
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 (RESERVED)
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 ANIMALS
Title 7 PARKS AND RECREATION
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 (RESERVED)
Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Title 13 SEWERS
Title 14 WATER
Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 17 ZONING
Title 18 CEQA PROCEDURES

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Note
Chapter 1.01 TITLE—DEFINITIONS—GENERAL
Chapter 1.04 CLAIMS
Chapter 1.08 JUDICIAL REVIEW
Chapter 1.12 APPEALS
Chapter 1.16 CODE ENFORCEMENT—GENERAL
Chapter 1.20 CRIMINAL PENALTIES
Chapter 1.24 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS

Note
*      Editor’s Note: Title 1, consisting of Ords. 183, 271, 273, 277, 485, 604, 711, 845, 851, 856, 867, 885, 896 and 976, was amended in its entirety by Ord. 978.

Chapter 1.01 TITLE—DEFINITIONS—GENERAL
1.01.010 Title.
     This code shall be known as the Brentwood Municipal Code. Whenever a reference is made to the code, the reference includes all amendments to it. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.01.020 Definitions.
     In this code the following definitions apply unless defined elsewhere in the Code or the context requires otherwise:

     City means the city of Brentwood.

     Code means the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     Council or city council means the Brentwood city council, and unless context requires otherwise, includes the mayor.

     County means Contra Costa County.

     Day means the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following, or a calendar day. (Government Code Section 6806.) If a deadline falls on a weekend or city holiday, the deadline is the next city business day.

     Health officer means the health officer of Contra Costa County. (See also Section 1.16.070.)

     Including means “including, but not limited to,” unless the context requires otherwise.

     Licensed means licensed in accordance with the appropriate provision of this code, or under state law.

     Month means a calendar month. (Civil Code Section 14.)

     Owner means a person owning real property, and includes a part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant, lessee, or other person having control or possession of the property, and the mortgagee under a recorded deed of trust. (The owner of record is determined by the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current.)

     Person means an individual natural person, firm, corporation, association, organization, partnership, limited liability company, business trust, corporation or company, or the agent, officer or employee or lessee of the person, and includes a governmental entity other than the city. (Government Code Section 17; Code of Civil Procedure Section 17.) A person responsible for a violation at a property includes: the owner; the tenant; the person in charge; the person using the property; and the lienholder shown on the last equalized assessment roll. If any of these is a minor, the parent or guardian is responsible.

     Personal property means every type of property except real property. (Civil Code Sections 14, 663.)

     Property means both real and personal property. (Civil Code Section 14.)

     Real property means land, what is affixed to land, and what is incidental or appurtenant to land. (Civil Code Section 658.)

     State means the state of California.

     Week means seven consecutive days. (Government Code Section 6805.)

     Writing means any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means, including handwriting, typewriting, printing, photostating, photographing, photocopying, transmitting by electronic mail or facsimile. (Government Code Sections 8, 6252.)

     Year means a period of three hundred sixty-five days, or a calendar year. (Government Code Section 6803.) (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.01.030 Rules of construction.
     In the interpretation of this code, the following rules apply, unless otherwise required by the context.

     A.    Acts by Deputy. Whenever a power is granted to or a duty is imposed upon an employee, he or she may delegate that power or duty, unless this code expressly provides otherwise.

     B.     Gender; Number. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. The feminine includes the masculine and neuter. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. (Government Code Sections 11, 12, 13.)

     C.     Construction of Words and Phrases. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the context and the approved usage of the language. Technical words and phrases and words and phrases which have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning at law, will be construed according to that meaning.

     D.    Amendments. Whenever a reference is made to this code, or a state code, it includes any amendment.

     E.     Headings. The title, chapter, section and subsection headings in this code are intended to indicate the contents and do not govern, limit, modify, or in any other way affect the scope, meaning or intent.

     F.     Directives. Shall, must, or will is mandatory and may is permissive. (Government Code Section 14.) May not is prohibitive.

     G.    Computation of Time. The time in which an act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is a holiday and then it is also excluded. (Government Code Section 6800.)

     H.    Prohibited Acts Include Causing or Permitting. An act or omission which is unlawful under this code includes causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, maintaining, suffering, or concealing the act or omission.

     I.      Cross References. Internal references to other chapters or sections refer to chapters or sections of this code. Parenthetical references to state law are for information and cross-referencing only.

     J.      Severability. The titles, chapters, sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable. If any is declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by a court, that determination shall not affect the remaining provisions.

     K.    If there is an inconsistency, the stricter regulation applies. (Ord. 999 § 1, 2018; Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.01.040 Notice.
     Whenever this code requires the giving of notice, and the time and manner of giving the notice is not otherwise specified, the notice must be in writing and given at least seven days before an act must be done or a right exercised. The notice will be served either personally or by first class mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person at his or her last known mailing address. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.01.050 Fees.
     Where an ordinance requires a person to file an application or request a permit, the city council may by resolution fix the fee to be charged for the filing and processing of the application and the request for a permit, including an appeal from the decision of a subordinate body. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.01.060 Nontransferability of permits.
     No city permit, license, or other issuance is transferable by the holder to another person or entity unless the transfer is expressly allowed in this code or is a property right which runs with the land. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.01.070 Holidays.
     The city council will establish by resolution those holidays on which the public offices of the city will be closed. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 1.04 CLAIMS
1.04.010 Claims procedures.
     A.    Government Claims Act. Under the Government Claims Act (Government Code Section 810 et seq.), most actions seeking money or damages against the city, or against a public employee acting within the scope of his or her employment, must be preceded by filing a proper administrative claim with the city clerk. Claim forms are available from the city clerk’s office.

     B.     Other Claims.

     1.     General. If a claim against the city for money or damages is not governed by the Government Claims Act or another state law, the claimant must present a written claim to the city clerk within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Government Code Sections 910 through 915.4. (See Government Code Section 905.) This subsection B is adopted under the authority of Government Code Section 935. In this section, claimant means the person seeking a claim, or his or her guardian, conservator, executor, administrator, or other designated representative.

     2.     Written Claim—Class Actions. All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class. In addition, the claim shall contain the information required by Government Code Section 910 and shall be presented to the city clerk or city attorney’s office on the city’s claim form.

     3.     Refunds. Unless otherwise expressly provided in this code, refunds are limited to one year from the city’s receipt of a written claim.

     4.     Legal Action. The claimant may not file a legal action against the city until he or she has presented a claim in accordance with this chapter and the city has acted on it. (Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6.)

     An action brought against the city upon a claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Government Code Sections 940 through 949. An action brought against an employee of the city shall conform to the requirements of Government Code Sections 950 through 951. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 
Chapter 1.08 JUDICIAL REVIEW
1.08.010 Time limits for judicial review.
     Judicial review of a final decision of the city may be had under California Code of Civil Procedures Section 1094.5 only if the person challenging the decision either: (1) files a petition for writ of mandate within ninety days following the date on which the decision becomes final; or (2) files a request for a copy of the record of proceedings with the city clerk within ten days after the date on which the decision becomes final, and then files the writ of mandate within thirty days after the record is either delivered or mailed to the person or his or her attorney. The procedures set forth in Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 apply.

     In making a final decision subject to review under Code of Civil Procedures Section 1094.5, the city shall provide notice to the party that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by this section. The city may do so by including a copy of this section with the written notice of the final decision.

     A final decision by the city to issue, revoke, suspend or deny a permit or other entitlement for expressive conduct protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution is entitled to priority and subject to expedited hearing and review procedures and must be filed and served within twenty-one calendar days from the date of the decision. (Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.)

     An appeal from a final decision by a hearing officer must be commenced within 20 days of the officer’s decision, under Section 1.24.090(G). (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 1.12 APPEALS
1.12.010 Hearing officer.
     Whenever this code authorizes an appeal to the city manager, or otherwise requires a hearing officer, the city manager may designate the hearing officer. The designated hearing officer must be an impartial person, such as: (1) a city employee from a department which has no involvement in the matter being considered; or (2) someone selected randomly from a panel of hearing officers assembled by the city attorney’s office, or (3) someone hired from an organization which provides hearing officers, in which case the cost will be shared equally by the city and the person cited.

     The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon or affected by the hearing officer’s decision. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.12.020 Appeal to city manager.
     A.    Applicability. A person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a city employee under this code (“appellant”) may appeal the matter to the city manager, unless the procedure for appeal is otherwise specifically provided in this code or state law.

     B.     Informal Discussion with Department Head. A person aggrieved by an administrative decision of an employee under this code must attempt to discuss the matter with the employee’s department head.

     C.     Appeal to City Manager. An appellant who is unable to resolve the matter with the department head under subsection B may appeal the decision to the city manager. If the matter is subject to city council appeal under this code, the city manager may, in his or her discretion, refer the matter directly to the city council to hear the appeal. (See subsection A.)

     D.    Waiver of Rights. Without a timely appeal, an appellant waives his or her rights to challenge the decision by administrative process, judicial process, or any other legal proceeding.

     E.     Procedures.

     1.     Form and Timing. The appellant must file a written notice of appeal with the city manager within ten days from the date written notice of the decision is sent (or personally delivered) to the person, or within twenty days from the date of discussion with the director. The appeal must be on a form provided by the city manager’s office.

     2.     Fee. The appeal must be accompanied by an appeal fee in the amount set by resolution of the city council.

     3.     Hearing and Decision. Upon receiving the notice of appeal, the city manager will set the matter for hearing and give the appellant written notice of the time and place of hearing at least ten days before the hearing. The hearing shall be held within thirty days of the date the notice of appeal is filed. The parties may extend this time by agreement. The city manager may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision appealed. The city manager shall render a written decision within thirty days after the close of the hearing.

     4.     Finality. The decision of the city manager is final ten days after the written notice of the decision is given to the appellant, unless an appeal to the city council is authorized and submitted under Section 1.12.030.

     F.     Not a Claim. The filing of an appeal under this or any section of this code does not constitute the filing of a claim under Chapter 1.20, Claims. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.12.030 Appeal to city council.
     A.    When Applicable. A matter is appealable to the city council only if: (1) specifically authorized under this code; or (2) otherwise required by state or federal law; and the appeal procedures are not set forth elsewhere in the code.

     B.     Procedures.

     1.     Form and Timing. If a matter is appealable to the city council under subsection A, the appellant may appeal the decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days of the written determination, on a form provided by the city clerk’s office. The ten days for filing the appeal is measured from the date written notice of the decision is sent (or personally delivered) to the person. If there is no written notice of decision, the time for appeal is twenty days from the date of the decision.

     2.     Fee. The appeal must be accompanied by an appeal fee in the amount set by resolution of the city council.

     3.     Hearing and Decision. Upon receiving the notice of appeal, the city clerk will set the matter for hearing and give the appellant written notice of the time and place of hearing at least ten days before the hearing. The hearing will be held within forty-five days of the date the notice of appeal is filed. The parties may mutually agree to extend this time. The city council may continue the hearing from time to time. The city council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed.

     The city council shall render a decision by minute action or adopting a resolution no later than the next regular city council meeting after the close of the hearing.

     4.     Finality. The decision of the city council is final. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 1.16 CODE ENFORCEMENT—GENERAL
1.16.010 Code enforcement—General.
     It is unlawful for a person to violate a provision, or to fail to comply with a requirement, of this code. Each day a violation occurs is a separate violation or offense. The city may enforce the provisions of this code by any one or more of the following methods, at the city’s discretion:

     A.    Criminal penalties, under Chapter 1.20.

     B.     Civil injunction, under Section 1.16.020.

     C.     Regarding land use and development, by the granting or denial of permits, the forfeiture and revocation of permits, or the recording of a notice of pending action. (See Chapter 17.890 and Sections 1.16.040 and 1.16.050.)

     D.    Administrative citations and penalties, under Chapter 1.24.

     E.     Public nuisance abatement, under Section 1.16.030 or Chapter 8.00.

     F.     Building abatement, under any of the California building codes adopted by the city under Title 15, Buildings and Construction.

     G.    Any other lawful remedy. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.16.020 Civil injunction.
     A violation of this code may be enforced by any civil remedy, including a civil injunction. The city attorney is authorized to initiate any appropriate civil action. If the city prevails, it is entitled to recover from the defendant reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs of suit. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.16.030 Public nuisance abatement.
     A condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this code is a public nuisance.

     The condition may be abated in accordance with the procedures in Chapter 8.00 or other specific abatement procedures in this code, or in accordance with the procedures set forth in the uniform codes adopted under Title 15, Buildings and Construction, or by any other lawful remedy. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.16.040 Violation of permit.
     A person who is granted a permit (including a land use entitlement or variance) by the city must comply with each term and condition of the permit. A person who violates or fails to comply with a term or condition of the permit is in violation of this chapter. The city may enforce the permit by any lawful means, including instituting proceedings for revocation. (See also Section 17.890.006.) (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.16.050 Notice of pending action.
     A.    Authority to Record Notice of Pending Action. If property in the city exists in violation of this title, and the owner fails or refuses to correct the violation, the city may record a notice of pending action against the affected property.

     B.     Procedure. Before recording a notice of pending action, the city will do the following:

     1.     Notice of Noncompliance. When the enforcement officer determines that compliance to this code under subsection A is not had and they intend to file a notice of pending action, they must provide written notice of the noncompliance to the owner at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll, by: (a) personal service; or (b) by first class mail and posting a copy on the subject project. The notice will contain: (a) a description of the property; (b) the condition that has caused the noncompliance (and will include reference to relevant municipal code sections); (c) a reasonable time limit to bring the property into compliance; (d) the potential to record a notice of action; and (e) the right to appeal. The enforcement officer may, in his or her discretion, send more than one notice, and conduct an informal show cause hearing to discuss the violation with the owner.

     2.     Appeal—Hearing. Within seven days from the date of giving of notice, the owner or person in control of the property may file an appeal of the notice of noncompliance to the city clerk who shall set a hearing date before a hearing officer appointed by the city manager under Chapter 1.12. The appeal must be in writing, identify the property subject to the notice of pending action, and include a statement setting forth the specific grounds for the appeal. The city will give notice of the hearing date in writing. The hearing date maybe no sooner than seven days from the date when notice of the hearing is given to the appellant and to the enforcement officer. Failure to appeal the notice of noncompliance or appear at the hearing will be deemed a failure of the appellant to exhaust their administrative remedies. The decision of the hearing officer is final.

     3.     Notice of Pending Action. If the notice of noncompliance is not appealed or if the notice of noncompliance is upheld by the hearing officer, the enforcement officer may then file the notice of pending action with the county recorder. The notice will describe the property, certify noncompliance, and state that the owner or person in control of the property has been notified. The notice of pending action, when recorded, is constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in the property, under California Civil Code Sections 1213 and 1215.

     4.     Release. If the owner corrects the violation after the notice has been recorded, and has notified the city in writing and consented to an inspection to confirm the correction, and has paid the fines and costs due to city, the enforcement officer will record a release or cancellation of the notice of pending action. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.16.060 Enforcement authority.
     A.    Designated City Employees. The following city employees have the authority to enforce provisions of this code as shown:

     1.     City manager: Titles 1, 3, 5 through 10, 12 through 18.

     2.     Chief of police and each peace officer: Titles 1, 3, 5 through 10, 12 through 18.

     3.     Community service officer: BMC Chapters 10.13 through 10.15; Vehicle Code sections authorized by the chief of police and on file with the city clerk; authorization to verify proof of correction for citations of mechanical and registration violations; verification of vehicle identification numbers (VIN) and other parts identification numbers.

     4.     Community development director: Titles 1, 3, 5 through 9, 12 through 18; Chapters 10.20 (Abandoned vehicles), 10.21 (Penalty) and 10.23 (Vehicle repair).

     5.     Public works director: Titles 12, 13, 14, and 16.

     6.     Parks and recreation director: Title 7.

     7.     Finance director: Title 5.

     8.     City engineer: Title 12 and 16.

     B.     City Manager. The city manager has the authority to designate additional city employees who may enforce particular provisions of this code not enumerated in subsection A.

     C.     Criminal Citations. Those city employees designated in subsection A are authorized to issue a criminal citation if that employee has completed a course of training prescribed by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training under Penal Code Section 832. (Penal Code Sections 19.7 and 836.5.) The employee so trained may issue a criminal citation to a person, without warrant, if the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person has violated this code, thereby committing a misdemeanor or an infraction, in the employee’s presence. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.16.070 County health services.
     A.    Health Officer. The county health officer is designated as the city’s health officer. (See also Section 1.01.020, Definitions.)

     B.     Health Laws. Under the authority of California Health and Safety Code Section 101375, the city council gives its consent for the county health officer to enforce and observe in the city: (1) orders, quarantine regulations, and rules prescribed by the state department and other rules and regulations issued under the California Health and Safety Code; and (2) statutes relating to public health.

     C.     Adoption of County Ordinances by Reference. Elsewhere in this code, the city has adopted certain county ordinances by reference and authorized county enforcement officials to operate in the city. (See Chapter 6.12, Animal Control Code; and Section 14.01.380, Water wells.) (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 1.20 CRIMINAL PENALTIES
1.20.010 Criminal penalties.
     A.    Misdemeanor. A person who violates a provision of this code, or who fails to comply with a requirement of this code, is guilty of a misdemeanor, unless the violation is specifically identified in this code as an infraction or unless the violation is charged as an infraction by the city attorney. The city attorney has the discretion to charge and prosecute a misdemeanor as an infraction.

     A misdemeanor is punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both. (Government Code Sections 36900, 36901.)

     B.     Infraction. A person who violates a provision of this code, or who fails to comply with a requirement of this code, is guilty of an infraction if the violation is specifically identified in this code as an infraction, or if it is charged as an infraction by the city attorney under subsection A. For the second or additional violation of the same code provision, the city attorney may charge and prosecute the matter as a misdemeanor.

     An infraction is punishable by:

     1.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

     2.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same code provision within a twelve-month period;

     3.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same code provision within a twelve-month period. (Government Code Section 36900.)

     A violation of the same code provision means a violation of the same: numbered code provision, provision of a code adopted by reference by this code, permit issued by the city, or condition of development approval. In this subsection, bail forfeiture is considered a conviction of the offense charged.

     An infraction is not punishable by imprisonment. A person charged with an infraction is not entitled to a jury trial or to a public defense unless arrested and not released.

     Every day a violation of this code continues constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 1.24 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
1.24.010 Applicability.
     A.    This chapter provides for administrative citations which are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the city to address any violation of this code.

     B.     Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.24.020 Administrative citation.
     Whenever an enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of any provision of this code determines that a violation of that provision has occurred, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to any person responsible for the violation. An administrative citation shall not be issued unless all of the following have occurred:

     A.    Prior written notice has been provided by the enforcement officer by: (1) personal service; or (2) by first class mail and posting a copy on the subject property. Such notice shall state the violation of this code, the violation location, the person(s) responsible, an order to correct or otherwise remedy the violation by a date no less than three business days from the date of the notice, and a warning that failure to timely comply with the order will result in the issuance of an administrative citation.

     B.     A report has been prepared by the enforcement officer detailing the instance or instances of the violation(s) of this code, including such information as photographic evidence, a chronological account of inspections made, identification of conditions noted, and witness statements, if any, all of which support the issuance of an administrative citation.

     C.     Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, an enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to any person responsible for a violation without providing the prior written notice required in subsection A or preparing the report required in subsection B when:

     1.     The violation requires immediate correction, due to an immediate danger to public health or safety; or

     2.     The person responsible for the violation has been given prior oral or written warning or a citation for a violation of the same section of the Brentwood Municipal Code within one year of the date of the new violation.

     In instances where an enforcement officer uses the authority provided in this subsection, the officer should prepare a report pursuant to subsection B within three business days of issuing a citation.

     D.    Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:

     1.     The date of the violation;

     2.     The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred;

     3.     The section of this code violated and a description of the violation;

     4.     The amount of the fine for the code violation;

     5.     A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine shall be paid;

     6.     An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation described in the administrative citation;

     7.     A description of the administrative citation review process, including the requirement of a written notice of appeal stating the grounds upon which the administrative citation was alleged to have been issued in error, the time within which the administrative citation may be appealed and the name and address of the city clerk to whom shall be delivered any such appeal;

     8.     A statement that judicial review of decisions upon an appeal hearing on the citation, must occur within the twenty-day timeframe set forth in Government Code Section 53069.4(b); and

     9.     The name and signature of the citing enforcement officer. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.24.030 Amount of fines.
     A.    The amounts of the fines for code violations imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the schedule of fines established by resolution of the city council.

     B.     The schedule of fines may specify any increased fines for repeat violations of the same code provision by the same person within a specified monthly period from the date of an administrative citation.

     C.     The schedule of fines shall specify the amount of any late payment charges imposed for the payment of a fine after its due date. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.24.040 Payment of the fine.
     A.    The fine shall be paid to the city within thirty days from the date of the administrative citation.

     B.     Any administrative citation fine paid pursuant to subsection A, shall be refunded in accordance with Section 1.24.090(D) if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation or that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation.

     C.     Payment of a fine under this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation that is the subject of the administrative citation. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.24.050 Hearing request.
     A.    Enforcement Officer Request.

     1.     Within thirty days of issuance of an administrative citation, an enforcement officer, with the concurrence of his or her department director, may request a review by the hearing officer, if the officer believes the citation was issued in error.

     2.     After considering information provided by the enforcement officer, the hearing officer will determine if the administrative citation should be voided.

     3.     The decision of the hearing officer is final.

     B.     Recipient of Administrative Citation Request.

     1.     Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of the code or that he or she is the responsible party by submitting a written letter requesting an appeal hearing and stating the specific grounds for the appeal. The letter shall be delivered to the city clerk within seven days from the date of the administrative citation, together with an advance deposit of the fine or a request and supporting documentation for an advance deposit hardship waiver pursuant to Section 1.24.060.

     2.     The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least seven days prior to the date of the hearing.

     3.     Reports of the enforcement officer concerning the administrative citation, if intended to be submitted to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, shall be copied and served on the person requesting the hearing at least seven days before the date of the hearing. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.24.060 Advance deposit hardship waiver.
     A.    Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest that there was a violation of the code or that he or she is the responsible party and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine as required in Section 1.24.050(B) may request an advance deposit hardship waiver.

     B.     The request shall be processed by the department of finance. The requirement of depositing the full amount of the fine as described in Section 1.24.050(B) shall be stayed unless or until the director of finance makes a determination not to issue the advance deposit hardship waiver.

     C.     The director of finance may waive the requirement of an advance deposit set forth in Section 1.24.050(B) and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the cited party has submitted a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the director of finance, the person’s actual financial inability to deposit with the city the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing.

     D.    If the director of finance determines not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the person shall remit the deposit to the city within ten days of the date of that decision or thirty days from the date of the administrative citation, whichever is later.

     E.     The director of finance shall issue a written determination listing the reasons for his or her determination to issue or not issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the director of finance shall be final and shall be served upon the person who applied for the advance deposit hardship waiver. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.24.070 Hearing officer.
     The city manager will appoint a hearing officer as set forth in Section 1.12.010. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.24.080 Hearing procedure.
     A.    No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless the fine has been deposited in advance in accordance with Section 1.24.050(B) or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued in accordance with Section 1.24.060.

     B.     The hearing date shall be no sooner than seven days from when the notice of the hearing is given to the party contesting the citation and the enforcement officer.

     C.     At the hearing, the party contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence concerning the administrative citation.

     D.    The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies.

     E.     The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. The person requesting a hearing is entitled to a copy of the code enforcement officer’s report to the hearing officer at least seven days before the hearing.

     F.     The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.24.090 Hearing officer’s decision.
     A.    After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall, within thirty days, issue a written decision to uphold or cancel the administrative citation and/or, if applicable, to suspend all or a portion of the fine and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The hearing officer may reduce the amount of the fine based on these factors: duration of the violation, frequency and number of violations, seriousness, good faith efforts to comply, impact on the community, and such other factors that are just. The hearing officer will mail a copy of the written decision to the person who requested the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer is final, with no right of appeal to any city employee, official or the city council.

     B.     If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city, unless the hearing officer, in his or her decision, suspends all or a portion of the payment of the fine in which case, the portion not suspended shall be retained by the city.

     C.     If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the hearing officer shall set forth in the decision a payment schedule for the fine, unless the hearing officer, in his or her decision, suspends payment of the fine in which case the portion not suspended shall be subject to a payment schedule.

     D.    If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the city, the city shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine.

     E.     The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer’s written decision by U.S. mail upon issuance.

     F.     To the extent applicable, the employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld by the hearing officer.

     G.    Decisions of the hearing officer are final. Legal action must be commenced in accordance with Government Code Section 53069.4(b) by filing a petition with the Superior Court within twenty days of the date of the hearing officer’s decision. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.24.100 Recoverable costs.
     Recoverable costs shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     A.    Any person who fails to pay to the city any citation costs imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter on or before the due date also shall be liable for the payment of any applicable late payment charges, administrative costs, cost of compliance reinspections, and collection costs.

     B.     In administrative proceedings, the prevailing party is entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys’ fees, but only if the city elects in writing, at the initiation of an administrative proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees. (Government Code Section 38773.5(c).) In no event shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the administrative proceedings. The city may recover its attorneys’ fees in the same manner as other costs pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.24.110 Recovery of administrative citation fine(s) and costs.
     A.    The procedures set forth in this section for the recovery of citation fine(s) and recoverable costs are adopted under Government Code Section 53069.4 which allows the city council to establish a procedure to govern the collection of administrative fines and recoverable costs.

     B.     To recover past due administrative citation fine(s) and recoverable costs:

     1.     The enforcement officer will cause a copy of the citation(s) to be filed with the finance department.

     2.     An invoice for the citation fine(s) and recoverable costs will be mailed to the property owner and/or responsible party.

     a.     The invoice for property related citations will include notification that if not paid within thirty days of the citation date, a lien and/or assessment on the property may be recorded.

     b.     The invoice for non-property related citations will include notification that if not paid within thirty days of the citation date, the account may be referred to a collection agency.

     3.     If the property owner and/or responsible party does not pay the non-property related citation fine and recoverable costs within thirty calendar days from the citation date, the account may be forwarded to a collection agency.

     4.     If the property owner and/or responsible party does not pay a property related citation fine and recoverable costs within thirty calendar days from the citation date the director of finance may authorize that a lien on the property be recorded.

     5.     If the property related citation fine and recoverable costs remains unpaid after thirty days from the citation date, the director of finance may authorize a special assessment upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current.

     6.     The assessment shall continue until it is paid, together with interest at the legal maximum rate computed from the date of confirmation of the statement until payment.

     7.     The county assessor shall enter each assessment on the county tax roll upon the parcel of land. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and procedure and sale in case of delinquency as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the citation and recoverable costs relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the citation and recoverable costs shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. The tax collector’s power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice.

     C.     On behalf of the city, the city manager or designee may collect any citation fines and recoverable costs by use of all available legal means and the choice of one remedy does not affect the city’s ability to use alternative remedies.

     D.    The city will not collect the citation fine(s) and recoverable costs more than once. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.24.120 Notices.
     A.    The administrative citation shall be served on the responsible person by: (1) personal service; or (2) by first class mail and posting a copy of the subject property. All other notices shall be served as noted in this chapter, or if not provided herein, by personal service or by U.S. mail.

     B.     Failure to receive any notice besides the administrative citation, specified in this chapter does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

 

1.24.130 Cost of administrative citation a personal obligation.
     Along with placing a lien or assessment upon the real property pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter, the city may make all fines and recoverable costs the personal obligation of the property owner, tenant or other person creating, causing, committing or maintaining the nuisance. In such a case, all of the procedures of this chapter apply except those specifically related to liens and assessments. (Ord. 978 § 2, 2016)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 COUNCIL—TIME AND PLACE OF MEETING
Chapter 2.08 MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBER SALARIES AND BENEFITS
Chapter 2.10 GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTION
Chapter 2.16 DISASTER COUNCIL AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
Chapter 2.20 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.22 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Chapter 2.24 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Chapter 2.28 PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING
Chapter 2.32 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Chapter 2.36 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.37 CITY ATTORNEY
Chapter 2.39 CITY TREASURER
Chapter 2.44 ARTS
Chapter 2.46 PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION

Chapter 2.04 COUNCIL—TIME AND PLACE OF MEETING
2.04.010 Meeting place designated—Procedure for temporary meeting place.
     The meeting place of the city council of the city of Brentwood shall be at 150 City Park Way in the city of Brentwood, county of Contra Costa, state of California, which is designated as the City Hall of the city of Brentwood and as the regular meeting place of the city council; provided, however, that in the event of an emergency or other circumstance whereby such City Hall and the council chambers may not be available for any meetings, or for any other reason, then the meetings may be held in any other location in the city of Brentwood after written notice setting forth the address of the meeting place has been provided in accordance with the requirements of the “Ralph M. Brown Act,” California Government Code Section 54950 et seq., as those sections may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 898 § 1, 2012; Ord. 617 § 1, 1999; Ord. 291, 1978; Ord. 271, 1976; Ord. 125 § 1, 1973)

 

2.04.020 Regular meeting date and time designated.
     The city council of the city of Brentwood shall meet on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month for regular council meetings, except that in November and December the city council shall meet on the second and the third Tuesdays. If the date of a regular meeting falls on a holiday when City Hall offices are closed, then the regular meeting will be scheduled for the next succeeding business day. Such regular council meetings shall commence at the time or times as specified by resolution adopted by the city council pursuant to this chapter. Notwithstanding the above requirements of this section, the city council may, prior to the regularly scheduled meeting, approve by resolution the cancellation or rescheduling of a regularly scheduled meeting. (Ord. 945 § 1, 2015; Ord. 940 § 1, 2015; Ord. 762, 2003; Ord. 291, 1978; Ord. 215 § 1, 1970; Ord. 125 § 2, 1963)

Chapter 2.08 MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBER SALARIES AND BENEFITS
2.08.010 Monthly compensation designated.
     The mayor and each member of the city council shall receive compensation of nine hundred thirty-nine dollars and twenty-six cents per month for services to the city. (Ord. 936 § 1, 2014; Ord. 686, 2001; Ord. 415, 1988; Ord. 379, 1985; Ord. 327 § 1, 1982; Ord. 248 § 1, 1973)

 

2.08.020 Adoption of mayor and city council benefits.
     Unless otherwise prohibited by state law, revisions to mayor and city council member benefits will be adopted by ordinance at a noticed public meeting. (Ord. 935 § 2, 2014)

 

2.08.030 Additional compensation for the mayor.
     In addition to the salary provided under Section 2.08.010, the mayor shall receive additional compensation in the amount of five hundred dollars per month. This section shall automatically terminate upon the expiration of the mayor’s current term of office, or no later than December 15, 2020. (Ord. 982 § 1, 2016; Ord. 942 § 1, 2015)

Chapter 2.10 GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTION
2.10.010 Date of election.
     The general municipal election for the city of Brentwood shall be held on the same day as statewide general election beginning with the statewide general election to be held in 1984. (Ord. 340 § 1, 1982)

 

2.10.020 District-based elections system.
     A.    Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 34886 and 34871(c), council members will be elected on a district-based elections system in four single-member districts. For purposes of this chapter, the term “district-based elections system” will mean the election of members of the city council by the voters of the district alone.

     B.     Except as provided in subsection C of this section, the council member elected to represent a district must live in that district and be a registered voter in that district, and any candidate for city council must live in, and be a registered voter in, the district in which he or she seeks election at the time nomination papers are issued, pursuant to California Government Code Section 34882 and Elections Code Section 10227.

     C.     A council member in office at the time this section takes effect will continue in office until the expiration of the full term to which he or she was elected or appointed and until his or her successor is qualified. If vacancies in council member offices elected at-large occur before expiration of the full term thereof, such vacancies will be filled according to law from the city at-large. (Ord. 1010 § 2, 2019; Ord. 340 § 1, 1982)

 

2.10.030 Districts.
     A.    Subject to Section 2.10.020, city council members will be elected on a by-district basis from the council districts described in subsection B below and depicted on the map attached to the ordinance codified in this section as Exhibit A and incorporated by this reference. To the extent there is a conflict between the map incorporated herein and the descriptions contained in subsection B below, the description will prevail.

     B.     The districts are as follows:

     1.     District 1: All the portion of the city of Brentwood lying northwesterly of the following described line: Beginning at the intersection of the Union Pacific rail line and the northerly boundary of the city of Brentwood, and proceeding southeasterly along the Union Pacific rail line to Marsh Creek, and proceeding southwesterly along Marsh Creek to drainage creek, and proceeding westerly along drainage creek to Fairview Avenue, and proceeding southerly along Fairview Avenue to gravel road, and proceeding northwesterly along gravel road to path, and proceeding southwesterly along path to longitude of 37°56’10.7”N, and proceeding westerly along longitude of 37°56’10.7”N to westerly boundary of the city of Brentwood.

     2.     District 2: All the portion of the city of Brentwood lying northeasterly of the following described line: Beginning at the intersection of Oak Street and the easterly boundary of the city of Brentwood, and proceeding northwesterly along Oak Street to Garin Parkway, and proceeding northerly along Garin Parkway to Sycamore Avenue, and proceeding westerly along Sycamore Avenue to Central Boulevard, and proceeding westerly along Central Boulevard to Walnut Boulevard, and proceeding southeasterly along Walnut Boulevard to McClarren Road, and proceeding westerly along McClarren Road to Sarah Street, and proceeding northerly along Sarah Street to Dainty Avenue, and proceeding westerly to Central Boulevard, and proceeding westerly along Central Boulevard to Minnesota Avenue, and proceeding northerly along Minnesota Avenue to drainage creek, and proceeding easterly along drainage creek to Marsh Creek, and proceeding northeasterly along Marsh Creek to the Union Pacific rail line, and proceeding northwesterly along the Union Pacific rail line to northerly boundary of the city of Brentwood.

     3.     District 3: All the portion of the city of Brentwood lying southwesterly of the following described line: Beginning at the intersection of Marsh Creek and the southerly boundary of the city of Brentwood, and proceeding northeasterly along Marsh Creek to Balfour Road, and proceeding westerly along Balfour Road to Fairview Avenue, and proceeding northerly along Fairview Avenue to gravel road, and proceeding northwesterly along gravel road to path, and proceeding southwesterly along path to longitude of 37°56′10.7″N, and proceeding westerly along longitude of 37°56′10.7″N to westerly boundary of the city of Brentwood.

     4.     District 4: All the portion of the city of Brentwood lying southeasterly of the following described line: Beginning at the intersection of Oak Street and the easterly boundary of the city of Brentwood, and proceeding northwesterly along Oak Street to Garin Parkway, and proceeding northerly along Garin Parkway to Sycamore Avenue, and proceeding westerly along Sycamore Avenue to Central Boulevard, and proceeding westerly along Central Boulevard to Walnut Boulevard, and proceeding southeasterly along Walnut Boulevard to McClarren Road, and proceeding westerly along McClarren Road to Sarah Street, and proceeding northerly along Sarah Street to Dainty Avenue, and proceeding westerly to Central Boulevard, and proceeding westerly along Central Boulevard to Minnesota Avenue, and proceeding northerly along Minnesota Avenue to drainage creek, and proceeding westerly along drainage creek to Fairview Avenue, and proceeding southerly along Fairview Avenue to Balfour Road, and proceeding easterly along Balfour Road to Marsh Creek, and proceeding southwesterly along Marsh Creek to southerly boundary of the city of Brentwood.

     C.     The council districts specified in subsections A and B of this section will continue in effect until they are amended or repealed in accordance with law. (Ord. 1010 § 2, 2019)

 

2.10.040 Election schedule.
     A.    Except as otherwise required by California Government Code Section 36512, council members will be elected in council districts 1 and 3 beginning at the general municipal election in November 2020, and every four years thereafter. Council members will be elected in council districts 2 and 4 beginning at the general municipal election in November 2022, and every four years thereafter.

     B.     Following the adoption of a ballot measure on November 7, 2006, by city voters, and beginning with the November 2008 general municipal election, the mayor is elected by the voters of the entire city every four years. (Ord. 1010 § 2, 2019)

 

2.10.050 Conduct of succeeding general municipal elections.
     The municipal general election in 1984 and each municipal general election thereafter will be conducted on the date specified by this chapter, in accordance with the Government and Elections Codes, unless this chapter is later repealed by the city council. (Ord. 1010 § 2, 2019; Ord. 340 § 1, 1982)

 

2.10.060 Affidavit of eligibility for elected officials.
     A.    Each candidate either nominated for an elective office, or proposed for appointment in the case of a vacancy in an elective office, will sign under penalty of perjury an affidavit declaring that the candidate is eligible to hold office. The affidavit will be in a form as shown in subsection C of this section. The affidavit will be submitted to the city clerk no later than the time the candidate assumes office.

     B.     Each official in an elective office will annually sign under penalty of perjury an affidavit declaring that the official continues to be eligible to hold office. The affidavit will be in a form as shown in subsection D of this section. The affidavit will be submitted to the city clerk no later than the time required by law for the annual filing of “Statements of Economic Interests” with the Fair Political Practices Commission, or June 1st, of each year, whichever is later.

     C.     Form—Affidavit of Eligibility for Candidates.

 

AFFIDAVIT OF ELIGIBILITY FOR CANDIDATES

 

STATE OF CALIFORNIA,

)

COUNTY OF CONTRA COSTA

)ss.

CITY OF BRENTWOOD

)

 

     I,         [name]       solemnly swear that I am eligible to hold elective office in the City of Brentwood in that I am a registered voter of the City of Brentwood at the time nomination papers were issued to me by the City Clerk and I am an elector of the City at the time of assuming office because my legal residence is located at          [address]           in the City of Brentwood, and, in the case of city council candidates, in the district in which I am running for election. For the duration of my term in office I will retain legal residence within the City of Brentwood and, in the case of city council candidates, in the district in which I am running for election.

 

     I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct.

 

     [signature]

     Subscribed and sworn to before me the ____ day of ______, 20___.

 

(SEAL) ____________________________

             Notary Public in and for the County of                          __________, State of California

 

     D.    Form—Affidavit of Eligibility for Elective Office Holders.

 

AFFIDAVIT OF ELIGIBILITY FOR

ELECTIVE OFFICE HOLDERS

 

STATE OF CALIFORNIA,

)

COUNTY OF CONTRA COSTA

)ss.

CITY OF BRENTWOOD

)

 

     I,         [name]       solemnly swear that I continue to be eligible to hold elective office in the City of Brentwood. In particular, my legal residence is in the City of Brentwood at       [address]  , which, in the case of City Council office holders, is in the district from which I was elected. For the duration of my term in office I will retain legal residence within the City of Brentwood and, in the case of City Council office holders, in the district from which I was elected.

 

     I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct.

 

     [signature]

 

     Subscribed and sworn to before me the ____ day of _____, 20___.

 

(SEAL) _____________________________

             Notary Public in and for the County of                          __________, State of California

(Ord. 1010 § 2, 2019; Ord. 594 § 1, 1998)

 

2.10.070 Definitions.
     Because of the thoroughness of the state Political Reform Act statutory scheme, unless a term is specifically defined in this chapter, or the contrary is stated (or clearly appears from the context), the definitions set forth in Chapter 2 (“Definitions,” Section 82000 et seq., of the Government Code) of the state Political Reform Act shall govern the interpretation of the provisions of this chapter. For example, “Contribution” is defined by Section 82015 of the Government Code.

     A.    “Election cycle” means that period commencing on May 30th of a general election year and concluding on December 31st of that same year. If a special election is conducted, the election cycle will commence on the first day of the month at least six months before the election and shall conclude on the last day of the month following the election (i.e., assume a March date is used for a city special election for an elective office; September 1st (the first day of the month at least six months before the election date) would be the first day of the election cycle and April 30th (the thirtieth day of the month following the election) would be the last day of the election cycle).

     B.     “Late contribution and expenditure” means any contribution or expenditure including a loan, which totals in the aggregate of two hundred fifty dollars or more but less than one thousand dollars that is made to, expended or received by a candidate, a controlled committee or a committee formed or existing primarily to support or oppose a candidate or measure before the date of election at which the candidate or measure is to be voted on but after the closing date of the last campaign statement required to be filed before the election. (Ord. 780 § 2, 2004)

 

2.10.080 Additional pre-election campaign statement.
     The California Political Reform Act provides for various campaign statements to be filed on dates determined by the Fair Political Practices Commission. Any candidate for a municipal office and any controlled committee of such a candidate will file a verified campaign statement on the due dates and contribution periods as provided by Article 2, Chapter 4, Title 9 of the Government Code, beginning with Section 84200. (Ord. 1015 § 1, 2020; Ord. 780 § 2, 2004)

 

2.10.085 Electronic filing.
     A.    Whenever any elected officer, candidate, or committee is required to file a campaign statement under the California Political Reform Act or the Regulations with the city clerk, the elected officer, candidate, or committee shall file the statement in an electronic format prescribed by the city clerk.

     B.     Any statement, report, or other document filed electronically or online pursuant to this section will be accepted as an original statement and need not be filed in paper format.

     C.     The date of filing for a statement, report, or other document that is filed online or electronically will be the day that it is received by the city clerk, acting as the local filing officer, and the electronic system will provide confirmation with an electronic timestamp that ensures that the statement, report, or other document was received.

     D.    If access to online filings is unavailable, the elected city officer, candidate, or committee may file an original statement by paper, at the discretion of the city clerk, acting as the local filing officer.

     E.     The provisions of this section will only apply to persons or combinations of persons who qualify as a committee under Section 82013 of the Political Reform Act. (Ord. 1015 § 1, 2020)

 

2.10.090 Reporting of late contributions and expenditures.
     Late contributions and expenditures of two hundred fifty dollars or more but less than one thousand dollars, shall be reported within twenty-four hours. Late contributions and expenditures shall be reported on subsequent campaign statements in addition to this section’s requirements. (Ord. 780 § 2, 2004)

 

2.10.100 Enforcement.
     A.    Any person who intentionally or negligently violates Sections 2.10.070 through 2.10.100, inclusive, of this chapter shall be liable in a civil action brought by a person residing within the city for an amount not more than three times the amount of the unlawful contribution or expenditure.

     B.     If two or more persons are responsible for any violation, they shall be jointly and severally liable.

     C.     In determining the amount of liability, the court may take into account the seriousness of the violation and the degree of culpability of the defendant(s). If a judgment is entered against the defendant or defendants in an action, the plaintiff shall receive fifty percent of the amount recovered. The remaining fifty percent shall be deposited into the general fund of city. In an action brought by the district attorney, the judgment shall be paid to the general fund of the county of Contra Costa.

     D.    No civil action alleging a violation of any provision of this act shall be filed more than one hundred eighty days after the date the violation occurred.

     E.     The court may award to a plaintiff or defendant who prevails in any action authorized by this chapter, costs of litigation, including reasonable attorneys’ fees. (Ord. 780 § 2, 2004)

 

2.10.110 Applicability of other laws.
     Nothing in this chapter shall exempt any person from applicable provisions of any other laws of this state or the city. (Ord. 780 § 2, 2004)

Chapter 2.16 DISASTER COUNCIL AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
2.16.010 Purpose of chapter described.
     The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency, the direction of the emergency organization and the coordination of the emergency functions of the city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. (Ord. 272 § 1, 1976)

 

2.16.020 Emergency defined.
     As used in this chapter, “emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 272 § 2, 1976)

 

2.16.030 Disaster council—Created—Membership.
     The Brentwood disaster council is created and shall consist of the following:

     A.    The mayor, who shall be chairperson;

     B.     The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chairperson;

     C.     The assistant director of emergency services;

     D.    Such chiefs of emergency services as may be provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter;

     E.     Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans’, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 272 § 3, 1976)

 

2.16.040 Disaster council—Powers and duties—Meetings.
     It shall be the duty of the Brentwood disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairperson or, in his or her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chairperson. (Ord. 272 § 4, 1976)

 

2.16.050 Emergency services—Director and assistant director designated.
     A.    There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city administrator shall be the director of emergency services.

     B.     There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. (Ord. 272 § 5, 1976)

 

2.16.060 Emergency services—Powers and duties of director and assistant director—Order of succession.
     A.    The director is empowered to:

     1.     Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

     2.     Request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

     3.     Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

     4.     Direct cooperation among and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise among them;

     5.     Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in Section 2.16.020;

     6.     In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as herein provided, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a state-of-war emergency, the director is empowered to:

     a.     Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency. However, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council,

     b.     Obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

     c.     Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers,

     d.     Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, and

     e.     Execute all of his or her ordinary power as city administrator, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant to this chapter adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council and by any other lawful authority.

     B.     The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council.

     C.     The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city, and have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (Ord. 272 § 6, 1976)

 

2.16.070 Emergency—Organization of forces designated.
     All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of paragraph (c) of subdivision (6) of subsection (A) of Section 2.16.060, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city of Brentwood. (Ord. 272 § 7, 1976)

 

2.16.080 Emergency—Plan for mobilization.
     The Brentwood disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city of Brentwood emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state-of-war emergency. The Brentwood disaster council shall provide for the organization, powers, duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 272 § 8, 1976)

 

2.16.090 Emergency—Expenditures for protection of city.
     Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city of Brentwood. (Ord. 272 § 9, 1976)

 

2.16.100 Emergency—Violation a misdemeanor.
     It is a misdemeanor during an emergency for any person to:

     A.    Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter;

     B.     Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

     C.     Wear, carry or display without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 272 § 10, 1976)

Chapter 2.20 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.20.010 Established—Number of members designated.
     A planning commission is established, with membership, powers and duties as provided in this chapter and by the statutes of the state. The planning commission shall consist of five members. (Ord. 314, 1981; Ord. 288, 1977)

 

2.20.020 Appointment and term of office—Residency requirement.
     The mayor shall appoint the members of the planning commission, with the approval of the city council, to serve terms of two years. Each member, unless removed by city council, shall hold his or her office until a successor is appointed. Appointments shall be made to staggered terms to provide that no more than three appointments expire at the same time. All persons appointed to the planning commission shall be residents of the city. (Ord. 898 § 3, 2012; Ord. 352, 1983; Ord. 238, 1977)

 

2.20.030 Compensation—Business expenses.
     All members of the planning commission shall serve as such without compensation, except such as may be fixed by the city council from time to time. Reasonable travel and other expenses may be allowed from time to time while traveling or engaged on business authorized by the planning commission. (Ord. 288, 1977)

 

2.20.040 Removal from office—Filling of vacancies.
     A.    Members of the planning commission may be removed from office by a majority vote of the city council or by the mayor subject to the approval of the city council.

     B.     If vacancies occur on the planning commission other than by the expiration of the term, they shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. (Ord. 288, 1977)

 

2.20.050 Election of officers—Secretary designated.
     Upon the swearing in of planning commissioners for new two-year terms, the planning commission shall elect a chair and a vice chair from among its members and other officers as deemed necessary by the commission. The chair and vice chair may serve successive terms. The secretary of the planning commission shall be the community development director or designee. (Ord. 898 § 4, 2012; Ord. 288, 1977)

 

2.20.060 Time and place of meetings.
     The planning commission shall meet regularly at least once each month at a time and place fixed by resolution of the commission, and shall hold such other meetings as shall from time to time be called in the manner and form required by law. (Ord. 288, 1977)

 

2.20.070 Attendance at meetings.
     Requirements for attendance at meetings of the planning commission may be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 288, 1977)

 

2.20.080 Powers and duties designated.
     The planning commission has the following powers and duties:

     A.    To recommend to the city council plans for the regulation of the future growth, development, and beautification of the city;

     B.     To carry out the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city (Title 17 of this code). However, when an application is combined with another application requiring legislative action (such as a zoning amendment, general plan amendment, exception under general plan density transition policy LU2a, or development agreement), the planning commission’s action will be advisory to the city council, which becomes the decision maker;

     C.     To undertake the study for, preparation and recommendation of the general plan (and amendments) for the long-term physical development of the city and of any land outside its boundaries which in the commission’s judgment bears relation to the development of the city;

     D.    To do such other things as may be required by other ordinances of the city or by state law. (Ord. 976 § 3, 2016; Ord. 288, 1977)

Chapter 2.22 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
2.22.010 Declaration of need.
     It is found, determined and declared that there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function in the city of Brentwood in accordance with the provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 324 § 1, 1981)

 

2.22.020 Statutory authority.
     The redevelopment agency is established pursuant to Section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, to be known as the redevelopment agency of the city of Brentwood. The redevelopment agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 324 § 2, 1981)

 

2.22.030 Agency—Designated.
     Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the Community Redevelopment Law, this city council declares itself to be the redevelopment agency of the city of Brentwood. (Ord. 324 § 3, 1981)

 

2.22.040 Agency—Purpose.
     The city council finds and determines that the designation of the city council as the redevelopment agency will serve the public interest and promote the public health, safety and welfare in an effective manner, in that this public body is best able to serve the needs of the community to implement the purposes of the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 324 § 4, 1981)

 

2.22.050 Filing of ordinance.
     The city clerk is directed to cause a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter to be filed in the office of the Secretary of State. (Ord. 324 § 5, 1981)

Chapter 2.24 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
2.24.010 Personnel system.
     The city manager shall formulate and recommend to the city council for its approval rules and regulations, and amendments thereto, pertaining to the operation of a personnel system. Such rules and regulations shall cover the selection, appointment, classification, promotion, demotion, suspension, retirement and termination of municipal service employees and all other matters governing the status of employees and conditions of their employment. Approval of such rules, regulations and amendments thereto shall be by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 799, 2005)

 

2.24.020 Personnel system—Application and exceptions.
     The personnel system established in this chapter and accompanying rules and regulations shall apply to all positions and employment in the municipal service, except the city manager, city attorney and all department heads. The personnel system shall not apply to elective officers, members of boards and commissions, nor to any limited service employees of the city, unless specifically included by the accompanying rules and regulations. (Ord. 799, 2005)

 

2.24.030 Personnel officer designated—Powers and duties.
     The city manager is appointed personnel officer. Subject to the limitations established by this chapter, other law, the annual municipal budget and resolutions of the city council, the personnel officer shall:

     A.    Administer the provisions of this chapter, establishing administrative regulations and records as appropriate and necessary;

     B.     Conduct recruitment for the purpose of hiring all city employees;

     C.     Administer discipline for all city employees; and

     D.    Make recommendations in regard to amendments to this chapter and resolutions pursuant thereto. (Ord. 799, 2005; Ord. 662 § 1, 2001)

 

2.24.040 Discrimination prohibited.
     The city is committed to the goal of equal employment opportunities. It is the policy of the city to ensure that the application of this chapter and the recruitment, employment, training, advancement, layoff, salary level, termination, and all other personnel actions for all positions, classes and individual employees are made on the basis of qualifications and performance without regard to race, color, religion, creed, national origin, sex, political affiliation, sexual orientation, physical or mental disability, or any other basis prohibited by federal or state law. (Ord. 799, 2005)

 

2.24.050 Employees—Establishment and change of compensation.
     A.    All compensation shall be as established by the city council. No employee shall accept anything of value for the performance of his or her official duties and acts or other acts performed while on duty, other than compensation duly authorized by the city council.

     B.     The city council may review and change compensation at any time, and shall review compensation with the annual municipal budget. Formal adoption of the budget shall conclusively constitute a completion of the annual compensation review. (Ord. 799, 2005; Ord. 697, 2002)

Chapter 2.28 PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING
2.28.010 State aid requested by city under Penal Code provisions.
     The city council of the city of Brentwood declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of California under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4 of Part 4 of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 271, 1976; Ord. 148 § 1, 1965)

 

2.28.020 Adherence to standards of California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training.
     Pursuant to Section 13522 of Chapter 1 of Title 4 of Part 4 of the California Penal Code, the city of Brentwood, while receiving aid from the state of California pursuant to said Chapter 1 will adhere to the standards or recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 148 § 2, 1965)

 

2.28.030 Ratio of sworn officers to city population.
     City of Brentwood hereby establishes as a minimum level of police services that the city shall maintain a ratio of one and one-half sworn officers to one thousand residents. The ratio may be less than this ratio for a period not to exceed one hundred twenty days due to resignations, terminations, or retirements. The city population shall be based on the most reliable estimates as approved by the city council. (Ord. 648, 2000)

Chapter 2.32 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Note
*      Editor’s Note: Ordinances 176 and 254, dealing with the state retirement system contract, are on file in the city clerk’s office.

 

2.32.010 Contract with state system authorized.
     A contract between the city council of the city of Brentwood and the Board of Administration of the California State Employee’s Retirement System is authorized, a copy of the contract being attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, marked “Exhibit A,” and by such reference made a part hereof as though herein set out in full. (Ord. 176 § 1, 1968)

 

2.32.020 Execution of contract by mayor authorized.
     The mayor of the city council is authorized, empowered and directed to execute the contract between the city council and the Board of Administration of the California State Employees’ Retirement System for and on behalf of the city of Brentwood. (Ord. 176 § 2, 1968)

Chapter 2.36 CITY MANAGER
2.36.010 Created.
     The office of city manager of the city of Brentwood is created and established. Notwithstanding any provisions of the municipal code or other documents of the city to the contrary, wherever the words “administrative officer” “chief administrative officer,” or “city administrator” are used, they shall mean city manager. (Ord. 332 § 1, 1982)

 

2.36.020 Appointment.
     The city manager shall be appointed by the city council solely on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications and ability. Residence in the city of Brentwood shall not be required as a condition of employment. However, no later than one year after employment, the city manager shall reside within the boundaries of the East Contra Costa Fire Protection District, as those boundaries existed on September 23, 2014. Upon the city manager’s showing of a good faith effort to relocate pursuant to this section, the city council may, by motion, extend the one year relocation period. No member of the city council shall receive such appointment during the term for which he/she shall have been elected or within one year after the expiration of his/her term of office. (Ord. 933 § 1, 2014; Ord. 898 § 5, 2012; Ord. 332 § 2, 1982)

 

2.36.030 Term of office—Removal.
     Unless otherwise specified in a separately executed employment agreement, the city council shall appoint the city manager for an indefinite term and may remove him or her at any time by a four-fifths vote of the city council. Notwithstanding this provision, however, the city manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member or members of the city council is elected, or within a period of ninety days next succeeding the appointment of any member or members to the city council. (Ord. 332 § 12, 1982)

 

2.36.040 Bond.
     The city manager shall secure a corporate surety bond in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars, or such other sum as may be determined by the city council and shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties herein prescribed. The fee will be paid by the city of Brentwood. (Ord. 332 § 3, 1982)

 

2.36.050 Compensation.
     The city manager, or such person designated to perform his or her duties as provided in Section 2.36.060, shall receive such compensation and benefits as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix, and the compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city that the city council shall designate. The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or her in the performance of his or her duties, or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council. (Ord. 332 § 4, 1982)

 

2.36.060 Temporary manager.
     The city manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, one of the department heads of the city to serve as manager pro tempore during any extended temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager and his or her failure to so appoint a manager pro tempore, the city council will designate any qualified person to perform the duties of the city manager. (Ord. 332 § 5, 1982)

 

2.36.070 General authority.
     The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager. This requires that neither the city council nor any individual member shall give any direct orders to any of the subordinates of the city manager. However, this is not meant to impede or restrict access by any city council member to city staff for the purpose of collecting information they feel they need to do their job as an elected official. Specific requests for such information should be directed to department heads. (Ord. 608 § 1, 1999; Ord. 598 § 1, 1998; Ord. 332 § 7, 1982)

 

2.36.080 Powers and duties.
     The city manager shall be the administrative head of the city government under the direction and control of the city council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He or she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty and have the power:

     A.    To enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to insure that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully performed and observed;

     B.     To appoint, suspend, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city, except the city attorney and city council appointed boards and commissions;

     C.     To supervise in general the operations of all departments of the city and to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his or her jurisdiction through their department heads;

     D.    To reorganize offices, positions, departments or units under his or her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business;

     E.     To analyze the functions, duties and activities of the various departments, divisions and services of the city government and of all employees thereof, and to effect changes to departments, divisions and services under his or her direction, including updating of classification titles, descriptions, salary ranges and leave adjustments that in his or her judgment will result in the highest degree of efficiency in the overall operation of the city government;

     F.     To attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom by the city council;

     G.    To recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary or proper;

     H.    To keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city, and to make recommendations thereon;

     I.      To prepare and submit an annual city budget to the city council for its approval;

     J.      To compile and keep up to date a complete inventory of all property, real and personal, owned by the city;

     K.    To approve all expenditures of the city before they are presented to the city council;

     L.     To purchase or cause to be purchased all supplies and equipment for all of the departments or divisions of the city;

     M.    To make investigations into the affairs of the city, and any department or division thereof, and any contract, or the proper performance of any obligations of the city;

     N.    To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city;

     O.    To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city;

     P.     To sign or designate to be signed:

     1.     Checks drawn upon the city treasury,

     2.     Written contracts and/or conveyances made or entered into by the city or approved by direction of the city council,

     3.     Instruments requiring the city seal;

     Q.    To serve as city clerk, director of emergency services, finance officer, personnel officer, and purchasing officer. The city manager may delegate all or portion of the duties of each of these positions to other city employees;

     R.     To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by the city council;

     S.     To devote his or her entire time to the duties of his or her office and the interest of the city, except as may otherwise be approved by the city council.

     T.     To adjust the amount of processing fees; find alternative means of paying processing fees; extend the time for payment of processing fees; and/or make refunds or prorations of processing fees paid. Such action shall only be for any business, or activity of any institution or organization recognized by a tax board of the state with a “Statement of Domestic Non-Profit Organization,” or the Federal Internal Revenue Service as being conducted wholly for the benefit of charitable, religious, or nonprofit purposes and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual or organization. Such action shall only be taken for good cause shown.

     U.    To determine the processing fees appropriate for projects that do not fit within the typical and regular processing fee categories listed in the fee resolutions and ordinances of the city.

     V.    Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the city’s discretion, upon proper application for senior housing, congregate care facilities or affordable housing pursuant to Government Code Section 65915, and/or Municipal Code Chapter 17.725, to adjust related development fees. (Ord. 946 § 1, 2015; Ord. 766 § 4, 2003; Ord. 702, 2002; Ord. 332 § 11, 1982)

 

2.36.090 Council-manager relations.
     The city manager shall take orders, directions and instructions regarding policy from the city council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the council. (Ord. 332 § 6, 1982)

 

2.36.100 Department cooperation.
     It shall be the duty of the city attorney, and all subordinates of the city manager, to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and ordinances of the city. All employees of the city shall deal with the city council solely through the city manager. This is not meant to restrict or limit contact and communication from city staff to the city council. Specific requests by city council for information they feel they need to do their job as an elected official should be directed to department heads. (Ord. 608 § 1, 1999; Ord. 598 § 1, 1998; Ord. 332 § 8, 1982)

 

2.36.110 Board and commission meetings.
     The city manager may attend any and all meetings of boards and commissions created by the city council, upon his or her own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he or she shall be heard as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof, and he or she shall inform the members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council. The city manager shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all boards or commissions appointed by the city council. (Ord. 332 § 9, 1982)

 

2.36.120 Exceptions.
     Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit inquiry or social communications between members of the city council, boards and commission, and the city manager and city employees of the city at any time. (Ord. 332 § 10, 1982)

Chapter 2.37 CITY ATTORNEY
2.37.010 Created.
     The office of city attorney of the city of Brentwood is created and established. (Ord. 816 § 1, 2005)

 

2.37.020 Appointment.
     The city attorney shall be appointed by the city council solely on the basis of his/her legal qualifications and ability. He/she shall be an attorney admitted to practice in the state of California and shall have been in actual practice for at least eight years preceding his/her employment. No member of the city council shall receive such appointment during the term for which he/she shall have been elected or within one year after the expiration of his/her term of office. (Ord. 816 § 1, 2005)

 

2.37.030 Term of office—Removal.
     The city council shall appoint the city attorney for an indefinite term and may remove him or her at any time by a four-fifths vote of the city council. Notwithstanding this provision, however, the city attorney shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any general or special municipal election held in the city at which election a member or members of the city council is elected, or within a period of ninety days next succeeding the appointment of any member or members to the city council. (Ord. 816 § 1, 2005)

 

2.37.040 Compensation.
     The city attorney shall receive such compensation and benefits as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix, and the compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city that the city council shall designate. The city attorney shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or her in the performance of his or her duties, or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council. (Ord. 816 § 1, 2005)

 

2.37.050 General authority.
     The city council and its members shall deal with the city attorney’s office solely through the city attorney. This requires that neither the city council nor any individual member shall give any direct orders to any of the subordinates of the city attorney. However, this is not meant to impede or restrict access by any city council member to city attorney office staff for the purpose of collecting information they feel they need to do their job as an elected official. (Ord. 816 § 1, 2005)

 

2.37.060 Powers and duties.
     The city attorney shall be the legal counsel of the city government under the direction and control of the city council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He/she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of the legal affairs of the city that are under his/her control. In addition to his/her general powers as the legal counsel, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his/her duty and have the power to:

     A.    Represent and advise the city council and all city officers in all matters of law pertaining to their offices;

     B.     Represent and appear for the city in any or all actions or proceedings in which the city is concerned or is a party, including the prosecution of violations of this municipal code and ordinances enacted by the city council, and represent and appear for any city officer or employee, or former city officer or employee, in any or all actions and proceedings in which any such officer or employee is concerned or is a party for any act arising out of his/her employment or by reason of his/her official capacity provided the interest of the city in such action or proceeding is not adversely affected;

     C.     Attend all regular meetings of the city council and give his/her advice or opinion in writing whenever requested to do so by the city council or by any of the boards or officers of the city;

     D.    Approve the form of all contracts made by and all bonds given to the city, endorsing his/her approval thereon in writing;

     E.     Review any and all proposed ordinances or resolutions for the city and amendments thereto;

     F.     Join in amicus briefs if there is no cost to the city;

     G.    Surrender to his/her successor all books, papers, files and documents pertaining to the city’s affairs;

     H.    The city council shall have control of all legal business and proceedings and city attorney may employ other attorneys to take charge of any litigation or matter to assist the city attorney therein;

     I.      Recommend to the city council for adoption, such measures and ordinances as he/she deems necessary or proper;

     J.      Be responsible for all activities and services of the city attorney’s office;

     K.    Appoint and remove those employees of the city attorney’s office allocated by the city council through the annual city budget as necessary and appropriate to assist the city attorney in performance of the duties and responsibilities of the office;

     L.     Perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by the city council. (Ord. 816 § 1, 2005)

 

2.37.070 Council-city attorney relations.
     The city attorney shall take orders, directions and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the council, and no individual council member shall give any order or instruction to the city attorney. All employees of the city attorney’s office shall deal with the city council solely through the city attorney. This is not meant to restrict or limit contact and communication from city attorney staff to the city council. However, any council member may, as an individual, request pertinent information on municipal legal affairs from the city attorney. These requests will be answered promptly. (Ord. 816 § 1, 2005)

 

2.37.080 Department cooperation.
     It shall be the duty of the city manager, and all subordinates of the city manager, to assist the city attorney in administering the legal affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and ordinances of the city. (Ord. 816 § 1, 2005)

 

2.37.090 Board and commission meetings.
     The city attorney may attend any and all meetings of boards and commissions created by the city council, upon his/her own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings that the city attorney attends, he/she shall be heard as to all matters upon which he/she wishes to address the members thereof, and he/she shall inform the members as to the legal status of any matter being considered by the city council. The city attorney shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all boards or commissions appointed by the city council. (Ord. 816 § 1, 2005)

 

2.37.100 Exceptions.
     Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit inquiry or social communications between members of the city council, boards and commission, and the city attorney and city attorney office staff at any time. (Ord. 816 § 1, 2005)

 

2.37.110 Agreements of employment.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the city attorney delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. In the case of a conflict between an agreement of employment and this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 816 § 1, 2005)

Chapter 2.39 CITY TREASURER
2.39.010 Created powers and duties.
     The city treasurer is hereby designated to be the director of finance and information systems. Notwithstanding any provisions of the municipal code or other documents of the city to the contrary, wherever the words “city treasurer,” “treasurer,” or “treasurer/controller” are used, they shall mean the director of finance and information systems. (Ord. 984 § 1, 2017; Ord. 947 § 1, 2015; Ord. 702, 2002)

Chapter 2.44 ARTS
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ords. 647, 760.

 

Article I. Arts Commission
2.44.010 Arts commission establishment.
     An arts commission is established with membership, powers and duties as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

2.44.020 Powers and duties.
     The arts commission is an advisory body to the city council and shall have the general powers and duties as follows:

     A.    Encourages, stimulates, promotes and fosters the cultural enrichment of the city, and thereby contributes to the quality of life in the city and develops awareness in the business community, in local government and in the general public of the value of the arts in the city by:

     1.     Overseeing the development of a city cultural arts master plan at the direction of the city council,

     2.     Publicizing art opportunities,

     3.     Encouraging artistic talent in a wide variety of forms,

     4.     Interpreting the community’s diverse interests in the arts and striving to meet those needs,

     5.     Coordinating art resources for the community and artists,

     6.     As approved by the city council, commissioning and placing public art in the city,

     7.     Promoting the arts as a reflection of the historical nature of the community,

     8.     Elevating the city’s commitment to the overall enhancement of its cultural life to co-equal status with recreation, planning, human services and youth,

     9.     Providing expertise in the area of public art and in-depth knowledge of the fine and performing arts,

     10.   Working cooperatively with the organizational structure of the city and all city departments,

     11.   Acting as a resource in areas related to public art and the arts in general,

     12.   Serving as a review board for requests for funding for arts-related city-sponsored grants programs;

     B.     Perform other art related functions, which may come before the commission;

     C.     Sponsor, alone or in cooperation with other public or private agencies and/or individuals, programs to further the development and public awareness of, and interest in, the fine and performing arts;

     D.    Solicit funding from private, state and federal sources available for the fine and performing arts. (Ord. 870 § 1, 2009; Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

2.44.030 Arts commissioners.
     A.    The arts commission shall consist of no more than five members, who shall be residents of the city. Members shall comply with all state and local laws relative to appointments to government office.

     B.     The commissioners should be knowledgeable about the arts and represent a cross section and distribution of membership among the major art and cultural fields which may include one or more of the following art disciplines: architectural arts, dance, art education, fiber arts, literature, music, painting, performing arts, photography, ceramics, sculpture, murals, visual, functional art and crafts. (Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

2.44.040 Terms of office.
     A.    Commencing March 1, 2014, the mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint commission members for terms of up to three years. Terms of members shall be staggered so that no more than two terms shall expire in any one year. As of March 1, 2014, the maximum term for any commissioner is three consecutive three-year terms. Commissioners appointed prior to March 1, 2014, may serve for three consecutive three-year terms upon the expiration of their current term; and commissioners whose final term ended within one year of March 1, 2014, may serve for three consecutive three-year terms without a one-year absence. For new commissioners appointed after March 1, 2014, a one-year absence after serving the maximum number of terms is required before being reconsidered for appointment.

     B.     Members shall be subject to removal by action of the city council without cause, only at a regularly scheduled city council meeting.

     C.     Each member, unless removed by city council, shall hold their offices until their successor is appointed. (Ord. 924 § 1, 2014; Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

2.44.050 Vacancies.
     Vacancies occurring during the term shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term. Vacancies shall be filled by nomination of the mayor with approval of the city council. (Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

2.44.060 Officers.
     A.    The officers of the arts commission shall be a chairperson and vice-chairperson. They shall perform all duties associated with such offices.

     B.     Election of officers shall be held as the last item of business regularly scheduled January commission meeting. (Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

2.44.070 Compensation.
     Members of the arts commission shall serve without compensation for their services, but may receive reimbursement for necessary travel and other expenses incurred on official duty when such expenditures have received prior authorization by a vote of the city council. (Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

2.44.080 Annual report.
     The commission shall prepare and submit an annual report to the city council in July of each year. (Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

2.44.090 Meetings.
     A.    Regular meetings of the arts commission shall be held on the third Wednesday of each month except December, when the commission will not have a regular meeting.

     B.     All scheduled and special meetings of the commission shall be publicly announced and open to the public. The chairperson may request the attendance at meetings of any officer or employee of the city, in an advisory capacity, to assist the commission in its deliberations.

     C.     A quorum for the purpose of transacting business at any regularly scheduled or special meeting shall be three members. Approval of any business transacted shall require a majority vote of the commission.

     D.    If a member of the commission is absent from three regular meetings of the commission, in a twelve-month period, the commission will request the city council to declare the position vacant. (Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

2.44.100 Staff assistance.
     The city director of parks and recreation or designee will be the staff liaison(s) to the commission. The staff liaison(s) shall work with the commission to implement the goals of the commission. (Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

Article II. Public Art Program
2.44.110 Public art program.
     This section outlines the city’s approach to public art in public and private development. This section encourages public and private developers to include public art in their projects. (Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

2.44.120 Purpose.
     A.    The city has formed an arts commission to encourage, stimulate, promote and foster programs for the cultural enrichment of the city and its inhabitants. The city accepts the responsibility for expanding the experience with visual art. Such art has enabled people in all societies to better understand their communities and individual lives. Therefore, a policy is established to require the inclusion of art in public capital projects and private construction and development projects.

     B.     In the commissioning and approval of public art projects, through the establishment of a city public art collection, and/or in the establishment of a city art gallery, the public art should be in harmony with the city’s heritage, vision, and/or opportunity. Public art should strive to say “this is Brentwood.”

     C.     Relating “heritage” to public art can mean:

     1.     Work that advances the public understanding of the arts in the city’s past or present;

     2.     Work that enhances what has been the city’s aesthetic quality.

     D.    Relating “vision” to public art can mean:

     1.     Work that can connect the city’s past to the future;

     2.     Work that connects directly to the future of where the city is going;

     3.     Work that is visionary and captures the aspiration, imagination, or beauty of the city.

     E.     Relating “opportunity” to public art can mean:

     1.     Work that provides interaction with people;

     2.     Work that provides interaction with the place it is located;

     3.     Work that can be placed in a key location in the community;

     4.     Work that has a broad geographic distribution in the city to increase exposure;

     5.     Work that is a part of a collection in a city art gallery that encourages local artists from the Brentwood area. (Ord. 870 § 2, 2009; Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

2.44.130 Requirement to provide artwork or pay in lieu contribution.
     A.    Percent for Public Art. When a project is subject to the provisions of this chapter, the options are as follows:

     1.     Acquire and install artwork in public places on or in the vicinity of the project site, as approved by the city council. The cost or value of such art should be as per resolution of the city council.

     2.     Pay in-lieu contribution for acquiring and installing an artwork project by contributing to the city municipal art fund as per resolution of the city council.

     B.     Eligible Projects. Residential subdivisions or more than four lots or units of any nature, including the repair and remodeling and renovation of same with a value as per resolution of the city council. City capital improvement program such as bridges, viaducts, elevated ways, gates and other structures owned by the city within the city with a value as per resolution of the city council.

     C.     Exempt Projects. All underground projects, utility projects, seismic upgrades, mechanical and electrical work, and construction due to fire or other natural causes.

     D.    Eligible Costs. Acquisition of artwork and staff and consultant costs associated with the acquisition and installation of the artwork, artist and design fees, artist travel and hotel expenses, the transportation and installation of artwork, lighting, landscaping directly associated with the artwork and identification plaques. Plus all costs directly related to utility relocation, site preparation and repairs and staff time associated with the installation of the artwork.

     E.     Non-Eligible Costs. Landscaping and public works and staff costs not directly associated with the artwork.

     F.     Method of Calculation. The minimum amount to be appropriated to the municipal arts fund shall be the total capital project appropriation including all construction costs as per resolution of the city council. Excluded are amounts budgeted for real property acquisition, demolition, redemption, architectural and engineering fees, site work (work related to clearing, grubbing, and earthwork), contingency allowances, equipment, finance costs, grant funded costs, publicly assisted residential construction or rehabilitation projects and site survey-related costs.

     G.    In order to qualify, any artwork on property shall include a maintenance and longevity agreement written to the satisfaction of the parks and recreation director in consultation with the city attorney. (Ord. 870 § 3, 2009; Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

2.44.140 Public art funds.
     All funds appropriated for public art shall be deposited into a public art fund. The city council shall authorize projects for funding as prescribed in the public art program guidelines. In circumstances where it is not feasible to incorporate artistic features into a particular project, such money appropriated may be pooled and used for art in other projects. Disbursement of such funds shall be made in connection with projects approved by the city council. Nothing herein prohibits the arts commission or the city from soliciting or receiving grants, donations, bequests or gifts from private or public sources from depositing moneys received in the public art program fund to be expended in a manner consistent with the public art program guidelines. (Ord. 870 § 4, 2009; Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

2.44.150 Commission authority.
     To carry out its responsibility hereunder, the commission shall:

     A.    Prepare, and recommend for city council’s approval “The Public Art Program Guidelines” which shall implement the city’s public art program which shall include, but not be limited to, a method or methods of selecting artists or works of art, and the placement of works of art.

     B.     Recommend to city council for approval the purchase of or commission the design execution or placement of works of art.

     C.     The commission shall work with the developer or staff responsible for a particular project to review the recommendations regarding the design, execution and/or placement of works of art in connection with the project.

     D.    The commission shall promulgate rules and regulations consistent with this chapter to facilitate the implementation of its responsibilities hereunder. (Ord. 870 § 5, 2009; Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

Article III. General
2.44.160 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following definitions:

     “Artist” means a practicing professional, skilled in the design and/or creative production of aesthetic objects whose qualifications are demonstrated by recognition or stature within their field and/or through reputation and/or exhibits.

     “Artworks” means context of the work as related to its creation, content and form.

     “City” means the city of Brentwood, a municipal corporation and general law city organized and existing under the Constitution and laws of the state of California.

     “Commission” means the Brentwood arts commission.

 

     “City council” means the city council of the city of Brentwood.

     “Deaccession” means to remove an object from a permanent collection of the city, usually through a sale or trade.

     “Public art” means artwork that is visually and physically accessible to the public and may include performing, musical, visual, cultural, physical, permanent, or temporary works.

     “Public art collection” means all city-owned artworks.

     “Public art plan” means the plan required by Section 2.44.150(A) of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     “Public art program acquisition” means an amount equal to eighty percent of the moneys allocated for public art through the public art program shall be utilized for all costs related to selection, acquisition, placement, installation, display and maintenance of artwork.

     “Public art program administration” means an amount equal to twenty percent of the moneys allocated for public art through the public art program shall be specifically designated for community education programs, publicity, dedications and administration of the public art program.

     “Public art program fund” means a separate fund established by the city to receive moneys for the public art program, generated through a percentage for art ordinance and contributions from private and public sectors.

     “Public art program plan” means a plan developed by the commission, following review of the proposed capital projects, including a prioritized list of visual projects with budgets and recommended inclusion of an art element or a design approach, developed in consultation with staff and approved annually by the city council. The public art plan may include a section on key marketing and educational programs for the year.

     “Public places” means all city-owned spaces, indoor and outdoors, which are generally accessible to the public. (Ord. 870 § 6, 2009; Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

2.44.170 Poet laureate.
     The arts commission shall recommend to city council for approval, the voluntary position of poet laureate, to advocate for the appreciation and advancement of arts, particularly poetry in the community. This appointment shall follow the approved guidelines and procedures. (Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

 

2.44.180 Amendments.
     This chapter may be amended in the same manner as originally adopted. (Ord. 847 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 2.46 PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
2.46.010 Commission establishment.
     The city of Brentwood park and recreation commission is established with membership, powers and duties as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 624 § 1, 1999)

 

2.46.020 Powers and duties.
     The park and recreation commission shall have the general powers and duties as follows:

     A.    The city shall acquire lands for park and recreational purposes. The city council shall receive recommendations from the park and recreation commission with reference to land acquisition and dedications before the city council acquires the property.

     B.     The park and recreation commission, acting on behalf of the city of Brentwood shall oversee all property set aside for park purposes as representatives of the city council.

     C.     The park and recreation commission shall encourage, stimulate, promote and foster programs for the enrichment of the city and thereby contribute to the quality of life in Brentwood and develop an awareness in the business community, in local government and in the general public of the value and benefits of the constructive use of leisure time in Brentwood. The park and recreation commission may perform other related functions that may come before the commission or may be referred to it by the city of Brentwood city council.

     D.    The park and recreation commission shall initiate, sponsor or conduct, alone or in cooperation with other public or private agencies and/or individuals, programs to further the development and public awareness of, and interest in park and recreation issues.

     E.     The park and recreation commission may seek funds from private, county, state and federal sources for park and recreation programs and facilities. The commission is also authorized to receive funds, devises, bequests, endowments, or other donations of money and property for parks and recreation on behalf of the city.

     F.     The park and recreation commission shall have the power to issue proclamations in recognition of support and/or in honor of outstanding achievements related to park and recreation.

     G.    The park and recreation commission will work with the planning commission on general land use issues to ensure adequate park, recreation and trail facilities exist in the city and review and recommend all conceptual park and recreation facility designs. The park and recreation commission shall approve all landscape and architectural plans for park and recreational facilities and will make recommendations to city council regarding final approval of such projects.

     H.    The park and recreation commission will appoint a nonvoting representative(s) to the city of Brentwood youth commission to act as a liaison from the park and recreation commission. The park and recreation commission will also request the city of Brentwood youth commission to appoint a non-voting representative(s) to the park and recreation commission.

     I.      The park and recreation commission shall advise the city manager in recruiting and appointing the director of park and recreation and shall, by making a report to the city manager, be a part of the yearly evaluation of the director.

     J.      The park and recreation commission shall establish rules and regulations governing the conduct of recreation programs, protection of property, and activities of persons in all parks so that all residents may enjoy them for leisure time activities.

     K.    The park and recreation commission shall establish rates, charges and deposits for the use of any and all recreation and park facilities.

     L.     The park and recreation commission shall hold public meetings on recreation programming and facility usage and conduct investigations and surveys for the purpose of obtaining facts and data concerning recreation programs and to assure the provision of programs designed to meet the needs and interests of citizens.

     M.    The park and recreation commission shall review grants, facility developments and designs, and recreation programs.

     N.    The park and recreation commission shall advise the city council on the subject of recreation and facility master planning and development. The commission shall implement and revise, as needed, the comprehensive park, recreation and trail master plan to ensure preservation of open space, development of park facilities and park maintenance operations and standards, and creation of recreation programs.

     O.    The park and recreation commission shall support and facilitate joint cooperation with local school districts, community athletic associations, and other community organizations.

     P.     The park and recreation commission shall make recommendations to the city council regarding the right to exclude persons; to regulate traffic, including pedestrian, equestrian, and vehicular; to regulate the operation and use of bicycles; the keeping or use of animals; the conducting of assemblies, contests, games, and sports; and the regulation of activities, such as merchandising, advertising, gambling, solicitation, and imbibing of alcohol, from or in any and all recreation facilities.

     Q.    The park and recreation commission shall forward appeals of any actions of the commission to the city council. (Ord. 624 § 1, 1999)

 

2.46.030 Membership.
     The park and recreation commission shall consist of five members who shall be residents of the city of Brentwood or from the boundaries of the former Brentwood recreation and park district. Members shall comply with all state and local laws relative to appointments to government office. (Ord. 624 § 1, 1999)

 

2.46.040 Terms of office.
     A.    Commission members shall be nominated by the mayor, and be approved by the city council, at a regularly scheduled council meeting, for terms of three years. Terms of members shall be staggered so that no more than two terms shall expire in any one year. The maximum term for any commissioner is three consecutive three-year terms. A one-year absence after serving the maximum term is required before being reconsidered for appointment.

     B.     All appointees to the commission shall hold their offices until their successors are appointed.

     C.     Members shall be subject to removal by action of the city council without cause, only at a regularly scheduled city council meeting. (Ord. 624 § 1, 1999)

 

2.46.050 Vacancies.
     Vacancies occurring during the term shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term. Vacancies shall be filled by nomination of the mayor with approval of the city council. (Ord. 624 § 1, 1999)

 

2.46.060 Officers.
     A.    The officers of the park and recreation commission shall be chairperson and vice-chairperson, holding a one-year term in each position or until their successor(s) is/are elected. The vice-chair will automatically ascend to the position of chairperson at the conclusion of the chairperson’s term. They shall perform all duties associated with such offices.

     B.     Election of officers, by a majority vote of the commission, shall be held at the regularly scheduled organizational meeting of the commission in January of each year. The term of office for the elected officers will start at the conclusion of the January meeting. Nominations for officers may be made by any commissioner at the January meeting.

     C.     The chairperson or vice-chairperson may be removed from their office by a majority vote of the commission.

     D.    Upon resignation or removal of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall ascend to the office of interim chairperson, after which time an election will be held for the vacant office of chairperson or vice-chairperson.

     E.     The chairperson will perform the following duties:

     1.     Presides at all meetings of the commission and will serve as parliamentarian;

     2.     Appoints committees and chairpersons of committees as necessary;

     3.     Represents the commission before the city council;

     4.     Performs other duties necessary or customary to the office;

     5.     Represents the commission at dedication and official functions.

     F.     In the absence of the chairperson or his/her ability to act, the vice-chairperson will preside in place of the chairperson.

     G.    The commission or the chairperson may appoint several of its members, but less than a quorum, to serve as a committee. On certain occasions, such as when a particular kind of expertise or public representation is desirable, the commission may appoint non-members to a committee. Committees make recommendations directly to the commission. A committee may not represent the commission before the city council or other bodies unless it has first received the authorization of the commission to do so. (Ord. 624 § 1, 1999)

 

2.46.070 Compensation.
     Members of the park and recreation commission shall be compensated pursuant to resolution of the city council. Further, reimbursement may be allowed for necessary traveling and other expenses incurred on official duty when such expenditures have received prior authorization. (Ord. 873 § 1, 2009; Ord. 624 § 1, 1999)

 

2.46.080 Budget.
     The park and recreation commission, on an annual basis, shall review the proposed city of Brentwood park and recreation budgets prior to the budget being submitted to city council. The budget review will include, at a minimum: capital improvement projects; general fund; developer fees; grants and donations; county park and recreation fund; and fees and charges. The commission may make comments related to the budget that will be included as a part of the budget that is presented to city council for final approval. (Ord. 624 § 1, 1999)

 

2.46.090 Annual report.
     The commission shall prepare and submit an annual report of its activities to the city council. (Ord. 624 § 1, 1999)

 

2.46.100 Meetings.
     A.    The park and recreation commission will approve a yearly calendar of meetings at the December commission meeting. Regular meetings of the park and recreation commission shall be held on the fourth Thursday of each month at a time and location to be determined by the commission. Should a regular meeting fall on a city-recognized holiday, the commission will establish the regular meeting for that month as a part of the yearly calendar approval.

     B.     All scheduled and special meetings of the commission shall be publicly noticed, open to the public, and the record of proceedings available to the public. The chairperson may request the attendance at meetings of any official or employee of the city, in an advisory capacity, to assist the commission in its deliberations.

     C.     A quorum for transacting business at any regularly scheduled or special meeting shall be at least fifty-one percent of the filled commissioner positions. Approval of any business transacted shall require a majority vote of the commissioners in attendance.

     D.    If a commission member ceases to reside in the city of Brentwood or the boundaries of the former Brentwood recreation and park district, such commissioner’s position shall be declared vacant.

     E.     If a member of the commission is absent without cause from two successive regular meetings of the commission, the commission may request the city council declare the position vacant. A member is not absent without cause if his/her absence is due to illness, or is unavoidable and the member give notice to city staff before the meeting that he/she will be absent and giving the reason for the absence. (Ord. 624 § 1, 1999)

 

2.46.110 Clerical assistance.
     Clerical assistance shall be provided by the city to assist the commission. Agendas will be provided a minimum of seventy-two hours prior to any regularly scheduled meeting and include any minutes from previous meetings not approved by the commission. (Ord. 624 § 1, 1999)

 

2.46.120 Staff assistance.
     The city of Brentwood director of parks and recreation, or designee(s) as appointed by the city manager, will be the staff liaison(s) to the commission. The staff liaison(s) shall work with the commission to effect the goals of the commission. (Ord. 624 § 1, 1999)

 

2.46.130 Task force(s).
     A.    The commission may make a recommendation to the city council requesting the formation of a task force to address certain specific issues; to function for a limited duration or purpose; and to operate solely in an advisory capacity.

     B.     The commission’s recommendation shall state:

     1.     The nature and purpose for forming the task force;

     2.     The goal(s) of the task force;

     3.     The reason(s) why the same goal(s) can not be accomplished by the commission;

     4.     The duration of time that the task force will function;

     5.     The budget of the task force including, but not limited to, any monetary and non-monetary resource being sought from the city;

     6.     The number of individuals to serve on the task force;

     7.     A proposed list of individuals interested in serving on the task force;

     8.     Any other information deemed relevant and appropriate.

     C.     The city council may, by a majority vote, authorize and approve the formation of a task force, which shall operate solely in an advisory capacity and appoint the membership thereon.

     D.    The city council may, by a majority vote, disestablish any task force created. (Ord. 624 § 1, 1999)

 

2.46.140 Code of ethics.
     Park and recreation commissioners agree to follow the “Code of Ethics for Park and Recreation Commissioners” as established by the National Recreation and Park Association.

 

        As a Park and Recreation Commissioner, representing all of the residents, I recognize that:

1.  I have been entrusted to provide park and recreation services to my community.

2.  These services should be available to all residents regardless of age, sex, race, religion, national origin, physical or mental limitation.

3.  While honest differences of opinion may develop, I will work harmoniously with other Commissioners to assure residents the services they require.

4.  I will invite all residents to express their opinions so I may be properly informed prior to making my decisions. I will make them based solely upon the facts available to me. I will support the final decision of the Commission Board.

5.  I must devote the time, study and thought necessary to carry out my duties.

6.  The Commission establishes the policy and the staff is responsible for administering the polices of the Commission.

7.  I have no authority outside of the proper meetings of the Commission.

8.  All Commission meetings shall be open to the public except as provided by law.

(Ord. 624 § 1, 1999)

 

2.46.150 Amendments.
     This chapter may be amended in the same manner as originally adopted. (Ord. 624 § 1, 1999)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.08 TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS
Chapter 3.12 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 3.16 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.20 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 3.24 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.26 UTILITY BILLING
Chapter 3.30 BIDDING PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC PROJECTS
Chapter 3.40 DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE EMERGENCY COST RECOVERY

Chapter 3.08 TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS
3.08.010 Transfer of functions to county officials—Manner of assessment and collection prescribed by state law.
     A.    All the duties and functions of municipal tax assessment and collection and the treasury functions connected therewith are transferred to the treasurer, tax collector and assessor and auditor of the county.

     B.     The assessment and collection of taxes for the city shall be done in the manner prescribed by the laws of the state and in the same manner and at the same time as are the taxes of the county. Payment of the collected taxes of the city to the city treasurer shall be made by the county as soon as possible after receipt. (Ord. 274 § 1, 1976)

 

3.08.020 Compensation for county officials—Established by Government Code.
     Compensation to the county for performing the tax functions of the city shall be fixed by an agreement between the city and the county and shall be in the amount set forth in the Government Code of the state. (Ord. 274 § 2, 1976)

Chapter 3.12 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
3.12.010 Title and authority for adoption.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Brentwood. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Ord. 175 § 1, 1967)

 

3.12.020 Tax imposed—Rate established.
     There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city of Brentwood are granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his, her or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 175 § 2, 1967)

 

3.12.030 Liability for payment.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.12.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 175 § 3, 1967)

 

3.12.040 Exemption—Debt transactions.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 175 § 4, 1967)

 

3.12.050 Exemption—Government agencies acquiring title.
     Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or any state, territory or political subdivision thereof is a party, shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Ord. 271, 1976; Ord. 175 § 5, 1967)

 

3.12.060 Exemption—Conveyances effecting reorganization or adjustment.
     A.    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

     1.     Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

     2.     Approved in any equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

     3.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

     4.     Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

     B.     Subsection A of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. 175 § 6, 1967)

 

3.12.070 Exemption—Conveyances on order of Securities and Exchange Commission.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if:

     A.    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made, recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

     B.     The order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

     C.     The conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 175 § 7, 1967)

 

3.12.080 Exemption—Realty held by partnership.
     A.    In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

     1.     Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

     2.     Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

     B.     If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

     C.     Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 175 § 8, 1967)

 

3.12.090 Administration of chapter provisions.
     The county recorder shall administer the provisions of this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 175 § 9, 1967)

 

3.12.100 Authority for refund claims.
     Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Ord. 175 § 10, 1967)

Chapter 3.16 SALES AND USE TAX
Note
*      Editor’s Note: The Agreement for State Administration of Local Sales and Use Tax may be found on file in the office of the city clerk.

 

3.16.010 Short title.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance.” (Ord. 251 § 1, 1973)

 

3.16.020 Intent of provisions.
     The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following purposes, among others, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

     A.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

     B.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

     C.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

     D.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 251 § 4, 1973)

 

3.16.030 Contract with state—Effect on operative date.
     Prior to January 1, 1974, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax provisions of this chapter. If this city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to January 1, 1974, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 251 § 5, 1973)

 

3.16.040 Sales tax imposed.
     For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.16.070, of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after January 1, 1974. (Ord. 251 § 6, 1973)

 

3.16.050 Effect of place of sale on provisions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 251 § 7, 1973)

 

3.16.060 Use tax imposed.
     An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after January 1, 1974, for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.16.070 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 251 § 8, 1973)

 

3.16.070 Rate of sales and use tax.
     The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be .975 percent. (Ord. 251 § 2, 1973)

 

3.16.080 State law provisions adopted.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 251 § 9, 1973)

 

3.16.090 Interpretation of adopted state law provisions.
     In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California. The substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. The substitution shall not be made in those sections including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under said provisions of that code. The substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, nor for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 251 § 10, 1973)

 

3.16.100 Seller’s permit not required when.
     If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 251 § 11, 1973)

 

3.16.110 Enjoining collection prohibited.
     No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 251 § 16, 1973)

 

3.16.120 Adoption of amendments to state law.
     All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 251 § 15, 1973)

 

3.16.130 Exclusions and exemptions.
     A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

     B.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

     C.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.

     D.    In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 359 § 1, 1983; Ord. 251 § 13, 1973)

 

*      Editor’s Note: Section 3.16.130 shall be operative January 1, 1984. Section 2 of Ord. 359, on file in the office of the city clerk, shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the legislature of the state which provides exemptions for operators of waterborne vessels.

 

3.16.140 Operative date.
     The provisions of this chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. (Ord. 251 § 3, 1973)

 

3.16.150 Violation a misdemeanor— Penalty.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 251 § 17, 1973)

Chapter 3.20 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.20.010 Title.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter is known as the “Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance.” (Ord. 995 § 1, 2018; Ord. 155 § 1, 1965)

 

3.20.020 Definitions.
     In this chapter, except where the context otherwise requires:

     “Hotel” means a structure or a portion of a structure that is occupied or intended for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. It includes a hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, or mobile home which is located outside a mobile home park (when the tenant is not an employee of the owner or operator of the mobile home), or other similar structure or portion thereof.

     “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of a room or portion of a room in a hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

     “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or another capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent other than an employee, the managing agent is also deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter. Compliance with this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent is considered to be compliance by both.

     “Person” is defined at Section 1.01.020.

     “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property and services, without any deduction.

     “Rental agent” means a person other than an operator who collects rent from a transient for the transient’s occupancy of a hotel.

     “Tax administrator” means the city manager.

     “Transient” means a person who occupies or is entitled to occupy a hotel space for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. A person so occupying a hotel space is deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired, unless there is a written agreement between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. (Ord. 995 § 1, 2018; Ord. 272, 1976; Ord. 155 § 2, 1965)

 

3.20.030 Imposed—Rate designated.
     For the privilege of hotel occupancy, each transient must pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator, a rental agent, or the city. The transient must pay the tax to the operator or rental agent at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax must be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax is due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy the space in the hotel or motel. If the tax is not paid to a rental agent, it must be paid to the operator before the transient has ceased occupancy in the hotel, or paid directly to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may require that the tax be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 995 § 1, 2018; Ord. 533, 1993; Ord. 364 § 1, 1984; Ord. 155 § 3, 1965)

 

3.20.040 Exemptions.
     A.    Exemption. No tax is imposed upon:

     1.     A person as to whom (or any occupancy as to which) it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax;

     2.     A federal or state of California officer or employee when on official business;

     3.     An officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt because of an express provision of federal law or international treaty;

     4.     A transient who occupies a room for which the rent is two dollars or less per day.

     B.     Claim Requirement. No exemption may be granted unless the transient makes a claim for it at the time rent is collected. The claim must be made under penalty of perjury on a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Ord. 995 § 1, 2018; Ord. 155 § 4, 1965)

 

3.20.050 Collection and recording duties of operator—False advertising prohibited.
     Each operator and each rental agent must collect the tax to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected. The amount of tax must be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient must receive a receipt for payment from the operator or rental agent. The operator or rental agent may not advertise or state, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part of it will be assumed by the operator or rental agent, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in Section 3.20.120. (Ord. 995 § 1, 2018; Ord. 155 § 5, 1965)

 

3.20.060 Time for registration—Transient occupancy registration certificate.
     Within thirty days after starting business, each hotel operator must register the hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him or her a transient occupancy registration certificate. The operator must post the certificate in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate will state the following, among other things:

     A.    The name of the operator;

     B.     The address of the hotel;

     C.     The date upon which the certificate was issued;

     D.    “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the operator has fulfilled the requirements of the city’s Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting the transient occupancy tax and remitting the tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize anyone to conduct an unlawful business. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (Ord. 995 § 1, 2018; Ord. 155 § 6, 1965)

 

3.20.070 Report and remittance.
     A.    Report. Each operator and each rental agent must make a return to the tax administrator on forms provided by him or her of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. The operator must file the report on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator.

     B.     Remittance. When the return is filed, the operator or rental agent must remit the full amount of the tax collected to the tax administrator. The operator or rental agent must hold in trust for the city all taxes collected under this chapter.

     C.     General. The tax administrator may: (1) establish shorter reporting periods for a certificate holder if the tax collector deems it necessary to ensure collection of the tax; and (2) require further information in the return. Return and payment are due immediately upon cessation of business. (Ord. 995 § 1, 2018; Ord. 155 § 7, 1965)

 

3.20.080 Penalties and interest for delinquency and fraud.
     A.    Original Delinquency. An operator or rental agent who fails to remit the tax imposed by this chapter within the time required must pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

     B.     Continued Delinquency. An operator or rental agent who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent must pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten-percent penalty first imposed.

     C.     Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of the remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax will be added, in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

     D.    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, an operator or rental agent who fails to remit the tax imposed by this chapter must pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid.

     E.     Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under this section become a part of the tax required to be paid. (Ord. 995 § 1, 2018; Ord. 155 § 8, 1965)

 

3.20.090 Collection and remittance—Effect of failure to comply.
     A.    Information for Tax Estimate. If an operator or rental agent fails or refuses to collect the transient occupancy tax and to timely make and report the remittance of the tax, the tax administrator may proceed to obtain information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator obtains the reasonably available information, the tax administrator will determine and assess against the operator or rental agent the tax, interest and penalties authorized by this chapter.

     B.     Notice of Tax Assessed. When a determination is made under subdivision A of this section, the tax administrator will give a notice of the assessed amount by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator or rental agent at the last known place of address.

     C.     Request for Hearing. The operator or rental agent may within ten days after the serving or mailing of the notice submit a written application to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If the request for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, become final and immediately due and payable by the operator of rental agent on whom it is assessed.

     If the operator or rental agent submits a timely request for hearing, the tax administrator will give at least five days’ written notice to the operator or rental agent to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified should not be fixed.

     D.    Hearing. At the hearing, the operator or rental agent may appear and offer evidence why the tax, interest and penalties should not be fixed. After the hearing, the tax administrator will determine the proper tax to be remitted and will then give written notice to the operator or rental agent. The amount determined to be due is payable within fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.20.100. The tax administrator may assess the full amount of any unremitted taxes and penalties solely against the operator in lieu of assessing some or all of those taxes and penalties against the rental agent. (Ord. 995 § 1, 2018; Ord. 155 § 9, 1965)

 

3.20.100 Procedure for appeal of tax administrator’s decision.
     An operator or rental agent aggrieved by a decision of the tax administrator regarding the amount of tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal that decision to the city council by following the procedures set forth in Section 1.12.030.

     The findings of the council are final. The amount found to be due is immediately due and payable upon the service of notice of the council’s decision. (Ord. 995 § 1, 2018; Ord. 155 § 10, 1965)

 

3.20.110 Records required—Inspection.
     It is the duty of every operator or rental agent liable for the collection and payment of a tax imposed by this chapter to preserve for a period of three years the records relevant to determining the amount of the tax. The tax administrator has the right to inspect the records at all reasonable times. The rental agent must provide the operator with copies of all records necessary for the operator to comply with its obligations under this chapter. (Ord. 995 § 1, 2018; Ord. 155 § 11, 1965)

 

3.20.120 Refund claim procedure.
     Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city (in all cases “the amount overpaid”) under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section. The applicant must submit a written claim within one year from the date of payment, on a form provided by the city, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded. No refund will be paid under this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right to a refund by written records.

     A.    Operator or Rental Agent. An operator or rental agent may claim a refund, or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, when he or she establishes in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the tax was overpaid. Neither a refund nor a credit is allowed unless the amount overpaid has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient.

     B.     Transient. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator or rental agent, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund of the amount overpaid from the operator or rental agent who collected the tax. (Ord. 995 § 1, 2018; Ord. 155 § 12, 1965)

 

3.20.130 Liability for payment—Actions by city.
     A tax required to be paid by a transient under this chapter is deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. A tax collected by an operator or rental agent that has not been paid to the city is deemed a debt owed by the operator or rental agent to the city.

     A person owing money to the city under this chapter is subject to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of the amount within three years of the date the money was due to the city. The tax administrator may assess the full amount of any unremitted taxes and penalties solely against the operator in lieu of assessing some or all of those taxes and penalties against the rental agent. (Ord. 995 § 1, 2018; Ord. 155 § 13, 1965)

 

3.20.140 Violation a misdemeanor—Penalty.
     In addition to the penalties and interest set forth in Section 3.20.080, a person who violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, by imprisonment for up to six months, or by both the fine and imprisonment.

     A violation of this chapter includes the following:

     A.    An operator, rental agent, or other person who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim.

     B.     A person required to make, render, sign or verify a report or claim, who makes a false or fraudulent report or claim with the intent to defeat or evade the determination of the amount due under this chapter. (Ord. 995 § 1, 2018; Ord. 155 § 14, 1965)

Chapter 3.24 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.24.010 Created in compliance with the Streets and Highways Code.
     To comply with the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the special gas tax street improvement fund. (Ord. 271, 1976; Ord. 8 § 1, 1948)

 

3.24.020 Moneys to be paid into fund.
     All moneys received by the city from the state of California under the provisions of the Street and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways, shall be paid into the special gas tax street improvement fund. (Ord. 8 § 2, 1948)

 

3.24.030 Expenditure of fund moneys.
     All moneys in the special gas tax street improvement fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to all of the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 271, 1976; Ord. 8 § 3, 1948)

Chapter 3.26 UTILITY BILLING
3.26.010 Purpose and authority.
     The city will charge for the furnishing of water and sewer service and the collection and disposal of solid waste (collectively utility services) as provided for in this code. The provisions of this chapter are enacted to set the rules and regulations for the billing of utility services for the city. The city will collect all charges and fees from customers using utility services provided by the city. The procedure of rendering bills for collection, their payment, and the consequences of nonpayment, unless otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter, will be governed by council/administrative policy as contained in resolutions adopted by the city council, including council/administrative policy no.10-24, residential water service discontinuation for nonpayment of a delinquent account. Policy no. 10-24, will be posted on the city website. It will be provided in English, the languages listed in California Civil Code Section 1632, and any other languages spoken by ten percent or more of the city’s utility customers. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.020 Utility service fees.
     All customers are responsible for utility service fees and charges as established by resolution or ordinance of the city council and as set forth in the cost allocation plan. In addition, all customers will be responsible for all additional fees and costs assessed due to unlawful connection or damage caused to the city’s property by the customer, or his or her tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees, permittees, guests or invitees. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.030 Failure or refusal to pay charges.
     No person may fail or refuse to pay the utility service fees and charges provided for in this code.

     If any person fails or refuses to pay the lawful charges, including both delinquent and current charges, for any utility services, the service to the premises, regardless of tenancy, will be discontinued, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. In addition, an action may be brought in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, and reasonable attorneys’ fees will be awarded to the city as plaintiff. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.040 Establishing service.
     No application for utility service will be approved without authorization from the city and the payment of all applicable fees and deposits as required in accordance with the current cost allocation plan plus recovery of any special costs for work incurred by the city. Each applicant for utility service is required to provide the information listed below and may be required to sign an application form provided by the city. Additionally, when determined necessary to protect the city, an applicant may be required to personally appear in order to establish service, fill out and sign an application and present personal identification. By applying for service, the applicant agrees to abide by all rules and regulations of the city, including providing all information required for the city to calculate a water allotment for the applicant during periods of water conservation/rationing. When two or more persons jointly apply for utility service, or when additional persons are added to an existing account, they will receive a single periodic bill, but will be jointly and individually liable for charges incurred for services provided and penalties incurred.

     The application form or process may include:

     A.    Date of application;

     B.     Name(s) of applicant(s);

     C.     Date of birth, California driver’s license or other form of government issued identification and last four digits of the Social Security number;

     D.    Street address of property to be served;

     E.     A telephone number where the applicant can be reached during work hours and during non-work hours;

     F.     Address to which the bills will be mailed if different than service address;

     G.    Email address;

     H.    Service start date;

     I.      Type of service requested;

     J.      Applicant’s relation to the property as owner, agent, tenant or developer;

     K.    The city may request that applicants submit other necessary information and payment of any other charges depending on the type of application for utility service in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.050 Utility service without making application.
     A person using utility services without filing an application will be responsible for paying for water usage from the date of the last recorded meter reading or an estimate of the water usage based on average usage for like premises of similar size and function as determined by the city. In addition, a person using utility services without filing an application is responsible for paying for sewer service and solid waste services rendered at the location. If application for service is not made within twenty-four hours after notification to do so, utility services may be discontinued. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.060 Application for service—Previous balance outstanding.
     When an applicant for utility service has a past due balance on a utility account that is in the collection process, the city may refuse utility service until all outstanding charges are paid. An application for new service may be completed in person and identification must be provided. A payment arrangement plan to pay off the past due amount and any applicable fees may be established in accordance with Section 3.26.130. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.070 Application fee.
     In addition to any security deposit that may be required, an application fee will be required in order to establish service. This fee will be charged on the customer’s first bill. The application fee will not obligate the applicant to take service for any period of time. The application fee is not transferable to any other properties or premises. The amount of the application fee is as set in the cost allocation plan. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.080 Security deposit.
     Customers who have demonstrated a record of nonpayment of utility bills may be required to pay a security deposit prior to service being established.

     A.    The amount of the deposit will be equal to the average monthly billing for accounts of similar size and function as determined by the city and will not be less than the seasonal amount threshold that will determine the minimum past due balance subjecting customers to discontinuation of service.

     B.     In the event of nonpayment of all or a portion of a bill, the security deposit will be applied to cover any unpaid charges on the account.

     C.     When the security deposit has been applied to cover any unpaid charges on the account, the customer will fully restore the security deposit in an amount equal to the current average monthly billing for their account in addition to the payment of any other applicable fees and charges set by resolution or ordinance of the city council, before the city reinstates service. If the security deposit is insufficient to cover the unpaid charges, an increase to the security deposit amount may be required.

     D.    No interest will accrue or be paid on any amounts deposited with the city.

     E.     After twelve months of good payment history, as determined by the director of finance and information systems, the security deposit may be credited to the account.

     F.     Upon permanent discontinuance of service and closing of an account, the city will refund the security deposit to the customer without interest less any unpaid fees and charges due and owing to the city for utility service.

     G.    When the city receives notice that a customer has filed for bankruptcy, the city may apply the customer’s security deposit to cover any delinquent fees and charges the customer owes for service furnished up to the date of the bankruptcy filing. The customer will then be required to complete an application for new service and submit a security deposit in the amount equal to the current average monthly billing for their account as determined by the city. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.090 Billing period.
     The regular billing period will be monthly. If the total period for which service is provided is less than one month, the monthly service charges will be prorated. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.100 When and where bills are due and payable.
     Bills are due and payable when invoiced and may be paid by any form acceptable to the city and in accordance with this chapter. Bills are past due twenty-five days after date of invoice and are considered paid when payment is received by the city. The city accepts no responsibility for non-receipt or delay in receipt of bills, except in circumstances which are under its direct control. If bills are not paid by the due date, a delinquency penalty on past due amounts, at a rate set by resolution or ordinance of the city council, will be added to the following month’s bill. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.110 Method of payment of utility bills.
     The utility bill may be paid by credit/debit card, check, cashier’s check, money order, or in cash unless specified otherwise. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.120 Returned payments.
     Payments by check or credit card that are returned unpaid are subject to a returned payment fee as set forth in the cost allocation plan. If the dishonored payment establishes a past due amount on the customer account, the amount that was returned plus the returned payment fee must be paid within one business day after notice. Failure to pay may subject the account to disconnection in accordance with sections 3.26.230 and 3.26.240, and for residential water service, council/administrative policy no. 10-24, residential water service discontinuation for nonpayment of a delinquent account. When a customer has two or more returned payments during a twelve-month period, the customer may be required to pay future utility bills only by cash, cashier’s check or money order for the following twelve months or establish a security deposit. The payment for reconnected service cannot be made by the same method as the returned payment leading to disconnect. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.130 Amortized payment arrangement.
     Customers that are unable to pay their utility charges may apply for an amortized payment arrangement which would allow the delinquent charges to be paid over a six-month period. The customer must pay twenty-five percent of their balance upon application for an amortized payment arrangement. The amortized payment arrangement must be signed by the customer and approved by the director of finance and information systems. The customer must pay their current charges each month while making payments in accordance with the amortized payment arrangement. Payments must be made by cash, money order or credit/debit card. Late penalties will not accrue on amounts included in an executed amortized payment arrangement during the repayment period.

     If the customer establishes service at a new location or transfers service while the amortized payment arrangement is in effect, any remaining balance will be transferred to the new account and a new amortized payment arrangement may be signed at the new address for the remaining months of the original agreement.

     If the customer violates the amortized payment arrangement, all past due charges become immediately due and payable. If not paid, the customer’s utility service will be subject to disconnection no sooner than five business days after the city posts a final notice of intent to disconnect service in a prominent and conspicuous location at the property. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.140 Balanced billing program.
     Customers with no more than two late payments and no amortized payment arrangement or disconnections for nonpayment in a twelve-month period, may apply for the balanced billing program. The plan allows customers to flatten out the peaks of their current month’s utility bill with the prior eleven months and make the utility bills more predictable in every season. Once participating in the balanced billing program, if customers have more than two late payments or elect payment arrangements, the balanced billing plan will stop and the full amount of any unpaid balance will be due and payable on the due date of the next utility bill. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.150 Inability to obtain a reading of water consumption.
     In the event a meter fails to register consumption, the customer will be charged for an estimated amount of water used, based upon the customer’s prior consumption during the same season of the year or upon a reasonable comparison with use of other customers during the same period receiving the same class of service under similar circumstances.

     The customer has the right to dispute the city’s estimate of the water usage on which the bill is based. An adjustment can be made if upon a comparison of the billed usage with accurately metered subsequent use, normally seven days or more, it is determined that the billed consumption was over or under estimated. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.160 Billing of separate water meters.
     Each meter on a customer’s premises will be billed separately, and the readings of two or more meters will not be combined unless the city, for operating convenience or necessity, determines otherwise or in the case of looped meters. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.170 Disputed bills.
     A customer must notify the city that it disputes the correctness of a bill and requests a review or investigation, within fifteen days from the date of disputed bill or any initial notice of termination of utility service. If a customer believes a payment has been made but not recorded on their account, the customer will be required to present a receipt, cancelled check or other satisfactory evidence to substantiate the payment and enable the city to research the receipt of the payment.

     If the dispute is related to the utility bill, the assistant director of finance and information systems will meet with the customer in person or by phone at the customer’s request to investigate and attempt to resolve the dispute informally. If, following the meeting with the assistant director of finance and information systems, the customer’s dispute is not resolved, the customer may submit the dispute to the director of finance and information systems by submitting a written request with a statement that the bill is in dispute and a full explanation of the dispute.

     If the dispute is related to utility services, the assistant director of public works/operations will meet with the customer in person or by phone at the customer’s request to investigate and attempt to resolve the dispute informally. If, following the meeting with the assistant director of public works/operations, the customer’s dispute is not resolved, the customer may submit the dispute to the director of public works by submitting a written request with a statement that the services billed are in dispute and a full explanation of the dispute.

     While the issue is being researched and before a final determination by the city is made, the customer must continue to pay all undisputed amounts owed on the schedule required to avoid interruption of service.

     The determination of the director of finance and information systems or director of public works is final. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.180 Adjustments of water bills due to meter error.
     Adjustments of water bills due to meter error will only be made after testing in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 14.01.430.

     A.    Fast Meters. When a test reveals that a meter is registering faster than the actual flow under conditions of normal operation, the city will, within forty-five days, refund or credit to the customer the full amount of meter test fee and the overcharge based on corrected meter readings for the prior period, not to exceed thirty-six months, that the meter was in use by the customer, unless the exact duration of fast meter registration can be determined. A refund or credit to the customer will be made only if the account is current and in good standing.

     B.     Slow Meters. When a test reveals that a meter is registering less than the actual flow, the city will retain the meter test fee and may bill the customer for the amount of the undercharge based upon corrected meter readings for the prior period, not to exceed thirty-six months that the meter was in use by the customer, unless the exact duration of slow meter registration can be determined.

     C.     Non-Registering and Unreadable Meters. When a test reveals that a meter is not registering or not readable, the city will refund or credit to the customer the full amount of meter test fee and may bill the customer for the estimated amount of water consumed while the meter was not registering or not readable. The director of public works will estimate the consumption based either upon the customer’s prior use during the same season of the year or upon a reasonable comparison with the use of other customers receiving the same type of service during the same period and under similar circumstances and conditions. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.190 Adjustment.
     A.    All Utility Customers. Bill adjustments will generally not be made on excess delivery or high water consumption except when evidence clearly shows that the excess delivery is due to a leak on an underground or unexposed water service line and not wasteful use, defective irrigation lines or otherwise due to the consumer’s acts, omissions, or negligence as determined by the director of public works. For purposes of this section, water service lines include any customer facilities that connect with the city’s facilities, such as the pipeline from the meter box, control valve and other necessary or required fittings to provide water to the premises from the meter box.

     A bill adjustment will only be made after adequate repairs have been made and only once it is certain such leak or loss will not occur again as determined by the director of public works. No adjustment or allowance will be made covering more than one billing period nor will more than one adjustment or allowance be made to the same customer for the same premises in any twelve-month period.

     If it is determined that an adjustment is warranted, an adjustment in the amount of fifty percent of the excess water consumption will be reflected in the next billing. Excess delivery will be calculated by comparing the water usage during the leak month to the customer’s prior consumption during the same season of the year, if available. If prior consumption during the same season of the prior year is not available, a reasonable comparison with use of other customers during the same period receiving the same class of service under similar circumstances will be used.

     B.     Residential Customers. When a residential abnormal water meter read has been recorded during the months used as a basis for the computation of the customer’s sewer service fee for a reason such as an unknown leak, meter failure, or other reason beyond the customer’s control as determined by the director of public works, the sewer service fee will be recalculated and the differential will be taken into account when the rate is set for the next billing year beginning in July. The recalculated sewer service fee will be determined by re-calculating the fee based on the customer’s prior usage during the same season of the prior year, if available. If prior consumption during the same season of the prior year is not available, a reasonable comparison with use of other customers during the same period receiving the same class of service under similar circumstances will be used or another basis as approved by the director of finance and information systems.

     C.     Commercial Customers. When a bill adjustment due to a leak has been provided to a commercial customer, a sewer service credit will be reflected in the next billing, due to the overcharge of sewer service fees based on excessive water consumption. The credit will be determined by re-calculating the sewer service fee based on the usage during the customer’s prior consumption during the same month of the prior year, or if not available, a reasonable comparison with use of other customers during the same period receiving the same class of service under similar circumstances.

     D.    A commercial customer may qualify for a sewer only adjustment for leaks that are not on the main service line. Once the leak has been repaired and verified by the director of public works, the credit will be determined by re-calculating the sewer service fee based on the usage during the customer’s prior consumption during the same month of the prior year, or if not available, a reasonable comparison with use of other customers during the same period receiving the same class of service under similar circumstances. No adjustment or allowance will be made covering more than one billing period, nor will more than one adjustment or allowance be made to the same customer for the same premises in any twelve-month period. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.200 Adjustments for billing errors.
     When it is determined that the city has overcharged or undercharged a customer for utility services, the account records will be corrected to insure accurate future billing. When the city has overcharged a customer as the result of a billing error, the account will be credited for overcharges for the period of overcharge not to exceed thirty-six months. In the case of an undercharge, back billing of up to thirty-six months will be calculated based on actual services delivered or estimated based on similar users and average use in the same area. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.210 Payment deadline—Failure to comply resulting in discontinuance of utility service.
     If a customer has not disputed the accuracy of a bill in a timely fashion, and the amount stated to be due is not paid in full within sixty days of the bill date, the city will have the right to discontinue utility service, except as otherwise set forth in this chapter or where prohibited by statute. Residential water customers discontinuation of service is outlined in council/administrative policy no. 10-24, discontinuation of residential water service for nonpayment of a delinquent account.

     Along with the discontinuation exemptions for delinquent residential water service accounts as further described in council/administrative policy no. 10-24, utility services will not be discontinued under the following circumstances:

     A.    During research and investigation regarding utility usage or billing until a resolution is determined by the city as set forth in Section 3.26.170; or

     B.     When a customer has been granted an extension for the payment period or is in compliance with an authorized amortization payment arrangement. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.220 Discontinuation of utility service due to vacating premises.
     Customers desiring to discontinue service should notify the city a minimum of two working days prior to vacating the premises. Unless discontinuance of service is ordered, the customer will be liable for all applicable charges whether or not any utilities are used by the customer. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.230 Discontinuation of utility service.
     Except for discontinuing water service pursuant to Section 3.26.240, the city may at its discretion discontinue a customer’s utility service if a customer fails to comply with all or any part of this chapter or other rule or regulation of the city. The director of public works will notify the customer in writing, describing the violation, and demanding immediate correction. If the severity of the violation could cause immediate detrimental or dangerous effects on other customers or the public in general and rectification of the violation will not allow time for written notice, the director of public works may discontinue utility service immediately. The city will correct such violation by whatever means possible, including entering the premises without notice. Utility service will not be supplied until the customer complies with the ordinance, rule or regulation that was violated. If the customer cannot comply with the ordinance, rule or regulation, the city may reinstate utility service if the customer satisfies the city that, in the future, the customer will comply with this chapter and other rules and regulations of the city, including payment of a reconnection/reinstatement of service charge as set forth in the cost allocation plan and any other payment may be required as a condition of renewal of service. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.240 Discontinuation of water service.
     The city may discontinue water service for the reasons and pursuant to the restrictions set forth in subsections A through G.

     A.    Discontinuation for Nonpayment. Residential water service may be discontinued for nonpayment of past due bills upon proper notice as provided in section 3.26.210, Section 3.26.250,, and council/administrative policy no. 10-24, residential water service discontinuation for nonpayment of a delinquent account.

     B.     On any Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or any time during which the city offices are not open to the public for business.

     C.     Unsafe Apparatus. Water service may be refused or discontinued to any premises using apparatus or appliances which might endanger or disturb the service to other customers.

     D.    Cross-Connections. Water service may be refused or discontinued to any premises where there exists a cross-connection in violation of this chapter or applicable laws or regulations.

     E.     Fraud or Abuse. Service may be discontinued if necessary to protect the city against fraud or abuse.

     F.     Upon Vacating Premises. Customers desiring to discontinue service should notify the city a minimum of two working days prior to vacating the premises. Unless discontinuance of service is ordered, the customer will be liable for applicable charges whether or not any water is used by the customer.

     G.    Negligence and Waste. Water service may be discontinued if the customer is found to be negligent or wasteful in using water furnished to their premises. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.250 Notice to residential customers if water service terminated for nonpayment.
     If the city determines that a residential customer’s water service should be discontinued for nonpayment, the city will provide notice pursuant to council/administrative policy no. 10-24, residential water service discontinuation for nonpayment of a delinquent account. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.260 Unauthorized turn on after delinquency.
     If after a service has been discontinued, the customer, without authorization, tampers with, turns on/restores the connection and continues to receive water service, the city may remove the meter and impose a charge for the unauthorized resumption of service. Such charge is in addition to all other applicable charges and is set forth in the cost allocation plan. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.270 Payment of legal fees and costs.
     A.    Collection. The city may collect all unpaid rates, charges, and costs. Collection procedures may include filing a court action.

     B.     Costs. Applicant, customer, owner or contractor will pay all attorneys’ fees and other costs incurred as a result of the necessity of the city’s resorting to court or other formal services or legal processes, including, but not limited to, any collection process, for the enforcement of any duties or obligations imposed by any of the ordinances, agreements, rules or regulations of the city. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.280 Responsibility for charges for discontinued or abandoned service.
     If the utility service is discontinued, disconnected or abandoned, no right of refund of account establishment charges, monthly fixed charges or credit in any manner accrues to the customer.

     The city may, at its discretion, retrieve any city owned solid waste containers from the premises following the final servicing of those containers. If the containers are not at the curb as requested, solid waste service charges may continue. The customer will be responsible for the containers and monthly fees until all containers are able to be retrieved by the city. If the customer is not able to return all containers, a replacement fee will be charged at a rate set by resolution or ordinance of the city council.

     Charges to the date of discontinuance of utility services will be assessed and monthly charges will be prorated to the date of discontinuance of service. The customer requesting discontinuance will submit a proper forwarding address at which the customer will receive a closing bill. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.290 Re-establishing service after interrupt or discontinuance.
     When utility service has been discontinued or interrupted due to nonpayment of the utility bill, the service will not be provided until all required delinquent charges and fees to re-establish service, at a rate set by resolution or ordinance of the city council, have been paid or the customer is eligible for and executes a payment arrangement. Customers seeking to re-establish service after discontinuation due to nonpayment or any other violation will be required to make payment only by cash, cashier’s check or money order, subject to Section 3.26.120, for the following twelve months, or establish a security deposit as set forth in Section 3.26.080. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.300 Collection on accounts.
     Final bills on closed or delinquent accounts are due within twenty-five days of invoice date. If a customer fails to pay the past due balance on a closed account within twenty-five days, the balance may be transferred to an active account in the customer’s name.

     Further collections actions will be accomplished in accordance with council/administrative policy as contained in resolutions adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.310 Director of finance and information systems powers.
     The director of finance and information systems will have the power, for good cause shown:

     A.    To extend the time for a customer to make a payment;

     B.     To adjust penalties or fees which would otherwise have accrued;

     C.     To set a seasonal amount threshold that will determine the minimum past due balance subjecting customers to discontinuation of service;

     D.    To adjust or extend the date of discontinuation of service;

     E.     To adjust the minimum amount of payment on the past due amount to restore services;

     F.     To adjust the amount of deposit required for utility services;

     G.    To authorize or extend payment arrangements when they would not normally be authorized or extended;

     H.    To change the billing frequency and billing date. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

 

3.26.320 Civil debt.
     The rates and fees imposed for utility services provided by the city will constitute a civil debt and liability owing to the city from the person(s) establishing or using utility services and are collectable in any manner provided by law. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 2019; Ord. 920 § 2, 2013)

Chapter 3.30 BIDDING PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC PROJECTS
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ords. 585 and 661.

 

3.30.010 Informal bid procedures.
     Public projects, as defined by the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (Section 22000 et seq., of the Public Contract Code—the “Act”) and in accordance with the limits listed in Section 22032 of the Public Contract Code, may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in Section 22032, et seq., of the Public Contract Code. (Ord. 868 § 1, 2009)

 

3.30.020 Contractors list.
     A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained by the public works director in accordance with the provisions of Section 22034 of the Public Contract Code and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission (the “Commission”). (Ord. 868 § 1, 2009)

 

3.30.030 Notice inviting informal bids.
     Where a public project is to be performed, which is subject to the provisions of this chapter, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed in accordance with Section 3.30.020, and to all construction trade journals as specified by the Commission in accordance with Section 22036 of the Public Contract Code. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the department/agency soliciting bids, provided however:

     A.    If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the city for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the Commission.

     B.     If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors. (Ord. 868 § 1, 2009)

 

3.30.040 Award of contracts.
     The city manager or designee is authorized to award informal contracts pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 868 § 1, 2009)

Chapter 3.40 DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE EMERGENCY COST RECOVERY
3.40.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to assist the city in defraying the cost of police personnel and equipment responding when a person, under the influence of an alcoholic beverage, drug, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any drug, proximately causes an incident by the negligent operation of a motor vehicle resulting in an appropriate emergency response. (Ord. 879 § 1, 2010)

 

3.40.020 Definitions.
     A.    For purposes of this chapter, a person under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any drug, when as a result of drinking an alcoholic beverage or using a drug, or both, his or her physical or mental abilities are impaired to a degree that he or she no longer has the ability to operate a motor vehicle with the caution characteristic of a sober person of ordinary prudence under the same or similar circumstances. For the purposes of this chapter, the provisions in Sections 23152 and 23156 of the California Vehicle Code shall apply.

     B.     For the purposes of this chapter, an “emergency response” is one for which police personnel and equipment respond to an “incident” beyond the police response required for a mere traffic stop leading an arrest.

     C.     For the purposes of this chapter, an “incident” is an event involving any person who is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any drug, whose negligent operation of a motor vehicle due to the influence proximately causes an event requiring an emergency response as defined in subsection B. Although a collision is not necessary to create an “incident,” an ordinary arrest, even for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs is insufficient. (Ord. 879 § 1, 2010)

 

3.40.030 Emergency cost recovery.
     Emergency response costs, as outlined in Section 3.40.040, shall be recoverable whenever police personnel and equipment respond to an incident up to the maximum dollar amount set by Government Code Section 53155. (Ord. 879 § 1, 2010)

 

3.40.040 Calculation of emergency response costs.
     Calculation of the amount due for an “emergency response” shall include all actual costs incurred by the city in responding to the incident, including salary, benefits and overhead as established by resolution of the city council, for each member of the police responding to the incident, the cost of equipment on scene, and the cost of repairing or replacing equipment damaged at the scene. This also includes the cost of obtaining medical assistance, removing vehicles, investigating the cause of the incident, conducting field sobriety tests, arrest and detention of the suspect, time spent traveling to and from the scene, transporting the suspect, booking the suspect, performing chemical tests, writing customary reports and follow up investigation needed to complete reports. (Ord. 879 § 1, 2010)

 

3.40.050 Collection of charges.
     A.    The chief of police or designee, shall calculate the charges payable under this section and shall forward the information that is required to invoice the person responsible for the incident to the finance and information systems department.

     B.     If the person deemed responsible for the incident is a minor, then the parents or guardian of such minor shall be liable for the cost of the emergency response as defined in this chapter.

     C.     If the invoice remains unpaid, the finance and information systems department shall initiate collection actions pursuant to council/administrative Policy # 10-15, Collections. (Ord. 879 § 1, 2010)

Title 4 (RESERVED)

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATION
Chapter 5.08 BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATION: SUPPLEMENT
Chapter 5.24 BRENTWOOD CABLE TELEVISION
Chapter 5.48 PEDDLERS
Chapter 5.52 POOL HALLS
Chapter 5.56 POOL HALLS AND CARDROOMS
Chapter 5.58 BINGO GAMES
Chapter 5.60 TAXICABS
Chapter 5.68 MOBILE VENDING
Chapter 5.70 MASSAGE
Chapter 5.72 COMPUTER GAMING AND INTERNET ACCESS ESTABLISHMENTS

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATION
Article I. General Provisions
5.04.010 Purpose.
     The provisions of this chapter are enacted solely to raise revenue for general municipal purposes and are not intended for regulation. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.020 Business tax certificates required.
     Business taxes are hereby imposed upon all businesses, professions, trades, vocations, enterprises, establishments, occupations, or callings conducting business in the city to which a business tax may lawfully apply. It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, vocation, enterprise, establishment, occupation, or calling in the city not otherwise exempt without first having procured a business tax certificate from the city or complying with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter.

     The business tax certificate shall be evidence only of the fact that such business tax has been paid. Neither the payment of the business tax nor the possession of the business tax certificate shall authorize, permit, or allow the doing of any act which the person paying or holding such business tax certificate would not otherwise be entitled to do; nor shall it be construed as permission to conduct or carry on a business at any place within the city where the conducting or carrying on of such business is prohibited or fails to comply with the city’s zoning, planning, or building regulations, nor shall it be construed as permission to conduct or carry on a business in such a manner as to create or maintain a nuisance. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.030 Exemptions.
     The following persons and organizations are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

     A.    Minors Under the Age of Eighteen. Businesses owned and conducted by minors under the age of eighteen years shall be exempt from the business tax provisions of this chapter where all of the following conditions exist and legal documentation is provided to support that:

     1.     All persons engaged in the operation of the business are under the age of eighteen years.

     2.     All persons engaged in the operation of the business have a bona fide ownership interest in the business.

     B.     Charitable, Religious, and Nonprofit Organizations.

     1.     Organization Activities. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a business tax to conduct, manage, or carry on any business, occupation, or activity of any institution or organization recognized by a tax board of the state with a “Statement of Domestic Non-Profit Organization” or the Internal Revenue Service of the United States which is conducted wholly for the benefit of charitable, religious, or nonprofit purposes and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person.

     2.     Nonexempt Activities. The exemption provisions of this section shall not be construed to extend to any person, business, corporation, or organization receiving a fee, wage, stipend, salary, remuneration, compensation, or pay for the performance of any business, occupation, or activity related to exempt organization activities. Any such person, business, corporation, or organization shall be subject to the business tax provisions of this chapter and shall obtain the business tax certificate prior to any business, occupation, or activity being undertaken.

     C.     Conflicts with Federal and State Laws or Contractual Agreements. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to require a person to obtain a business tax certificate prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with the applicable statutes, laws, or constitution of the United States or the state of California or other contractual obligations or franchise agreements. The director of finance may develop administrative guidelines concerning exemptions, apportionment, and any other matters which she or he determines as necessary for the lawful and effective implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.040 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

     A.    “Business” means and includes professions, trades, vocations, rentals, leases, enterprises, establishments, and occupations and all and every kind of calling, any of which is conducted for the purpose of earning in whole, or in part, a profit or livelihood, whether or not a profit or a livelihood actually is earned thereby, whether paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, and whether or not the business has a fixed place of business in the city.

     B.     “Director of finance” means the individual designated by the city manager to collect business taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     “Gross receipts” means and includes the total amounts actually received or receivable from sales, services, rentals, or leases in the total amounts actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or a credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of, or in connection with, the sale or rental of materials, property (real or personal), goods, wares, or merchandise. Included in “gross receipts” shall be receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, rented or leased, the cost of the materials used, labor and service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever.

     Real estate brokers shall include in “gross receipts” the entire commission received for the sale of property.

     Excluded from “gross receipts” shall be the following:

     1.     Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;

     2.     Credit allowed on property accepted as a part of the purchase price in which property may later be sold;

     3.     Any tax required by law to be included, or added to, the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;

     4.     Such part of the sales price of property returned by purchasers upon the rescission of the sales contract as is refunded, either in cash or by credit;

     5.     As to legal settlements, amounts collected for others, where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that amounts are paid to those for whom the amounts were collected;

     6.     Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into the income of the business shall not be excluded;

     7.     As to a real estate transaction, the sales price of the real estate sold for the account of others, except that portion which represents commission or other income;

     8.     Income from businesses which perform the function of agent or broker, except that portion of income which represents commission or other income to the agent or broker;

     9.     As to a retail gasoline dealer, a portion of the receipts of the dealer from the sales of motor vehicle fuels equal to the amount of motor vehicle fuel license tax imposed;

     10.   As to retail gasoline dealer, any special motor fuel taxes if paid by the dealer or collected by the dealer from the consumer or purchaser.

     D.    “Person” means and includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint-stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts trust, business, and other common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than an employee.

     E.     “Sworn statement” means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths or a declaration or certification made under the penalty of perjury.

     F.     “Gross receipts subject to the business tax” shall be that portion of gross receipts relating to business conducted within the city. For businesses with their headquarters located within the city of Brentwood, their total gross receipts shall be deemed to be related to business conducted within the city unless an apportionment of gross receipts is requested by the business pursuant to Section 5.04.230 of this chapter. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

Article II. Tax Amounts
5.04.050 Tax basis.
     The amount of the business tax to be paid by the applicant is to be measured by gross receipts from the preceding completed calendar or fiscal year. For a new business, which has no gross receipt history, the applicant is required to estimate the gross receipts. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.060 Tax rate.
     The tax rate for all businesses shall be as follows:

 

Gross Receipts

Business Tax

Minimum

$100

$333,334 — $500,000

$0.30 per $1,000

$500,001 — $1,000,000

$150 + $0.25 per $1,000 in excess of $500,000

$1,000,001 and up

$275 + $0.15 per $1,000 in excess of $1,000,000

 

     For purposes of this section, existing businesses shall be defined as only those businesses with an existing business license issued by the city of Brentwood prior to June 1, 2002. Existing businesses shall pay no more than forty percent of the tax rate provided in this section for the first year that this chapter is in effect. Existing businesses shall pay only seventy percent of the tax rate provided in this section for the second year that this chapter is in effect. After the second year has ended, existing businesses shall pay the tax rate provided in this section.

     Twenty percent of the business license tax collected shall be set aside for economic development for the explicit purpose of business promotion and institutional advertisement for the city of Brentwood. Organizations, including the city of Brentwood and the Brentwood chamber of commerce, may apply annually for the use of these funds on a project by project basis to the city manager. Disbursement of these funds would require city council approval. (Ord. 973 § 3, 2016; Ord. 803 § 1, 2005; Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.070 Minimum tax.
     The minimum tax which shall be paid by any business will be one hundred dollars. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

Article III. Application and Renewal
5.04.080 Business tax certificate applications.
     Every person required to have a business tax certificate pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall make a written application to the director of finance and submit an application fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. The written application shall contain the following information:

     A.    The nature or kind of business for which the business tax certificate is requested;

     B.     The place where the business is to be conducted and, if the business is not to be conducted at a permanent location, the residence address, identified as such, of the owners of the business;

     C.     If the application is made for the issuance of a business tax certificate to a person to do business under a fictitious name, the names, social security numbers, and residence addresses of the owners of the business;

     D.    If the application is made for the issuance of a business tax certificate to a corporation or partnership, the names, franchise tax number, and residence addresses of the officers or partners thereof;

     E.     Contractors must provide a list of all subcontractors including mailing address, phone number, contact person and contract amount. Contractors must also provide a copy of a valid Brentwood business tax certificate for all subcontractors; and

     F.     Any further information which the federal or state taxing authority or the director of finance may require to enable the issuance of the business tax certificate. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.090 Business tax certificate renewals.
     In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of the business tax certificate required by the provisions of this chapter shall submit to the director of finance a written statement, upon a form provided by the director of finance, written under penalty of perjury or sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth the actual gross receipts earned the preceding calendar or fiscal year as reported to any federal or state taxing authority to which gross receipts are reported to enable the director of finance to ascertain the amount of the business tax to be paid. Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual business taxes required by the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable on January 1st, April 1st, July 1st and October 1st and delinquent on first of the month following the due date.

     No renewal of a business tax certificate shall be issued until payment in full of all delinquent business taxes, including accrued interest and applicable penalties thereon is received by the city. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to ensure renewal of the business tax certificate. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

Article IV. Business Tax Certificate Issuance
5.04.100 Content.
     All business tax certificates required by the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be prepared and issued by the director of finance upon the payment to the city of the proper amount of business tax. Each business tax certificate shall state upon the face thereof the following:

     A.    The name of the person to whom the business tax certificate is issued;

     B.     The type of business taxed;

     C.     The location or address of the business taxes;

     D.    The date of the expiration of the business tax certificate. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.110 Posting and keeping.
     All business tax certificates issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be posted and kept in the following manner:

     A.    Any persons transacting and carrying on business at a permanent location in the city shall keep such business tax certificate posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on.

     B.     Any persons transacting and carrying on business, but not operating at a permanent location in the city, shall keep such business tax certificate upon them at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.120 Duplicates.
     A duplicate business tax certificate may be issued by the director of finance to replace any business tax certificate previously issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which business tax certificate has been lost or destroyed, upon the filing of a statement of such fact and the payment of a duplicate fee set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.130 Branch establishments.
     A separate business tax certificate shall be issued for each branch establishment or location of business; provided, however, warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with, and incidental to, a business taxed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of businesses or branch establishments; and provided, further, any person conducting two or more types of businesses at the same location and under the same management, or at different locations, but which businesses use a single set or integrated set of books and records, may elect to pay only one business tax calculated on all the gross receipts of the businesses. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.140 Change of location.
     No business tax certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable; provided, however, where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such license may be amended upon application to authorize the transacting and carrying on of the same business at some other location to which the business is moved. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

Article V. Administration
5.04.150 Certification of records.
     A.    Conclusiveness of Statements. No statement required by the provisions of this chapter shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of such statements preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sums as are actually due and payable pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such statements and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to certification by the director of finance or authorized employees or representatives of the city, who are hereby authorized to examine such books and records of any certificate holder or applicant for a business tax certificate as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of the business tax due.

     B.     Record Retention. All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter shall keep complete records of all business transactions and shall retain such records for examination by the director of finance or authorized employees or representatives of the city, and maintain them for a period of at least three years from the annual due date of the federal tax return or the city business tax return, whichever time period is greater. Records which shall be maintained for audit purposes shall include state and federal income tax returns, schedules and records included in such returns, and any and all work papers used to prepare such returns.

     C.     Examination of Records. All business tax certificate holders, applicants for business tax certificates, and persons engaged in business in the city are hereby required to permit an examination of such books and records for the purposes set forth in this section during regular business hours and at reasonable times.

     D.    Interest and Penalties. If, subsequent to the examination, it is determined that the business has been delinquent or has nonreported or under-reported gross receipts, thereby underpaying business taxes, the certificate holder shall pay to the city within ten days of notification of the determination of the amount of tax due, interest in the amount set by resolution of the city council from the date the tax was due, and a penalty in the amount of the business tax due. Interest shall continue to accrue on the additional tax amount until such amount is paid in full.

     A mistake made in stating the amount of the business tax shall not, in any case, prevent or prejudice the director of finance from collecting what is actually due from any person or entity carrying on a trade, calling, profession, or occupation subject to a business tax under this chapter.

     E.     Determination of Tax Amounts Due. If any person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter fails to submit information required, or if the director of finance is not satisfied with records and statements filed, the director of finance shall determine the amount of the business tax due from such person by means of such information as may be obtainable and shall mail a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Brentwood, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at their last-known address. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.160 Information confidential.
     It is unlawful for the director of finance or designee, or any person having an administrative duty pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or financial information obtained by an investigation of the records of any person required to obtain a business tax certificate, or pay a business tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of the official duty of the director of finance, or of the amount or source of income, profits, losses, or expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or amended statement or application, or copy of either, or in any book containing any abstract or particulars therein to be seen or examined by any person; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not be construed to prevent:

     A.    Disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee, or agent for the collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing the provisions of this chapter or collecting the business taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter;

     B.     The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, federal or state officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, if the reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or court of law upon a subpoena;

     C.     The disclosure of information and the results of examination or records or particular taxpayers, or relating to particular taxpayers, to a court of law for proceedings brought to determine the existence of the amount of any business tax liability of such particular taxpayers of the city;

     D.    The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to the effect, to the taxpayer, or to the taxpayer’s successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, or guarantors if directly interested, of information as to items included in the measure of any paid business tax, any unpaid business tax, or any amount of business tax required to be collected, including interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney shall approve each such disclosure, and the director of finance or designee may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when, in their opinion, the public interest would suffer thereby;

     E.     The disclosure of the names and business address of persons to whom business tax certificates have been issued and the general type and nature of their business;

     F.     The disclosure, by way of public meeting or otherwise, of such information as may be necessary to the city council in order to permit the city council to be fully advised as to the facts if a taxpayer files a claim for the refund of business taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against them by the city for business taxes, or when acting upon any other similar matter; and

     G.    The disclosure of general statistics regarding business taxes collected or business done in the city. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.170 Director of finance adjustment powers.
     The director of finance shall have the power, for good cause shown, and documented by the director of finance as a permanent record:

     A.    To extend the time for filing any required sworn statement;

     B.     To waive any penalties which would otherwise have accrued;

     C.     To adjust the amount of the business tax due;

 

     D.    To make refunds or prorations of taxes paid. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.180 Debt to city.
     The amount of any business tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. A suit may be brought against any person to enforce the collection of the debt described in this chapter in any court of competent jurisdiction. The conviction of any person for transacting any business without a certificate shall not excuse or exempt such person from payment of any license due or unpaid at the time of such conviction, and nothing herein shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.190 Delinquencies and penalties.
     For failure to pay the business tax required by the provisions of this chapter prior to the delinquency date, the director of finance shall add a penalty. The amount of this penalty shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.200 Enforcement.
     A.    Duties of the Director of Finance and Chief of Police. It shall be the duty of the director of finance to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in such enforcement as may from time to time be required by the director of finance.

     B.     Inspections. The director of finance, in the exercise of the duties imposed by the provisions of this section, and acting through deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall have the right to enter and examine all places of business free of charge during normal business hours to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with.

     C.     Penalty for Violation. Any person who violates any provisions of Section 5.04.020 by transacting and carrying on any business, trade, vocation, enterprise, establishment, occupation, or calling in the city without first having procured a business tax certificate from the city or without complying with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter is guilty of a violation as set forth in Chapter 1.08 and is subject to punishment, as provided for in Chapter 1.08 of the municipal code. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.210 Evidence of doing business.
     When any person, by the use of a sign, circular, card, telephone book, newspaper, other publication, or advertising media, shall advertise, hold out, or represent that such person is in business in the city, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a government agency indicating that such person is conducting a business in the city, and such person fails to deny, by a sworn statement given to the director of finance or designee, that such person is not conducting a business in the city after being requested to do so by the director of finance or designee, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person is conducting a business in the city. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.220 Remedies cumulative.
     All remedies prescribed by the provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.230 Apportionment.
     When the business tax imposed by this chapter cannot be enforced without there being an apportionment according to the amount of business done in the city of Brentwood, apportionment rules shall be established by the director of finance. The director of finance shall conduct an investigation and shall fix as the business tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory or, if a business tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the business tax so affixed. In fixing the business tax to be charged, the director of finance shall have the power to base the business tax upon a percentage of gross receipts, operating expenses, floor space, payroll, number of employees, business taxes paid to other cities, or any other measure which will assure that the business tax assessed shall be uniform with the amount of business done in the city of Brentwood, or of businesses of a like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the business tax set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 707, 2002)

 

5.04.240 City council.
     This chapter was adopted by the voters as Measure D in November 2002, following city council adoption of Ordinance No. 707. The City Council is empowered to amend Chapter 5.04 to clarify provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 973 § 4, 2016; Ord. 707, 2002)

Chapter 5.08 BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATION: SUPPLEMENT
5.08.010 Umbrella business license.
     When a special event or temporary use permit involves a use with multiple vendors, such as a craft fair, the sponsor or promoter may obtain a business license certificate to include a master list of vendors (see also Section 7.01.020 of this code). (Ord. 973 § 6, 2016)

Chapter 5.24 BRENTWOOD CABLE TELEVISION
5.24.010 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:

     A.    “Basic service” means the service tier provided by the grantee as required under 47 U.S.C. Section 543(b)(7) which includes the delivery of local broadcast stations, and public, educational and government access channels. Basic service does not include optional program and satellite service tiers, a la carte services, per channel, per program, or auxiliary services for which a separate charge is made.

     B.     “Cable service” means: (1) the transmission to subscribers of: (a) video programming, or (b) other programming services; and (2) subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming services.

     C.     “Cable system” means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: (1) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (2) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way, (3) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or (4) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system.

     D.    “City” means the city of Brentwood, California.

     E.     “Control” or “controlling interest” shall mean actual working control or ownership of a cable system in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person or legal entity (except underwriters during the period in which they are offering securities to the public) of more than fifty percent of a cable system or the franchise under which the cable system is operated. A change in the control or controlling interest of a legal entity which has control or a controlling interest in a grantee shall constitute a change in the control or controlling interest of the cable system under the same criteria. Control or controlling interest as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one person or legal entity.

     F.     “Dwelling unit” means any building or part of a building that is used as a home or residence.

     G.    “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor.

     H.    “Franchise” means an authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city hereunder, as the franchising authority, to a grantee to construct or operate a cable system or provide cable service in the city. All of the rights and obligations of the grantee and the city under this chapter and the franchise agreement may be referred to herein as the “franchise.”

     I.      “Franchise agreement” means a contractual agreement entered into between the city and any grantee hereunder that is enforceable by the city and by the grantee, and which, along with this chapter, sets forth the rights and obligations between the city and the grantee in connection with the franchise.

     J.      “Grantee” means a person or legal entity to whom or to which a franchise under this chapter is granted by the city, along with the lawful successors or assigns of such person or entity.

     K.    “Gross revenues” means all revenue collected by the grantee from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services within the city. Gross revenues shall include, without limitation: periodic fees charged subscribers for any basic, optional, premium, per-channel or per-program service; franchise fees; installation and reconnection fees; leased channel fees; converter rentals and/or sales; program guide revenues; upgrade, downgrade or other change-in-service fees; provided, however, that this shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the grantee herein imposed directly upon any subscriber of user by the state, local or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee on behalf of the governmental unit or any franchise fees or other fees collected by grantee and then paid to the city; local advertising revenues, revenues from home shopping, revenues from the sale, exchange, use or transmission of any programming developed on the cable system for community or institutional use; provided however, that this shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the grantee herein imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the state, local or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee on behalf of the governmental unit.

     L.     “Installation” means the connection of the cable system from feeder cable to a subscriber’s terminal.

     M.    “May” is permissive.

     N.    “Normal business hours” as applied to the grantee shall mean those hours during which similar businesses in the city are open to serve customers. In all cases, normal business hours must include some evening hours at least one night per week, and/or some weekend hours.

     O.    “Normal operating conditions” shall mean those service conditions that are within the control of the grantee. Those conditions that are not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to: natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, labor disputes, vandalism, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.

     P.     “Person” means any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint stock company, limited liability company, joint venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, private or public, whether for-profit or not-for-profit.

     Q.    “Shall” is mandatory.

     R.     “Service area” means all areas in the city regardless of housing density.

     S.     “Service interruption” is the loss of either picture or sound or both for a single or multiple subscriber(s).

     T.     “Street” means the surface of and all rights-of-way and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place, sidewalk, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or easement now or hereafter held by the city for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the city which, within their proper use and meaning, shall entitle the grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing poles (but only in accordance with the requirements of the city’s engineering department, including applicable fees), wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a cable system.

     U.    “Subscriber” shall mean any person(s), firm, grantee, corporation or other legal entity, or association lawfully receiving any cable service provided by a grantee pursuant to this chapter.

     V.    “User” means a party utilizing a cable system channel for purposes of production or transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with receipt thereof in the capacity of a subscriber. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002; Ord. 700 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.020 Cable franchise required.
     No person shall be allowed to occupy or use any streets for installation, operation or maintenance of a cable system or for the provision of cable service in the city without a franchise. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.030 Applications for initial (non-renewal) franchises.
     A.    Applications for an initial franchise shall include at a minimum:

     1.     A clear description of the identity of the applicant, including, but not limited to, the name, address, telephone number and type of business entity;

     2.     A list of all officers, director and stockholders or partners who hold an ownership interest of more than ten percent and the names and addresses of parent or subsidiary entities;

     3.     A detailed description of the cable system proposed to be constructed by the applicant;

     4.     A detailed description of the manner in which the applicant proposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the cable system, including a detailed description of the streets and other public property which the applicant proposes to use;

     5.     A detailed description of the cable services applicant proposes to provide, including a schedule of all proposed rates and charges to subscribers and a copy of the proposed service agreement between the applicant and its subscribers;

     6.     A time line for the necessary steps to be taken by applicant from the granting of the franchise to the completion of the cable system as proposed by the applicant;

     7.     A statement setting forth all agreements or understandings, whether written, oral or implied, existing between the applicant and any person with respect to the proposed franchise or cable system;

     8.     A financial statement certified by an officer of the applicant demonstrating the financial condition of the applicant and its financial capability to construct and operate the cable system as proposed;

     9.     Any other information which may be pertinent to demonstrating that the applicant has the legal, character, technical and financial capability to construct and operate the cable system as proposed and to otherwise comply with all the terms of this chapter.

     B.     The city may at any time require such additional information as it may deem necessary to determine whether the applicant should be granted a franchise. The applicant shall then provide the required information.

     C.     The applicant shall pay to the city at the time of filing an application fee in the amount of five thousand dollars to reimburse the city for expenses incurred in connection with processing and handling the application. This fee shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the applicant’s reimbursement of any expenses provided for in Section 5.24.120. The application fee is non-refundable in the event that the city does not grant the applicant a franchise. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.040 Grant or denial of applications.
     A.    After consideration of an application in a public hearing affording due process, the city council may:

     1.     Approve by resolution a preliminary grant of the application upon finding that the applicant has the legal, character, financial and technical qualifications to construct and operate the cable system as proposed and that the proposal otherwise complies with the terms of this chapter, and direct the city manager or designee to negotiate a franchise agreement with the applicant under the terms of the resolution, which franchise agreement shall be subject to, and take effect only upon, the approval of the city council;

     2.     Deny the application upon a finding that the applicant does not have the legal, character, financial or technical qualifications to construct and operate the cable system as proposed, or that the applicant has failed to agree to a proposed franchise agreement on terms acceptable to the city council, or that the applicant is otherwise unwilling or unable to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     In order that no provider of cable services be granted an unfair competition advantage over another and to ensure equal protection under the law, the city council shall not issue to any person, any franchise or other authority to construct a cable system or provide cable services or video programming service in any part of the city using the streets on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome to such person than those applied to any current grantee under its franchise. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.050 Rights and privileges of grantee.
     Any franchise granted by the city shall grant to the grantee the right and privilege to erect, construct in accordance with the city’s applicable standards and plans, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets now in existence and as may be created or established during the term of the franchise any poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures and other facilities and equipment necessary for the maintenance and operation of a cable system. The installation of poles shall be discouraged and permitted only in accordance with the requirements of the city’s engineering department including payment of applicable fees. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.060 Agreement and incorporation of application by reference.
     A.    Upon adoption of any franchise agreement and execution thereof by the grantee, the grantee agrees to be bound by all the terms and conditions contained herein.

     B.     Any grantee also agrees to provide all services specifically set forth in its application and to provide cable service within the confines of the city; and by its acceptance of the franchise, the grantee specifically agrees that its application is thereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the franchise. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.070 Franchise territory.
     Any franchise is for the legally incorporated territorial limits of the city and for any area added to the city’s jurisdiction during the term of the franchise. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.080 Duration and acceptance of franchise.
     Any franchise and the rights, privileges and authority granted under this chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after final city approval thereof, as provided by law, and shall continue in force and effect for a term as specified in the franchise agreement and no longer than fifteen years, provided that within thirty days after the date of final city approval of the franchise, the grantee shall file with the city its unconditional acceptance of the franchise and promise to comply with and abide by all its provisions, terms and conditions. Such acceptance and promise shall be in writing duly executed. Such franchise shall be non-exclusive and subject to termination or non-renewal under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.090 Franchise renewal.
     Applicable federal procedures and standards shall govern the renewal of any franchise awarded under this chapter. In the event that any or all of the applicable provisions of federal law are repealed or otherwise modified, the following relevant section(s) shall apply:

     A.    Between thirty-six and thirty months prior to the expiration of the franchise, the grantee shall inform the city in writing of its intent to seek renewal of the franchise.

     B.     The grantee shall submit a proposal for renewal that demonstrates:

     1.     That it has been and continues to be in substantial compliance with the terms, conditions, and limitations of this chapter and its franchise;

     2.     That its cable system has been installed, constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with the FCC and this chapter and its franchise;

     3.     That it has the legal, technical and financial qualifications to continue to maintain and operate its cable system; and

     4.     That it has made a good faith effort to provide services and facilities which accommodate the demonstrated needs of the community, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs.

     5.     What if any areas of the city it does not serve, the justification therefor and a specific timetable for providing cable service to those areas.

     C.     After giving public notice, the city shall proceed to determine whether the grantee has satisfactorily performed its obligations under the franchise. To determine satisfactory performance, the city shall consider technical developments and performance of the cable system, cost of services, and any other particular requirements set forth in this chapter. The city shall also consider the grantee’s reports made to the city and to the FCC, and the city may require the grantee to make available specified records, documents, and information for this purpose, and may inquire specifically whether the grantee will supply services sufficient to meet future cable-related community needs and interests, while taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests. Provisions shall be made for public comment with adequate prior notice of at least ten days.

     D.    Grantee shall be entitled to the same due process rights including those in Section 626 of the Communications Act (47 U.S.C. Section 546).

     E.     The city shall then prepare any amendments to this chapter that it believes necessary.

     F.     If the city finds that grantee has complied with all material obligations under the existing franchise, and that grantee has the technical, legal, and financial capabilities to meet the obligations of grantee’s renewal proposal, and that grantee’s renewal proposal meets the future cable-related needs and interests of the city, taking into account the cost of meeting them, a new franchise shall be granted pursuant to this chapter as amended for a period to be determined. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.100 Police powers.
     A.    In accepting a franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its rights thereunder are subject to the lawful and generally applicable exercise of the city’s police power to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and it agrees to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such power.

     B.     Any conflict between the provisions of a franchise agreement and any other current or future lawful exercise of the city’s police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter, except that any such exercise that is not of general application in the jurisdiction or applies exclusively to the grantee or cable system which contains provisions inconsistent with the franchise agreement or this chapter, shall prevail only if upon such exercise the city finds a danger to health, safety, property or general welfare or if such exercise is mandated by law.

     C.     Any conflict between this chapter and any subsequent franchise agreement that becomes effective after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be resolved according to the provisions of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.110 Use of grantee facilities.
     The city may install and maintain upon the poles of the grantee, or in any empty conduit space of grantee within the public rights-of-way, any wire, equipment or other fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with the cable system operations, including future plans, of the grantee, subject to agreement between the city and grantee on commercially reasonable terms, conditions, and compensation for such use. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.120 Franchise and enforcement costs.
     A.    The city may require an applicant or grantee to pay or reimburse the city for all or some portion of its reasonable out-of-pocket expenses, including attorneys’ and consultants’ fees and costs incidental to the awarding, modification, transfer or renewal of its franchise. These costs may include any such expenses incurred by the city in its study, preparation of proposal documents, evaluation of applications and examinations of the qualifications of the applicant in excess of five thousand dollars.

     B.     In the case of enforcement proceedings initiated by the city, the city shall be entitled to employ the services of technical, financial or legal consultants. All reasonable fees of such consultants incurred by the city shall be borne equally by the grantee and the city, regardless of the nature or outcome of any specific dispute or matter under consideration. The city’s payment of its half of such billings shall be prima facie proof of the reasonableness of such charges.

     C.     Nothing in this section shall entitle the grantee to have any role in the selection of city’s consultants or attorneys and, in order to protect the attorney-client and work product privileges, the city may delete from billings for attorneys and consultants retained by the city any detailed description of services performed.

     D.    Payment of such costs and expenses shall not be deemed to be “franchise fees” within the meaning of Section 622 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Section 542), and such payments shall not be deemed to be: (1) “payments in kind” or any involuntary payments chargeable against the franchise fee to be paid to the city by grantee pursuant to a franchise; or (2) part of the franchise fees to be paid to the city by grantee pursuant to a franchise to the extent required by applicable law. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.130 Notices.
     All notices from the grantee to the city pursuant to a franchise shall be sent to the city clerk. The grantee shall maintain with the city, throughout the term of the franchise, an address for service of notices by mail. The grantee shall maintain a central office to address any issues relating to operating under the franchise. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.140 Performance bond.
     A.    Within thirty days after the award of an initial or renewal franchise, the grantee shall deposit with the city a bond in an amount established in the franchise agreement. The form and content of such bond shall be approved by the city attorney. This instrument shall be used to ensure the faithful performance of the grantee of all lawful provisions of the franchise, and to ensure compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency, commission, board, department, division, or office of the city having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under the franchise, and to ensure the payment by the grantee of any fees, claims, liens or taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system pursuant to the franchise.

     B.     The bond shall be maintained at the amount established in the franchise agreement for the entire term of the franchise, even if amounts have to be withdrawn pursuant to the franchise.

     C.     If the grantee fails, upon thirty days’ notice and opportunity to cure, to pay to the city any amount owed under the franchise, that is not on appeal to the court of proper jurisdiction or otherwise in dispute, within the time fixed herein; or fails to repay the city within thirty days after said notice and opportunity to cure, any delinquent amount owed to the city for, any damages, costs or expenses which the city is compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with the franchise, or fails, after three days’ notice of such failure by the city to comply with any provision of the franchise which the city reasonably determines can be remedied by demand on the bond, the city may immediately make such demand and recover jointly and severally from the bond, the principal and surety of the bond, the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney’s fees, including the city’s legal staff, and costs, up to the full amount of the bond. Upon such demand for payment, the city shall notify the grantee of the amount and date thereof.

     D.    The rights reserved to the city with respect to the bond are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by the franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such bond shall affect any other right the city may have.

     E.     The bond shall contain an endorsement agreeing that the bond may not be reduced or canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until thirty days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intention to reduce, cancel or not renew.

     F.     In the event the city receives a thirty day notice from a surety, it shall have the right to demand payment from the bond unless grantee provides appropriate assurance that a replacement bond will be presented before the expiration of the thirty day period. The sufficiency of such assurance shall be determined by the city in its sole discretion. This section shall not apply if the city and grantee agree that a bond is no longer required, or if the amount of the bond is in the process of being reduced by agreement between the city and grantee.

     G.    At any time during the term of the franchise, the city council may waive in writing the requirement for a grantee to maintain a performance bond. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.150 Construction bond.
     A.    Within thirty days of the effective date of a franchise, the grantee shall file with the city a construction bond in favor of the city in an amount established in the franchise agreement. This bond shall be maintained throughout the period for construction of the cable system in the service area, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement.

     B.     If the grantee has been deemed to have failed to comply with any law, chapter or resolution governing the franchise, or to have failed to observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of the franchise, as it relates to the conditions relative to the construction of the cable system, including the franchise agreement that is incorporated herein by reference, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally, from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or losses deemed owed by grantee to the city, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney’s fees, including the city’s legal staff, and costs, up to the full amount of the bond.

     C.     The city shall, upon completion of construction of the service area, waive the requirement of the grantee to maintain the bond. However, the city may require a performance bond to be posted by the grantee for any construction subsequent to the completion of the service area, in a reasonable amount not to exceed the amount of the construction bond in the franchise agreement and upon such terms as determined by the city.

     D.    The bond shall contain an endorsement stating that the bond may not be reduced or canceled by the surety during the construction period which the bond is intended to cover.

     E.     In the event the city receives a thirty day notice from a surety, it shall have the right to demand payment from the bond unless grantee provides appropriate assurance that a replacement bond will be presented before the expiration of the thirty day period. The sufficiency of such assurance shall be determined by the city in its sole discretion. This section shall not apply if the city and grantee agree that a bond is no longer required, or if the amount of the bond is in the process of being reduced by agreement between the city and grantee.

     F.     At any time during the term of the franchise, the city council may waive in writing the requirement for a grantee to maintain a construction bond. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.160 Liability insurance.
     A.    The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise, liability insurance insuring the city and the grantee in the minimum amounts set forth in the franchise agreement. If no amounts are so specified, the minimum amounts shall be:

     1.     Two million dollars for property damage to any one person;

     2.     Five million dollars for property damage from any one occurrence;

     3.     Two million dollars for personal injury to any one person;

     4.     Five million dollars for personal injury from any one occurrence.

     B.     The certificate of insurance obtained by the grantee in compliance with this section shall be filed and maintained with the city during the term of the franchise. The grantee shall immediately advise the city attorney of any litigation that may develop that would affect this insurance.

     C.     Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the city there under, shall be construed to limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.170 Indemnification.
     A.    Disclaimer of Liability. The city shall not at any time be liable for injury or damage occurring to any person or property from any cause whatsoever arising out of grantee’s construction, maintenance, repair, use, operation, condition or dismantling of its cable system or due to the act or omission of any person or legal entity other than the city or those persons or legal entities for which the city is legally liable as a matter of law.

     B.     Indemnification. The grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its respective officers, boards, departments, commissions and employees (hereinafter referred to as “indemnitees”), except the sole negligence or willful misconduct of the city:

     1.     Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees by reason of any act or omission of the grantee, its personnel, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors, resulting in personal injury, bodily injury, sickness, disease or death to any person or damage to, loss of or destruction of tangible or intangible property, libel, slander, invasion of privacy and unauthorized use of any trademark, trade name, copyright, patent, service mark or any other right of any person, corporation or other legal entity, which may arise out of or be in any way connected with the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or condition of the cable system caused by grantee, its subcontractors or agents or the grantee’s failure to comply with any federal, state or local law.

     2.     Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants) imposed upon indemnitees by reason of any claim or lien arising out of work, labor, materials or supplies provided or supplied to grantee, its contractors or subcontractors, for the installation, construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system. Upon written request by the city, such claim or lien shall be discharged or bonded within fifteen days following such request.

     3.     Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees by reason of any financing or securities offering by grantee or an affiliate thereof for violations of any laws, statutes or regulations of the state of California or of the United States, including those of the Securities and Exchange Commission, whether by the grantee or otherwise; excluding therefrom, however, claims which are based upon and arise out of information supplied by the city to the grantee in writing and included in the offering materials with the express written approval of the city prior to the offering.

     C.     Assumption of Risk.

     1.     The grantee undertakes and assumes for its officers, directors, agents, contractors and subcontractors and employees all risk of dangerous conditions, if any, on or about any city-owned or controlled property, including public rights-of-way, arising out of the installation, operation, maintenance or condition of the cable system or the grantee’s failure to comply with any federal, state or local law. The grantee hereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the indemnitees against and from any claim asserted or liability imposed upon the indemnitees for personal injury or property damage to any person.

     2.     At its sole cost and expense, the city shall indemnify and hold harmless grantee for any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the grantee by reason of the sole negligence or misconduct of the grantor or its officials, boards, departments, commissions or employees.

     D.    Defense of Indemnitees. In the event any action or proceeding shall be brought against any or all of the indemnitees by reason of any matter for which the indemnitees are indemnified hereunder, the grantee shall, upon notice from any of the indemnitees, at the grantee’s sole cost and expense, defend the same; provided further, however, that the grantee shall not admit liability in any such matter on behalf of the indemnitees without the express written consent of the city attorney or the city attorney’s designee.

     E.     Notice, Cooperation and Expenses. The city shall give the grantee reasonably prompt notice of the making of any claim or the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this section. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the city from cooperating with the grantee and participating in the defense of any litigation by the city’s own counsel at the city’s own expense. No recovery by the city of any sum under the bond shall be any limitation upon the liability of the grantee to the city under the terms of this section, except that any sum so received by the city shall be deducted from any recovery which the city might have against the grantee under the terms of this section.

     F.     Nonwaiver of Statutory Limits. Nothing in this chapter is intended to express or imply a waiver by the city of statutory provisions, privileges or immunities of any kind or nature under California law, including the limits of liability of the city. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.180 Rights of individuals.
     A.    The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or other persons on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, income, sex, marital status, sexual preference or age. The grantee shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.

     B.     The grantee shall comply with the equal employment opportunity requirements of the FCC and other applicable employment laws.

     C.     The grantee shall, at all times, comply with the applicable privacy requirements of state and federal law.

     D.    The grantee agrees to make all services available and grantee’s cable system shall be capable of providing cable service to all residential and commercial dwellings throughout the service area. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.190 Public notice.
     Minimum public notice of any public meeting relating to the franchise shall be governed by the provisions of the State Open Meetings Law. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.200 Service availability and records.
     The grantee shall provide cable service throughout the entire franchise area pursuant to the provisions of the franchise and shall keep a record for at least three years of all requests for service received by the grantee. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.210 Cable system construction.
     A.    Within five years from the date of the award of an initial franchise, the grantee must make cable service available to every dwelling unit within the service area.

     1.     The grantee must make cable service available to at least forty percent of the dwelling units within the service area within eighteen months from the date of the award of the franchise.

     2.     The grantee must make cable service available to at least eighty percent of the dwelling units within the service area within three years from the date of the award of the franchise.

     B.     The grantee, in its application, may propose a timetable of construction which will make cable service available in the service area or other areas sooner than the above minimum requirements, in which case the said schedule will be made part of the franchise agreement, and will be binding upon the grantee.

     C.     Any delay beyond the terms of this timetable, unless specifically approved by the city council in writing, will be considered a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.220 Construction and technical standards.
     A.    Compliance with Construction and Technical Standards. The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its cable system in compliance with all laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, and FCC technical standards. In addition, the grantee shall file with the city any technical or performance tests for the cable system required to be filed with the FCC, including but not limited to, the “Cumulative Leakage Index” test.

     B.     Additional Specifications:

     1.     Construction, installation and maintenance of the cable system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All cables and wires shall be undergrounded, except where existing utilities are above ground, and shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations.

     2.     The grantee shall at all times comply with the applicable:

     a.     National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards);

     b.     National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters);

     c.     FCC and other federal, state and local regulations.

     3.     In any event, the cable system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the city or other areas where the grantee may have equipment located.

     4.     Any antenna structure used in the cable system shall comply with construction, marking, and lighting of antenna structure, required by the United States Department of Transportation.

     5.     All working facilities and conditions used during construction, installation and maintenance of the cable system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

     6.     Radio frequency (RF) leakage shall be monitored and repaired in accordance with applicable FCC rules and regulations.

     7.     Grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power for headend, transportation and trunk amplifiers for the minimum time period specified in the franchise agreement.

     8.     In all areas of the city where all cables, wires and other like facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the grantee shall place its cables, wires and other like facilities underground. When all public utilities relocate their facilities from pole to underground, the grantee must do so concurrently. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.230 Use of streets.
     A.    Interference with Persons and Improvements. The cable system, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected, operated and maintained so that none of its facilities shall endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or interfere with the rights or reasonable health, safety or welfare of property owners who adjoin any of the streets and public ways, or interfere with any improvements the city may make, or hinder or obstruct the use of the streets or public property of the city.

     B.     Restoration to Prior Condition. In case of any grantee disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, landscaping, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping, or surface of any street disturbed, in as good condition as before the work was commenced and in accordance with standards for such work set by the city. After ten days’ notice of the need for restoration, if restoration measures are not being performed to the reasonable satisfaction of the city, the city may undertake remedial restoration activities, such activities to be performed at the grantee’s cost.

     Prior to undertaking any such work grantee must obtain an encroachment permit in accordance with the applicable requirements of the city’s engineering department.

     C.     Erection, Removal and Common Uses of Poles and Above Ground Structures.

     1.     No poles or similar wire-holding structures shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval of the city with regard to location, height, types, and any other pertinent aspect and only in accordance with the applicable requirements of the city’s engineering department. However, no location of any pole or similar wire-holding structure shall confer upon grantee any vested interest and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the city determines, after all requisite notice and due process, that such removal or relocation is necessary to the public health, safety or welfare.

     2.     Where existing poles or similar wire-holding structures are available for use by the grantee, but it does not make arrangements for such use, the city may require the grantee to use such poles and structures if it determines that such use is necessary to the public health, safety or welfare would be enhanced thereby and the terms of the use available to the grantee are just and reasonable.

     3.     Where the city desires to make use of the poles or other similar wire holding structures of the grantee and the use will not unduly interfere with the grantee’s operations, the city may require the grantee to permit such use for reasonable consideration and terms.

     4.     The placement, erection and any necessary screening for small pedestals or similar above ground structures must be approved by the city’s engineering department.

     D.    Relocation of Facilities. Upon reasonable notice by the city at any time during the term of the franchise, the grantee shall remove or relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense for one or more of the following reasons designated by the city:

     1.     Traffic conditions or any other condition affecting public safety;

     2.     Construction, alteration or vacation of any street;

     3.     Installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, fiber optic cables and conduit, signal lines or tracks;

     4.     Installation or construction of any other type of structures or improvements by the city or public agencies.

     E.     Cooperation with Building Movers. The grantee shall, at the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires or other fixtures to permit the moving of buildings. Expenses of such temporary removal, raising or lowering shall be paid by the person making the request, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given at least ten days advance notice to arrange for such temporary changes.

     F.     Tree Trimming. The grantee shall not remove any tree or trim any portion of any tree within any street without the prior consent of the city, except in an emergency situation. The grantee shall provide notice to any affected residents at the same time that the grantee applies to the city for consent to perform tree trimming. The city shall have the right to do the trimming requested by the grantee at the cost of the grantee. Regardless of who performs the work requested by the grantee, the grantee shall be responsible, shall defend and hold city harmless from any and all damages to any tree as a result of grantee’s trimming, or to the property surrounding any tree, whether such tree is trimmed or removed, except claims arising from city’s sole negligence or misconduct.

     G.    Road Cuts. The grantee shall not use road cuts for the laying of cable or wires without the prior approval of the city. In the absence of such approval, the grantee shall utilize auguring or other boring methods, but only upon notice to the city and only after locating all underground utilities. The city does not permit excavation in newly resurfaced streets during the three-year period after completion of street resurfacing. For those streets with chip seal or slurry seal coatings, the moratorium shall be for eighteen months, subject to exceptions permitted by Section 100 of the city’s standard plans and specifications. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.240 Operational standards.
     A.    The grantee shall maintain all parts of the cable system in good condition throughout the entire franchise term.

     B.     Upon a request for any cable service by any person located within the franchise territory and more than one hundred fifty feet from the existing cable system, the grantee shall furnish the requested service within thirty business days to such person as required by the terms of the franchise.

     C.     Temporary Service Drops:

     1.     The grantee shall make commercially reasonable efforts to bury temporary drops within five days after placement. Delays for any reason other than those listed herein will be communicated to the city. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, delays caused by the following conditions are presumed to be acceptable during the existence of the condition: adverse weather or ground conditions, the need for a street bore, cable system redesign requirements and any other unusual obstacle, such as obstructive landscaping, that is created by the subscriber.

     2.     The grantee shall provide reports to the city, upon request, on the number of drops that have not yet been buried.

     D.    The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum cable system use.

     E.     The grantee shall not allow the operations of the cable system to interfere with television reception of subscribers or persons not served by the grantee, nor shall the cable system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the operation of the various utilities serving customers within the city, nor shall other utilities interfere with the grantee’s cable system. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.250 Customer service standards.
     A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the enforcement of any federal, state or local law or regulation concerning customer service or consumer protection that imposes customer service standards or consumer protection requirements that exceed the customer service standards of the franchise or that address matters not addressed by the franchise.

     B.     The grantee shall make available at all times to its subscribers a local or toll-free telephone access line and shall have knowledgeable, qualified representatives available to respond to customer telephone inquiries regarding service and repairs during normal business hours.

     C.     Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time including wait time and the time required to transfer the call, shall not exceed thirty seconds. This standard shall be met no less than ninety percent of the time as measured on a quarterly basis.

     D.    Under normal operating conditions, the customer shall receive a busy signal less than three percent of the total time that the office is open for business.

     E.     Under normal operating conditions, each of the following standards shall be met no less than ninety-five percent of the time as measured on an annual basis.

     1.     All installations shall be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed. A standard installation is one that is within one hundred fifty feet of the existing cable system.

     2.     Excluding those situations that are beyond its control, the grantee shall respond to any service interruption promptly and in no event later than twenty-four hours from the time of initial notification. Grantee shall respond to all other service requests within twenty-four hours during the normal workweek for that cable system. The appointment window alternatives for installations, service calls, reconnects and other related activities will be: “morning” or “afternoon”; not to exceed a four-hour “window” during normal business hours for the cable system, or at a time that is mutually acceptable. The grantee shall schedule supplemental hours during which appointments can be scheduled based on the needs of the community. If at any time an installer or technician is running late, an attempt to contact the customer shall be made and the appointment rescheduled as necessary at a time that is convenient to the customer.

     F.     Upon notification by a subscriber of a service interruption, grantee shall give the subscriber a credit for one day of the affected service if service is interrupted for more than four hours in any one day and the service interruption is caused by grantee.

     G.    The grantee shall provide written information for each of the following areas at the time of installation and at any future time upon the request of the subscriber:

     1.     Products and services offered;

     2.     Prices and service options;

     3.     Installation and service policies;

     4.     How to use the cable services.

     H.    Bills shall be clear, concise and understandable, with all charges for cable services itemized.

     I.      Credits shall be issued promptly, but no later than the subscriber’s next billing cycle following the resolution of the request and the return of the equipment by the subscriber if service has been terminated.

     J.      The grantee shall give subscribers a minimum of thirty days advance notice of any rate or channel change.

     K.    The grantee shall maintain and operate the cable system in accordance with the rules and regulations incorporated herein or the applicable statutes, rules and regulations promulgated by federal, state or local governments, including the FCC.

     L.     The grantee shall continue, through the term of the franchise, to maintain the technical standards and quality of service required by the franchise. Should the city find, by resolution, that the grantee has failed to maintain such technical standards and quality of service, and should it, by resolution, specifically enumerate improvements to be made to bring the cable system back into compliance with such technical standards and quality of service, the grantee shall make such improvements.

     M.    The grantee shall keep a monthly service log that indicates the nature of each service complaint received in the last twelve months, the date and time each complaint was received, the disposition of each complaint, and the time and date thereof. This log shall be made available for periodic inspection by the city. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.260 Service standard.
     A.    If the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the cable system, or to transfer it within the meaning of Section 5.24.300, the grantee shall take reasonable measures to minimize any disruption of service to subscribers.

     B.     If a new operator acquires the cable system, the grantee shall cooperate with the city, new franchisee or new operator to maintain continuity of service to all subscribers. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.270 Complaint procedure.
     A.    The city manager or designee has primary responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and implementation of complaint procedures.

     B.     During the term of the franchise and any renewal thereof, the grantee shall maintain a local office for the purpose of receiving and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, billing questions and similar matters. The office must be reachable by a local call to receive and address complaints during normal business hours. The grantee shall also establish and maintain one or more payment locations within the city where customers may make payments and drop off or exchange subscriber-related equipment.

     C.     As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the cable system, the grantee shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed.

     D.    When there has been a pattern of complaints which reasonably indicates that the cable system is not in compliance with the technical standards of the FCC promulgated pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 544(e), the city shall have the right to require the grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the cable system. The grantee shall cooperate fully with the city in performing such testing and shall prepare results and a report, if requested, within thirty days after notice. Such report shall include the following information:

     1.     The nature of the complaint or problem that precipitated the special tests;

     2.     The cable system component(s) tested;

     3.     The equipment used and procedures employed in testing;

     4.     The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was resolved;

     5.     Any other information pertinent to the tests and analysis which may be required.

     E.     The city may require that tests be supervised, at the grantee’s expense, by an independent consulting engineer of the city’s choice if: (1) the results are found to be inadequate to correct the problem which led to the complaints; or (2) grantee has failed to cooperate fully with the city in performing the tests and reporting thereon. The engineer shall sign all records of the supervised tests and forward to the city such records with a report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending actions to be taken.

     F.     The city’s rights under this section shall be limited to requiring tests, analysis and reports covering specific subjects and characteristics based on complaints or other evidence when and under such circumstances as the city has reasonable grounds to believe that the complaints or other evidence require that tests be performed to protect the public against substandard cable service. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.280 Grantee rules and regulations.
     The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the franchise, and to assure uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers; provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.290 Franchise fee.
     A.    A grantee shall pay to the city a franchise fee in the amount designated in the franchise agreement. Unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement, such franchise fee shall be the maximum percentage of the grantee’s gross revenues allowed by applicable law.

     B.     The franchise fee shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other tax owed to the city by the grantee, such as municipal property taxes or other state, county or local taxes.

     C.     The franchise fee and any other costs or penalties assessed shall be payable quarterly on a calendar year basis to the city within forty-five days of the end of each quarter. Within forty-five days of the end of each quarter, the grantee shall also file a complete and accurate verified statement of all gross revenues received during the quarter and the grantee’s fiscal year-to-date.

     D.    The city shall have the right to inspect the grantee’s income records and to audit and recalculate any amounts determined to be payable under the franchise; provided, however, that such audit shall take place no more than once a year and within thirty-six months following the close of each of the grantee’s fiscal years that is the subject of the audit. Any additional amount due the city as a result of an audit shall be paid within thirty days following written notice to the grantee by the city, which shall include a copy of the audit report. This time shall be extended if within the thirty-day period grantee delivers notice to the city that it objects to the findings of the audit. The notice shall state with reasonable specificity the basis for grantee’s objections. The parties shall meet within thirty days to attempt to resolve grantee’s objections. If the parties are unable to resolve grantee’s objections, the parties shall select an independent auditor, who shall review the audit and grantee’s objections. The decision of the independent auditor shall be final. The parties shall share equally the costs of the independent auditor, subject to Section 5.24.310.

     E.     If the results of an audit show an underpayment of franchise fees exceeding five percent of the amount owed, the grantee shall reimburse the city for its reasonable and actual costs of the audit.

     F.     If any franchise fee payment or recomputed amount, cost or penalty, is not made on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall be charged from such date at an annual rate of twelve percent. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.300 Transfer of ownership or control.
     A.    No franchise or cable system shall be sold, assigned, transferred, leased or disposed of, either in whole or in part, either by involuntary or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise hypothecated in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, control thereof, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person or entity, nor shall control of or a controlling interest in the franchise or cable system be changed (hereinafter a “transfer”) without the prior written consent of the city council. Every such transfer which occurs without the prior written consent of the city council shall be a substantial default of a material provision of the franchise agreement for which the city may seek remedies as set forth in the franchise agreement.

     B.     Without the city council’s prior consent, the grantee may (among other things): (1) grant a security interest in, or make a collateral assignment of, the franchise and the cable system for the purposes of securing indebtedness; and (2) transfer or assign the franchise and the cable system to a wholly owned subsidiary of the grantee and such subsidiary may transfer or assign the franchise and the cable system back to the grantee without such consent, providing that such assignment is without any release of liability of the grantee. However, no secured party may take control of the franchise or the cable system without the city council’s prior consent according to this section.

     C.     The grantee shall promptly notify the city of any actual or proposed transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of control of, or a change in a controlling interest in, the grantee, the franchise or the cable system. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control or of a controlling interest has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation in any manner by any person or group of persons of fifty and one-tenth percent of the voting interests of the grantee or of a controlling interest.

     D.    Subject to applicable federal law, any proposed assignee, transferee or acquirer of control or a controlling interest in the grantee, the franchise or the cable system must show legal, technical, character and financial qualifications as determined by the city and must agree to comply with all provisions of the franchise. The city shall have one hundred twenty days to act upon any request for approval of a transfer submitted in writing that contains or is accompanied by all such information as is required in accordance with FCC regulations and by the city. The city shall be deemed to have consented to a proposed transfer if its refusal to consent (including the reasons therefor) is not communicated in writing to the grantee within one hundred twenty days following receipt of written notice together with all the required information, unless the requesting party and the city agree to an extension of time. The city shall not unreasonably withhold consent to a proposed transfer.

     E.     The consent or approval of the city to any transfer of control of, or a controlling interest in, the grantee, the franchise or the cable system shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of the franchise.

     F.     In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the city shall not approve any transfer of control of, or a controlling interest in, a franchise prior to substantial completion of construction of the cable system which is proposed to be built under that franchise.

     G.    In no event shall a transfer of control of, or a controlling interest in, the grantee, franchise or cable system be approved without the successor(s) in interest agreeing in writing to abide by all terms and conditions of the franchise.

     H.    Notwithstanding this section or anything to the contrary in this chapter, all city review of any transfers shall be in accordance with and subject to applicable federal law.

     I.      This section shall not be effective with respect to any transaction of which the city has been provided written notice by grantee as of the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 801 § 1, 2005; Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.310 Availability of books and records.
     A.    The grantee shall fully cooperate in making available at reasonable times, and the city shall have the right to inspect at the grantee’s local office, upon reasonable notice and where reasonably necessary for the enforcement of the franchise, books, records, maps, plans and other like materials of the grantee applicable to the cable system, at any time during normal business hours.

     B.     Unless prohibited by law, rule or regulation, copies of the following records and/or reports are to be made available to the city upon request, but no more frequently than on an annual basis unless otherwise agreed upon by the grantee and the city:

     1.     A yearly review and resolution or progress report submitted by the grantee to the city;

     2.     Periodic preventive maintenance reports;

     3.     Copies of FCC Form 395-A (or successor form) or any supplemental forms related to equal opportunity or fair contracting policies;

     4.     Subscriber inquiry/complaint resolution data (but not including names or addresses) and documentation concerning these inquiries and/or complaints;

     5.     Periodic construction update reports including, where appropriate, the submission of “as-built” and strand maps;

     6.     Any technical or performance tests required to be filed with the FCC, such as the “Cumulative Leakage Index” test. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.320 Other petitions and applications.
     Copies of all petitions, applications, communications and reports related to the cable system and submitted by the grantee to the FCC, the Securities and Exchange Commission, or to any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting operations authorized by the franchise or received from such agencies shall be provided to the city upon request. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.330 Fiscal reports.
     Upon request by the city, the grantee shall file annually with the city no later than one hundred twenty days after the end of the grantee’s fiscal year, a statement of gross revenues certified by an officer of the grantee. Verified statements submitted quarterly under Section 5.24.290 shall satisfy this requirement. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.340 Removal of cable system.
     At the expiration of the franchise term or when any renewal of the franchise is denied, or upon termination of the franchise as provided herein, or the discontinuance by grantee of use of the cable system or any part thereof for a continuous period of six months or more, upon written notice from the city, the grantee shall forthwith, remove at its own expense all portions of the cable system designated in the city’s notice from all streets and public property within the city within a reasonable time period fixed in the city’s notice. Upon such notice of removal, a bond shall be furnished by the grantee in an amount sufficient to cover this expense. If the grantee fails to do so within the time period specified in the city’s notice, the city may perform the work at the grantee’s expense. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.350 Required services and facilities in new and renewal franchises.
     A.    Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall set forth minimum channel capacity, access channel, and system construction obligations. The cable system shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to have a bandwidth of eight hundred sixty megahertz.

     B.     The grantee shall provide emergency alert capability pursuant to FCC rules. The grantee shall cooperate with the city in the use and operation of the emergency alert override system. The cable system shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to have the technical capability for two-way communications. The cable system shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to provide:

     1.     At least one specially designated channel for use by local education authorities;

     2.     At least one specially designated channel for local government uses;

     3.     At least one specially designated channel for use by local not-for-profit entities;

     4.     At least one specially designated channel for public use under the control of the city, with playback equipment located in facilities designated by the city;

     Provided, however, these channels must be available full-time, dedicated to the city, and controlled by it. Except for the equipment required in subsection (B)(4) of this section, any studios and associated production equipment required by the franchise agreement shall be located in a mutually agreed upon site to meet the need for educational and local governmental access as noted in subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section. Financial and technical support and replacement and maintenance of equipment of this facility may be specified in the franchise agreement.

     C.     The grantee shall provide emergency alert capability pursuant to FCC rules. The grantee shall cooperate with the city in the use and operation of the emergency alert override system. (Ord. 801 § 2, 2005; Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.360 Reserved.
 

5.24.370 Performance evaluation sessions.
     A.    The city and the grantee may hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions within ninety days of the third and sixth anniversary dates of the franchise or renewal thereof or as may be required by federal and state law. All such evaluation sessions shall be open to the public.

     B.     Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of the franchise at the request of the city or the grantee.

     C.     All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with the legal notice requirements of the city.

     D.    Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but are not limited to: service rate structures; franchise fee, penalties, free or discounted services; application of new technologies; cable system performance; services provided; programming offered; customer complaints; privacy; amendments to this chapter or the franchise agreement; judicial and FCC rulings; line extension policies; and grantee or city rules. The city acknowledges that, pursuant to federal law, it does not have jurisdiction nor enforcement rights over all the standards and services mentioned above, including programming and the application of all new technologies under a cable television franchise. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as requiring the renegotiation of the franchise agreement.

     E.     Members of the general public may add topics either by working through the negotiating parties or by presenting a petition. If such a petition bears the valid signatures of five or more residents of the city, the proposed topic or topics shall be added to the list of topics to be discussed at the evaluation session. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.380 Rate change procedures.
     The city reserves all rights, if any, to regulate cable service and equipment rates, subject to applicable law. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.390 Franchise forfeiture and termination.
     A.    In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the city under this chapter or otherwise, the city reserves the right to forfeit and terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder in the event of a substantial breach of its terms and conditions following the required thirty day period to cure. A substantial breach by the grantee shall include, but shall not be limited to the following:

     1.     Violation of any material provision of the franchise or any material rule, order or regulation of the city or determination of the city council;

     2.     Attempt to evade any material provision of the franchise or to practice any fraud or deceit upon the city or its subscribers or customers;

     3.     Material failure to begin or complete cable system construction or cable system extension, or to make cable service available as provided herein;

     4.     Failure to provide the services promised in the grantee’s application as incorporated herein by Section 5.24.030;

     5.     Failure to restore service after one hundred sixty-eight consecutive hours of interrupted service, except when approval of such interruption is obtained from the city; or;

     6.     Material misrepresentation of fact in the application which was inaccurate as of the date the application was filed.

     B.     The foregoing shall not constitute a major breach if the violation occurs but is without fault of the grantee or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its control. The grantee shall not be excused by mere economic hardship nor by misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers or employees.

     C.     The city may make a written demand that the grantee comply with any such provision, rule, order or determination under or pursuant to the franchise. If the violation by the grantee continues for a period of thirty days following such written demand without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the city may place the issue of termination of the franchise before the city council. The city shall cause to be served upon the grantee, at least twenty days prior to the date of such meeting, a written notice of intent to request such termination and the time and place of the meeting. Public notice shall be given of the meeting and the issue(s) which the council is to consider.

     D.    The city council shall hear and consider the issue(s) and shall hear any person interested therein and shall determine in its discretion whether the grantee has committed any violation which warrants forfeiture or termination of the franchise.

     E.     If the city council determines that the violation by the grantee was the fault of the grantee and within its control, the council may, by resolution declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be forfeited and terminated unless there is compliance within such period as the council may fix, such period to not be less than thirty days; provided, however, that no opportunity for compliance need be granted for fraud or material misrepresentation.

     F.     The issue of forfeiture and termination shall automatically be placed upon the council agenda at the expiration of the time set by it for compliance. The council may then terminate the franchise forthwith upon finding that the grantee has failed to achieve compliance or it may further extend the period, at its discretion. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.400 Foreclosure.
     Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the cable system, or upon the termination of any lease covering all or a substantial part of the cable system, the grantee shall notify the city of such fact, and such notification shall be treated as a notification that a change in control of the grantee has taken place, and the provisions of the franchise governing the consent of the city to such change in control of the grantee shall apply. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, any such foreclosure shall be in accordance with the requirements of federal law. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.410 Receivership.
     A.    The city shall have the right to cancel a franchise one hundred twenty days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of one hundred twenty days, or unless:

     1.     Within one hundred twenty days after his/her election or appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of this chapter and remedied all defaults thereunder; and

     2.     Such receiver or trustee, within the one hundred twenty days, shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this chapter and the franchise granted to the grantee.

     B.     Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, any such foreclosure shall be in accordance with the requirements of federal law. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.420 Compliance with local, state and federal laws.
     A.    Notwithstanding any other provisions of the franchise to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with all applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances of the city, state and federal government or any administrative agencies thereof, provided however, if any such state or federal law or regulation shall require the grantee to perform any service, or shall permit the grantee to perform any service, or shall prohibit the grantee from performing any service, in conflict with the terms of the franchise or of any law or regulation of the city, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the city of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the city or the franchise.

     B.     If the city determines that a material provision of this chapter is affected by any subsequent action of the state or federal government, the city and the grantee shall negotiate to modify any of the provisions herein to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this chapter.

     C.     If any section, sentence, paragraph, term, or provision hereof is determined to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction thereof, such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise, or any renewal thereof. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.430 Forfeitures for violations and non-compliance.
     For the violation of any of the following provisions of this chapter, forfeitures shall be jointly and severally recoverable from the grantee and the surety under the appropriate bond as follows, and the city may determine the amount of the forfeiture for other material violations that are not specified in a sum not to exceed one hundred dollars per day, per violation, for each day that such violation occurs or continues:

     A.    Material failure to furnish, maintain, or offer all cable services to any potential subscriber within the city pursuant to Section 5.24.180 or 5.24.210 herein upon order of the city: fifty dollars per day, per violation, for each day that such failure occurs or continues;

     B.     Material will include but shall not be limited to the following: failure to obtain or file evidence of required insurance, construction bond, performance bond, or other required financial security: one hundred dollars per day, per violation, for each day such failure occurs or continues;

     C.     Material failure to provide access to data, documents, records, or reports to the city as required by Sections 5.24.200, 5.24.300, 5.24.310, 5.24.320 and 5.24.330: one hundred dollars per day, per violation, for each day such failure occurs or continues;

     D.    Material failure to comply with applicable construction, operation, maintenance or installation standards: one hundred dollars per day, per violation for each day such failure occurs or continues;

     E.     Any material violations for non-compliance with the customer service, technical or quality of service standards of Sections 5.24.240, 5.24.250 and 5.24.260, the grantee shall pay fifty dollars per day, per violation for each day that such noncompliance occurs or continues;

     F.     Any other material violations of the franchise to be determined by the city in a public hearing but not specifically noted in this section shall not exceed one hundred dollars per day, per violation for each day such violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.440 Procedures.
     A.    Whenever the city believes that the grantee has violated one or more terms, conditions or provisions of the franchise, and wishes to impose penalties, a written notice shall be given to the grantee informing it of such alleged violation or liability. The written notice shall describe in reasonable detail the specific violation so as to afford the grantee an opportunity to remedy the violation or otherwise respond. The grantee shall have thirty days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation or respond to the notice. If the violation is not corrected or if grantee has not otherwise responded to the notice within thirty days, the city may impose penalties unless the violation is of such a nature so as to require more than thirty days and the grantee proceeds diligently within the thirty days to correct the violation. In any case where the violation is not cured within thirty days of notice from the city, or such other time as the grantee and the city may mutually agree to, the city may proceed to impose forfeitures.

     B.     The grantee may, within ten days of receipt of notice, notify the city that there is a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has, in fact, occurred. Such notice by the grantee to the city shall specify with particularity the matters disputed by the grantee and shall stay the running of the thirty day cure period pending a decision by the city council as required below. The city council shall hear the grantee’s dispute. Grantee must be given at least ten days’ notice of the hearing. At the hearing, the grantee shall be entitled to present evidence. After the hearing, the city shall provide grantee a copy of its decision, along with supporting documents. In the event the city upholds the finding of a violation, the grantee shall have fifteen days subsequent, or such other time period as the grantee and the city mutually agree, to correct the violation.

     C.     The rights reserved to the city under this section are in addition to all other rights of the city whether reserved by this chapter or authorized by law or equity, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to penalties shall affect any other right the city may have. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.450 Tampering with cable system prohibited.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, in any form or manner, with any part of a cable system for the purpose of taking or receiving television signals, radio signals, picture, programs, sound or electronic impulses of any kind for the purpose of enabling him or herself or others to receive any such television signal, radio signal, picture, program, sound or electronic impulses.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the grantee, to willfully tamper with, remove, obstruct or injure any cable, wires, devices or other equipment of the cable system. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 5.48 PEDDLERS
5.48.010 Findings—Purpose.
     A.    Findings. The city council wishes to protect the city’s residents and businesses from uninvited solicitors, peddlers and vendors to: (1) protect against criminal activity, including fraud and burglary; (2) minimize the unwelcome disturbance of residents and their privacy; (3) preclude solicitation and sales by individuals who have been convicted of certain crimes; (4) prevent the solicitation of funds in captive-audience areas; (5) preclude peddling where it would interfere with pedestrian and vehicular passage; and (6) generally preserve the public health, safety and welfare.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable time, place and manner restrictions to serve the interests described in subsection A, while also protecting rights to freedom of speech. (Ord. 912 § 2, 2013)

 

5.48.020 Definitions.
     In this chapter:

     “Department” means the city police department.

     “Peddler” means a person who goes uninvited from door to door, or place to place, to sell, offer or solicit any thing or service, whether for present or future delivery. “Peddler” includes, but is not limited to, a hawker, itinerant merchant without a fixed place of business in the city, or solicitor proposing orders for future delivery or future service.

     “Person” means an individual, a firm, corporation, partnership, association or any other organization. (Ord. 912 § 2, 2013)

 

5.48.030 Permit required—Exemptions.
     A.    Permit Required. A peddler operating in the city must first have a peddler’s permit, unless an exemption under subsection B applies. It is unlawful for a person who is not exempt to operate in the city as a peddler without a permit.

     B.     Exemptions. A peddler’s permit is not required for those listed below. However, any person listed below shall comply with the applicable requirements of Section 5.48.090(B) through (F).

     1.     Peddling or soliciting by a non-profit organization (tax exempt organization under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3)) or on behalf of a public entity;

     2.     Peddling or soliciting by anyone under sixteen years old;

     3.     Selling to retail establishments;

     4.     A licensed real estate person;

     5.     Regular delivery routes (for example, newspaper, dry cleaning, groceries);

     6.     A person seeking only to inform or persuade others on issues, or collect signatures, where no immediate donation is requested or received;

     7.     A person who is otherwise exempt under state or federal law, who provides to the city evidence of entitlement to the exemption. (Ord. 912 § 2, 2013)

 

5.48.040 Application for permit—Application fee.
     A.    Application. A person applying for a peddler’s permit shall submit an application to the police department, on a form provided by the city. The application shall include the following information:

     1.     Applicant’s name, permanent address and telephone number, birth date, driver’s license (or other governmental identification), fingerprint (taken by the department) and two photos of passport quality for inclusion on the identification card;

     2.     If applicable, the name, address and telephone number of business under which applicant is operating, and the credentials establishing applicant’s relationship to that business;

     3.     A brief description of the nature of the applicant’s business and the product or service to be peddled, solicited or sold;

     4.     The length of time the applicant intends to operate in the city;

     5.     The location in the city where applicant intends to operate;

     6.     If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle and license number;

     7.     If food products will be sold, a statement whether the applicant has the necessary permits from the Contra Costa County environmental health department;

     8.     A statement whether or not the applicant has been convicted within the last five years of any felony or misdemeanor involving violence, injury to persons or property, theft, fraud or misrepresentation, with a brief explanation of the nature of the offense, time period and penalty imposed;

     9.     Other information which the police department considers necessary to process the application.

     B.     Application Fee. An applicant for a peddler’s permit shall submit a nonrefundable application fee with the application. The fee shall be in the amount established by city council resolution to cover the costs of processing the application, and conducting a background check and investigation. (Ord. 912 § 2, 2013)

 

5.48.050 Review of application—Decision—Grounds for denial.
     A.    Review of Application. Upon receipt of a complete application and fee, the department shall undertake an investigation and background check (live scan).

     B.     Decision. The department shall render its decision and either approve or deny the application within ten working days of receipt of live scan results. The department shall advise the applicant in writing of its decision. The application may be denied only if based on one or more of the grounds for denial set forth in subsection C of this section.

     C.     Grounds for Denial. The department may deny (or revoke under Section 5.48.070) a peddler’s permit based on any one or more of the following reasons:

     1.     Failure to submit a complete application, with application fee;

     2.     Fraud or misrepresentation made in the application (or in the course of carrying on the business);

     3.     Conviction within the prior five years of a crime involving violence, injury to persons or property, theft, fraud or misrepresentation;

     4.     The proposed or actual sale or solicitation of illegal items;

     5.     Violation of this chapter or the terms of the permit.

     The department shall not base the approval, denial or revocation of a permit on the opinions, beliefs or ideas of the applicant. (Ord. 912 § 2, 2013)

 

5.48.060 Permit and term—Display—No transfer.
     A.    Permit and Term. The peddler’s permit shall show the name and address of the applicant, the date of issuance and expiration, the name of the organization with which the applicant is affiliated (if applicable), the kind of goods or services to be sold, the applicant’s signature stating his or her agreement to abide by the terms of the permit and this chapter, and a photo of the applicant. The maximum term of the permit is one year.

     B.     Display. The permittee shall carry the permit in a holder furnished by the city and shall display the permit in a prominent place on him or herself while operating in the city. On the request of a police or code enforcement officer, the permittee shall sign his or her name for comparison with the permit.

     C.     No Transfer. A peddler’s permit may not be transferred from one person to another. (Ord. 912 § 2, 2013)

 

5.48.070 Revocation procedures.
     The department may revoke a peddler’s permit for any of the reasons set forth as grounds for denial of the permit (under Section 5.48.050(C)). A revocation shall be in writing, stating the reasons for the revocation. It takes effect at the time of personal delivery to the permittee, or upon its mailing to the permit tee’s address as shown on the application. (Ord. 912 § 2, 2013)

 

5.48.080 Appeal.
     An applicant or permittee may request a hearing within ten calendar days of a denial or revocation as applicable, in writing. The department’s patrol division captain or designee shall hold a hearing within ten calendar days, after giving at least five days’ written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the permittee. In the case of a revocation, the permit is temporarily suspended during the time until the hearing date.

     A decision of the department’s patrol division captain, or designee, under this chapter may be appealed to the city manager. The person filing an appeal to the city manager shall do so in writing, within ten days after the decision being appealed, shall state specifically the grounds for the appeal; and pay a fee, set by city council resolution, for the processing of the appeal. If the city manager or designee rules in favor of the appellant, then the city will refund the appeal fee.

     The city manager or designee, who may be a city hearing officer, shall hear the appeal within ten working days, after giving the permittee at least five days’ written notice of the time and place of the hearing. The decision of the city manager or designee is final. (Ord. 912 § 2, 2013)

 

5.48.090 Requirements of permit use.
     Each person with a peddler’s permit shall comply with the following requirements. Each person exempt from obtaining a peddler’s permit shall, if applicable, comply with subsections B through F of this section. It is unlawful to fail to comply with the applicable portions of this section and/or the terms of a peddler’s permit.

     A.    Display the permit as required by Section 5.48.060(B);

     B.     Not enter a residential property and attempt to contact the occupants by ringing a door bell, knocking on a door or by some other means; where there is a clearly visible sign stating “No peddlers or solicitors,” or similar terms;

     C.     Not enter a residential property after sunset;

     D.    Maintain a current city business license under Chapter 5.04, unless exempt under Section 5.04.030 of this code;

     E.     Not engage in peddling at a fixed location (for more than thirty minutes) on any city property or on any public right-of-way, without a separate encroachment permit;

     F.     Not peddle:

     1.     Within fifteen feet of a bank or ATM,

     2.     In a public parking lot or garage after dark,

     3.     At any indoor or outdoor dining area,

     4.     Within three hundred feet of a school before four p.m. on a school day,

     5.     Within a public park, playground or recreational center, without a vendor permit under Section 7.02.215 of this code, or

     6.     At a location where pedestrian passage will be reduced to less than five feet. (Ord. 912 § 2, 2013)

 

5.48.100 Violation and penalty.
     A first violation of this chapter within one year is an infraction. A second or more violation of this chapter within one year is a misdemeanor. Both are punishable as set forth in Section 1.08.010.

     The city may also enforce a violation by any method permitted by law, including issuance of an administrative citation under Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 912 § 2, 2013)

Chapter 5.52 POOL HALLS
Note
*      For additional provisions regarding pool halls and billiard parlors, see Chapter 5.56 of this code.

 

5.52.010 Applicability of provisions.
     Any pool or billiard parlor which is legally in existence and in operation on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall comply with all provisions of this chapter not later than January 1, 1972. (Ord. 223 § 13, 1971)

 

5.52.020 Definition.
     For the purpose of this chapter, a “pool or billiard parlor” means any premises in which there are two or more pool or billiard tables used for the purpose of playing pool or billiards or other game, for which a compensation of any kind is paid to the owner, proprietor, manager, lessee or possessor thereof. A premises in which there are no more than two coin-operated pool or billiard tables, which premises is used in conjunction with some other business, shall not be a pool or billiard parlor for the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 270 § 1, 1975; Ord. 223 § 1, 1971)

 

5.52.030 Administration and enforcement.
     The chief of police of the city of Brentwood shall administer this chapter, and shall take all steps necessary and expedient for the enforcement of this chapter and the administration thereof. (Ord. 223 § 3, 1971)

 

5.52.040 Permit required.
     It is unlawful for any person to operate a pool or billiard parlor without having first obtained a permit to do so as provided in this chapter, or to operate a pool or billiard parlor after the permit therefor has been suspended or revoked as provided in this chapter, or to operate a pool or billiard parlor in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 223 § 2, 1971)

 

5.52.050 Permit application—Contents—Fingerprinting—Fee—Processing.
     A.    The application for a pool or billiard parlor permit shall be in writing to the chief of police on forms provided by the chief of police providing such information as he deems necessary for the granting of an application. A separate application shall be completed by each owner or other person having a financial interest in the operation of the proposed pool or billiard parlor.

     B.     Each such person shall be the fingerprinted by police department as part of the application process.

     C.     A fee of twenty-five dollars to cover the cost of processing the application shall accompany the application for each permit. The chief of police shall process each application, and within thirty days of the receipt thereof, shall either grant or deny the permit applied for. (Ord. 223 § 4, 1971)

 

5.52.060 Permit—Issuance conditions—Term—Transferability.
     A.    The chief of police shall grant the permit in the event he finds that the applicant or applicants and the premises which they operate fall within the standards set by this chapter, or he shall deny the permit where he doubts that these standards would be met.

     B.     In event of denial, the chief of police shall so notify the applicant in writing, giving the reasons therefor.

     C.     Permits once granted shall remain valid until suspended, revoked or abandoned. If a suspended or revoked permit is reinstated, it shall remain valid until suspended, revoked or abandoned, unless in reinstatement of a suspended or revoked permit a time limit is established, in which case the time limit shall govern. A permit shall be considered abandoned in the event the permittee fails to operate his or her premises for a period of thirty or more days, or the permittee allows his or her business license to lapse.

     D.    A permit is not transferable either as to owner or as to location of premises. (Ord. 270 § 2, 1975; Ord. 223 § 5, 1971)

 

5.52.070 Appeal procedure—Decision of council.
     A.    In the event any applicant for a permit, or permittee, feels aggrieved by any action or decision of the chief of police, he may appeal such action to the city council of the city of Brentwood. Such appeal must be commenced by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk of Brentwood within ten days following such action. Such appeal shall be based on an error or abuse of discretion, or that a decision or action was not supported by adequate evidence, and shall state the action the applicant wishes the city council to take.

     B.     On receipt of such appeal, the city clerk shall place it on the next city council agenda to be prepared after the receipt of the appeal, at which time the city council shall hear the appeal and after consideration, make a determination which shall be final. (Ord. 223 § 6, 1971)

 

5.52.080 Conditions for suspension or revocation.
     A.    In the event the chief of police finds any violation of the standards set forth in this chapter, he may in his or her discretion suspend a permit for not to exceed thirty days, or revoke a permit.

     B.     In making such a determination, the chief of police shall give due consideration to the gravity of the violation, together with demonstrated willingness of the permittee to correct the violation. (Ord. 223 § 10, 1971)

 

5.52.090 Standards—Permittees.
     All applicants for a permit shall be of good moral character, with a record free from felony convictions or convictions of crimes of moral turpitude. Following receipt of a permit, all permittees shall demonstrate the ability to operate the pool or billiard parlor within accord of the standards set out in this chapter for the operation of a pool or billiard parlor. (Ord. 223 § 7, 1971)

 

5.52.100 Standards—Conduct of business.
     All pool and billiard parlors shall operate in accordance with the following operational standards:

     A.    All pool or billiard parlors shall be closed between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m.

     B.     Premises shall be maintained in an orderly manner.

     C.     Permittees shall report the name, address and date of birth of all employees to the chief of police and shall report any changes in employees.

     D.    Permittees shall prohibit loitering on the premises and loud noises that could be disturbing to persons at neighboring properties.

     E.     There shall be no living quarters on the premises.

     F.     All exits shall be openable from the outside and not locked or blocked at any time during which the pool or billiard parlor is in operation.

     G.    Patrons shall be prohibited from gambling or any other illegal activity on the premises.

     H.    All pool or billiard tables shall be located in main rooms only and not in side rooms. (Ord. 270 § 3, 1975; Ord. 223 § 8, 1971)

 

5.52.110 Standards—Premises.
     All buildings used for pool and billiard parlors shall be located in accordance with requirements of the zoning provisions of the city of Brentwood (Title 17 of this code) and shall be in safe buildings. (Ord. 270 § 4, 1975; Ord. 223 § 9, 1971)

 

5.52.120 Minors not to be permitted on premises.
     It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, servant or employee, to permit any person under the age of eighteen years or any intoxicated person, to enter, be in, remain at or frequent any pool or billiard parlor if alcoholic beverages are served on the premises. (Ord. 270 § 5, 1975; Ord. 223 § 11, 1971)

 

5.52.130 Minors prohibited on premises.
     Every person under the age of eighteen years is prohibited from going into, remaining at, loitering in or frequenting any pool or billiard parlor if alcoholic beverages are served on the premises. (Ord. 270 § 6, 1975; Ord. 223 § 12, 1971)

 

5.52.140 Violation a misdemeanor—Penalty.
     A.    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a forfeiture of his or her license or permit and by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by such forfeiture and imprisonment in jail for not more than six months, or by such forfeiture, fine and imprisonment.

     B.     For the purpose of this chapter, each day during which any provision of this chapter is violated shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. (Ord. 223 § 14, 1971)

Chapter 5.56 POOL HALLS AND CARDROOMS
Note
*      For additional provisions on pool halls, see Chapter 5.52 of this code.

 

5.56.010 Definitions.
     A.    For the purpose of this chapter, “pool or billiard parlor” means a room in which there is one or more pool or billiard tables used for the purpose of playing pool or billiards for which a compensation of any kind is paid to the owner, proprietor, manager, lessee or possessor thereof. A room in which there is no more than one coin-operated pool or billiard table and which room is used in conjunction with some other business, shall not be considered a pool or billiard parlor for the purpose of this chapter.

     B.     “Cardroom” means a room, in which there are one or more tables at which people play cards, in connection with the business of selling cigars, tobacco, soft drinks, or alcoholic beverages, regardless of whether a rental or fee of any kind is paid to the owner, proprietor, or possessor of the card tables or whether the same is used for the convenience of his or her customers. (Ord. 185 § 1, 1969; Ord. 69 § 1, 1954)

 

5.56.020 License fee established—Limitations on use.
     For every person conducting a pool or billiard hall the sum of two dollars and fifty cents per quarter for each pool or billiard table shall be charged. For every person conducting a cardroom the sum of one hundred dollars per calendar year or any part of a calendar year for each card table with no quarter licenses being issued for card tables shall be charged. Card table is hereby defined as a table at which people play any game of cards in connection with the business of selling cigars, tobacco, soft drinks, food or alcoholic beverages or entertainment, regardless of whether a rental or fee of any kind is paid to the owner, proprietor, or possessor of said table or whether the same is used for the convenience of his or her customers. It is further provided that the licensing for a pool or billiard hall or for pool or billiard tables and for a card game and card tables shall not include the right to sell tobacco, confections, soft drinks and lunches or carry on any other business on said premises without an additional business license for the privilege of conducting such business. (Ord. 271, 1976; Ord. 105 § 2, 1959; Ord. 21 § 3, 1948; Ord. 2 § 5(6), 1948)

 

5.56.030 Permitting minors at premises—Excessive noise—Prohibited—Hours of operation.
     It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, servant or employee, to permit any person under the age of eighteen years, except as provided for in Section 5.56.040 of the municipal code, or any intoxicated person to enter, be at, or remain at the premises where pool, billiards or cards are played, or to permit any gambling thereat prohibited by the laws of the state, or to permit any loud, boisterous or obscene language to be indulged in at the premises, or to fail to keep or maintain the same in a decent or orderly manner, or to permit any electric piano, radio or phonograph or musical instrument to be played thereat after the hour of two a.m., or to fail to close the premises not later than the hour of two a.m. or to reopen the premises earlier than the hour of six a.m. except that a cardroom may be open between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. on Fridays, Saturdays, and Sundays; provided, that in the event the cardroom is operated in conjunction with a bar or other place required to be licensed by the state for on-sale dispensing of alcoholic beverages, any connection between the bar and cardroom shall be locked, sealed or in some other manner acceptable to the chief of police, closed off to separate the bar and the cardroom. (Ord. 411, 1987; Ord. 189 § 1, 1969; Ord. 69 § 2, 1954)

 

5.56.040 Minors prohibited from entering establishment—Exception.
     Every person under the age of eighteen years is prohibited from going to or remaining in any place within the corporate limits of the city which is a pool or billiard parlor except in the following circumstances:

     A.    When the facility serves alcoholic beverages a minor may enter the establishment when on an errand when sent or with the knowledge and consent of a parent, guardian or other person having lawful custody of such person and further prohibited from loitering in or frequenting any such place.

     B.     When the facility does not serve alcoholic beverages and is operated as a family-oriented business. (Ord. 411, 1987; Ord. 185 § 2, 1969; Ord. 69 § 2.1, 1954)

 

5.56.050 Violation a misdemeanor—Penalty.
     A.    Any person, whether a corporation, firm, or individual, principal, agent, servant or employee, violating any of the terms, provisions or sections of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail of the county of Contra Costa, state of California, not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     B.     Every day that any pool or billiard parlor or cardroom is conducted, maintained or kept open in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 69 § 3, 1954)

Chapter 5.58 BINGO GAMES
5.58.010 Compliance with state regulations required.
     All bingo games conducted by authorized organizations are to be conducted in such a manner that said games are in complete compliance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the state of California. (Ord. 279, 1977)

 

5.58.020 License—Eligibility—Issuance—Fee.
     All organizations authorized to conduct bingo games under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the state of California must, prior to conducting any bingo games in the city, furnish to the city administrator reasonable evidence of the eligibility of said organization to conduct bingo games. Upon satisfactory proof of eligibility being provided to him or her, the city administrator shall issue a permit authorizing the applicant organization to conduct bingo games in the city. The fee for the issuance of a bingo permit is to be determined by a resolution of the city council, which sum is to be paid prior to issuance of said permit. Any lawfully issued bingo permit is to remain valid until revoked by the city administer. (Ord. 279, 1977)

Chapter 5.60 TAXICABS
Article I. General
5.60.010 Purpose.
     The enactment of this chapter is authorized and required by Government Code Section 53075.5. (See also Government Code Sections 53075.6 through 53075.9 and Vehicle Code Section 21100.) This chapter serves as the taxicab transportation service policy of the city, as required by Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(1).

     The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules governing the permitting and operation of taxicab companies and drivers. (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

 

5.60.020 Definitions.
     “City” means the city of Brentwood.

     “Driver” means an individual who operates a taxicab, whether as an agent, employee or as an owner.

     “Employee” includes self-employment as an independent driver.

     “Owner” means a person or entity engaged in the business of carrying passengers in a taxicab. Owner may be an individual, group of individuals, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, corporation or any other organizational structure identified by name, phone number, central dispatch, color scheme, monogram, or insignia distinguishing itself from any other entity engaged in such business.

     “Person” includes an individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association and any other organization.

     “Taxicab” means a passenger vehicle designed for carrying not more than eight passengers excluding the driver, and used for carrying passengers for hire. (Vehicle Code Section 27908.) “Taxicab” does not include a charter-party carrier of passengers within the meaning of the Passenger Charter-Party Carriers’ Act (Public Utilities Code Section 5351 et seq.).

     “Taximeter” means any mechanical or electronic device by which the charge for hire of a motor vehicle is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled or time consumed, or both, and upon which device the charge is indicated by figures. (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

 

5.60.030 General requirements—Exceptions.
     A.    Owner’s Permit. No person may operate a taxicab business within the city without first obtaining an owner’s permit and a city business license.

     B.     Driver’s Permit. No person may drive a taxicab within the city without first obtaining a driver’s permit and, unless the driver is an employee of the owner, a city business license.

     C.     Exceptions. The permit requirements of this section do not apply to any of the following:

     1.     The operation of a taxicab proceeding through the city while en route to a destination outside the city;

     2.     The operation of a taxicab by an owner who has a current, valid permit issued by another public entity if the taxicab only brings passengers into the city and does not solicit any passenger while in the city;

     3.     A vehicle operated under a ride-sharing agreement, for example when a commuter transports another who contributes gasoline money;

     4.     An ambulance or medical transportation services company vehicle (Insurance Code Sections 10178.5, 10352; Welfare and Institutions Code Section 14136.1);

     5.     A vehicle (such as a rental car) leased for self-operation where the lessee does not use the vehicle for transporting other people for hire;

     6.     A limousine, which is any sedan or sport utility vehicle of any length with a seating capacity of not more than ten passengers including the driver, used in the transportation of passengers for hire on a prearranged basis (Public Utilities Code Section 5371.4);

     7.     A vehicle listed as an exclusion under Public Utilities Code Section 5353 (b) through (f) and (h), (i), (k), (l) and (n). (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

 

Article II. Owner’s Permit and Operations
5.60.050 Owner’s permit requirement.
     A.    General. No person may operate a taxicab within the city without first obtaining an owner’s permit under this section, unless an exception applies under Section 5.60.030(C). The owner’s permit includes vehicle inspections and operating requirements.

     B.     Application. The owner shall submit a complete application in the form provided by the city. The application will include information regarding the owner, the business, the rates, the drivers and the vehicles, including fingerprinting for criminal background checks. The applicant shall submit a nonrefundable application fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council, to cover the costs of fingerprinting, background investigation, vehicle inspections, and general administrative costs in administering the permit program.

     C.     Determination. The owner’s permit shall be granted within thirty days after submittal of a complete application, unless the city finds any one or more of the following:

     1.     The applicant fails to submit a complete application;

     2.     The applicant makes any omission, untrue statement or material misrepresentation in the application, or provides fraudulent documentation;

     3.     A proposed vehicle lacks the required equipment, is improperly licensed or unsafe;

     4.     The proposed company name, color scheme or insignia will tend to confuse the identification of the company or vehicles with an existing operator;

     5.     The applicant has been convicted of a felony offense, or a misdemeanor offense, involving moral turpitude, theft or fraud, including any such convictions following a plea of no contest, taking into consideration the nature of the conviction, the age of the applicant at the time of the conviction, any evidence of rehabilitation, and the relationship of the conviction to the propriety of the applicant operating a vehicle for hire;

     6.     The applicant has not otherwise complied with this chapter.

     D.    Terms of Permit.

     1.     A permit is valid for one year from date of issuance, unless suspended or revoked. The permit must be renewed annually.

     2.     A permit may not be assigned, sold or transferred to another owner, driver or vehicle.

     3.     The owner shall comply with this chapter in his or her business operations.

     4.     The owner ensures that each vehicle has been listed and approved as part of the application.

     5.     The owner ensures that each driver has a driver’s permit issued by the city.

     6.     The owner must maintain a city business license.

     7.     The owner shall notify the city in writing within ten days of any change of address, telephone number, vehicle or driver.

     8.     The owner shall include the number of its permit in every written or oral advertisement of its services, in conformance with Government Code Section 53075.9.

     9.     There is no limitation on the number of permits issued in the city, unless the city council later adopts an amendment to this chapter setting a limit.

     10.   Following permit issuance, the owner shall notify the city police department of any new vehicles or drivers. New vehicles and drivers shall meet all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

 

5.60.060 Operating regulations.
     A.    Posting. The owner shall ensure that the following information is posted or carried in each vehicle:

     1.     Driver carrying a valid California driver’s license;

     2.     Driver’s city driver’s permit (under Section 5.60.100) posted in view of passengers;

     3.     Vehicle registration carried in the vehicle;

     4.     Owner’s identification and rates to be displayed in the vehicle in view of passengers;

     5.     Ability to show proof of California insurance.

     B.     Rates. No patron may be charged more than the rates submitted with the application. (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

 

5.60.070 Indemnification—Insurance.
     A.    Indemnification. As a condition of receiving an owner’s permit, the applicant will be required to sign a statement agreeing to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, as stated more specifically on the permit application.

     B.     Liability Insurance. In order to obtain an owner’s permit from the city, the applicant must demonstrate that it maintains at its sole expense liability insurance meeting certain minimum requirements as established by the city’s risk manager and detailed on the permit application. (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

 

5.60.080 Logs and trip sheets.
     A.    Both taxicab drivers and dispatchers shall keep a contemporaneous log or trip sheet of each taxicab service rendered and produce it within twenty-four hours upon request from the city. The log or trip sheet shall include the following information:

     1.     The identity of the taxicab driver and dispatcher for the taxicab service rendered;

     2.     The location where the passenger(s) entered the vehicle;

     3.     The time of entry of the passenger(s) at that location;

     4.     The number of passenger(s) entering the cab;

     5.     The time at which the passenger(s) were delivered to their final destination;

     6.     The precise location of the final destination of the passenger(s);

     7.     The time and location of any stops made by the passenger(s) between initial pick-up and final drop-off and collection of fare;

     8.     The amount of fare collected from the passenger(s);

     9.     The starting and ending mileage of each trip.

     B.     The owner shall require that the logs or trip sheets be completed by the driver and dispatcher contemporaneously with each taxicab service rendered and filed at the end of each shift. The owner shall keep the logs and trip sheets on file in his or her office for a period of sixty days, and shall make them at all times convenient to be open to examination by an authorized representative of the chief of police. The falsifying of any trip sheet by an owner, taxicab driver, or dispatch operator is grounds for the revocation of the driver’s permit and owner’s permit. (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

 

Article III. Driver’s Permit and Standards
5.60.100 Driver’s permits.
     A.    General. No person may drive a taxicab within the city without first obtaining a driver’s permit under this section, unless an exception applies under Section 5.60.030(C). (See also Government Code Section 53075.5(b).) If an owner is also a driver, that owner would need two permits: the owner’s permit and the driver’s permit.

     B.     Application. The prospective driver shall submit a complete application in the form provided by the city. The application will include information regarding the driver, the driver’s age as twenty-one years or older, the driving record, fingerprinting for criminal background check, and passport style photograph for the driver’s permit. The applicant shall submit a nonrefundable application fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council, to cover the costs of fingerprinting, background investigation, vehicle inspections, and general administrative costs in administering the permit program.

     C.     Determination. The driver’s permit shall be granted unless the city finds any one or more of the following:

     1.     The applicant fails to submit a complete application;

     2.     The applicant makes any omission, untrue or material misstatement or provides fraudulent documentation with the application;

     3.     Department of Motor Vehicle records of any state of the United States that indicate the department has taken administrative action which resulted in actual suspension or revocation of the applicant’s driver’s license, unless such suspension or revocation was based on a nondriving related matter;

     4.     The applicant has violated this chapter three or more times within the last three years;

     5.     There is an absence of satisfactory proof that the vehicle will be operated in compliance with the provisions of this chapter;

     6.     The applicant does not possess a valid California driver’s license;

     7.     The applicant has been convicted of any felony offense, or of any misdemeanor offense, involving moral turpitude, theft or fraud, including a conviction following a plea of no contest or nolo contendere, taking into consideration the nature of the conviction, the age of the applicant at the time of the conviction, any evidence of rehabilitation, and the relationship of the conviction to the propriety of the applicant operating a vehicle for hire;

     8.     The applicant has failed to obtain a certificate of a negative test for controlled substances and alcohol from a city-approved lab, in conformance with Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3).

     D.    Terms.

     1.     The term of the permit is one year and may be renewed.

     2.     The issuance of a driver’s permit is conditioned upon the driver ensuring that he or she will only operate a vehicle approved for an owner who has a valid owner’s permit. The driver’s permit shall state the name of the employer.

     3.     The driver’s permit shall become void upon termination of the driver’s employment, including termination of self-employment as an independent driver, and the driver shall immediately return his or her permit to the police department upon the termination of employment.

     4.     The issuance of a driver’s permit is conditioned upon the driver complying with the mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing and program certification set forth in Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3). (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

 

5.60.110 Standards for driver conduct.
     Each driver licensed under this chapter shall abide by the following standards:

     A.    Posting. A driver shall abide by the posting and carrying requirements of Section 5.60.060(A): driver’s license, driver’s permit, vehicle registration, and rate schedule.

     B.     No Misrepresentation. A driver may not misrepresent the rates, travel time or distance, or identity of the vehicle owner.

     C.     No Obstruction of Public Right-of-Way. A driver may not obstruct a street or sidewalk, and shall remain in or beside the vehicle when the vehicle is standing on a public street.

     D.    Reasonable Assistance. A driver shall offer to provide assistance to each passenger entering and leaving the vehicle unless the passenger indicates otherwise.

     E.     Seating Capacity. No driver may accept into his or her vehicle any greater number of passengers than the rated seating capacity of the vehicle.

     F.     No Denial of Service. A driver may not refuse a prospective fare based on the distance of the route (within fifty miles of the city) or on the basis of race, creed, color, age, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, or physical disability, including use of service animals.

     G.    Lost Property. A driver shall report and deliver to the police department any property found in the vehicle and not claimed and returned to the passenger within forty-eight hours.

     H.    Mandatory Testing. A driver shall submit a certificate of a negative test for controlled substances and alcohol from a city-approved lab, in conformance with Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3). (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

 

Article IV. Vehicle Requirements
5.60.150 Vehicle approval—Vehicle standards.
     A.    Vehicle Standards. As part of the owner’s permit application, the owner shall provide information regarding each vehicle to be used in the city. The information shall be provided on a form provided by the city, and shall include:

     1.     A copy of the state vehicle registration under owner’s name, license plate number and corresponding vehicle identification number of each vehicle;

     2.     Make, model or type, year of manufacture and passenger-seating capacity of each vehicle;

     3.     Taximeter with current weights and measures seal intact to be installed in each taxicab;

     4.     Valid inspection certificate issued by the Contra Costa County, division of agriculture/weights and measures, stating the name and model number of the taximeter and the vehicle number for which it is assigned;

     5.     Valid “certificate of safety” vehicle inspection certificate from an auto repair facility with a valid license from the State Bureau of Automotive Repair;

     6.     Certificate of insurance from the insurance carrier verifying the coverage required in Section 5.60.070(B) of this chapter for each vehicle;

     7.     Proposed color, lettering and insignia to appear on each vehicle.

     B.     Vehicle Approval. As part of the issuance of an owner’s permit is the approval for the specific vehicles listed, and the color, markings and lettering on that vehicle. No other vehicles may be used in the city without prior approval of the police department. (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

 

5.60.160 Equipment.
     A.    Equipment. Each taxicab must have the following equipment:

     1.     A trunk device which will permit the opening of the trunk lid from the inside of the trunk;

     2.     A permanent fixture to display the taxicab driver’s permit in prominent view of the passengers;

     3.     A prominent sign within the passenger area of each taxicab informing passengers to call the city’s police department, at a telephone number to be provided on the permit application, with comments or complaints about the service provided;

     4.     No fewer than four working doors, except that a handicapped accessible mini-van may be used;

     5.     A current fire extinguisher;

     6.     Four flares;

     7.     At least two emergency reflectors;

     8.     Spare tire and jack;

     9.     Windows which patrons can open from the inside;

     10.   Working headlights, taillights, turn-signals, back-up lights, and brake lights;

     11.   A light of not less than two candlepower within the vehicle, so arranged as to illuminate the entire passenger compartment. The light shall be kept constantly lighted at all times while any passengers are being loaded into or unloaded from the vehicle during dusk or night hours;

     12.   All safety belts in good working order.

     B.     Additional Equipment. In addition, every taxicab must have the following working equipment:

     1.     A taximeter, as defined in Section 5.60.020 of this chapter;

     2.     A two-way radio and a mobile display terminal capable of communication with a dispatcher. (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

 

5.60.170 Maintenance and inspection.
     A.    Vehicle Inspection and Annual Reinspection. A vehicle to be used under an owner’s permit in the city must first be inspected by an auto repair facility with a valid license from the State Bureau of Automotive Repairs, to assure that the vehicle and its equipment comply with this chapter. A vehicle found to be unsafe or unsuitable for service will not be approved and may be taken out of service.

     An annual reinspection is required at the time of renewal of the owner’s permit.

     B.     City Right to Inspect at Any Time. Any city police officer has the right to inspect a vehicle at any time to ascertain whether it complies with this chapter. The last inspection form, a current commercial vehicle registration, a copy of the current division of agriculture/weights and measures certificate certifying the taximeter, and a copy of the current insurance policy shall be carried in the vehicle at all times and shall be made readily available to the city representative in the course of the inspection.

     C.     Taximeters. No taxicab may be operated in the city unless such taxicab is equipped with a taximeter in good operating condition At the time of permitting, and annually thereafter, the business owner shall provide a valid taximeter inspection certificate issued by the Contra Costa County division of agriculture/weights and measures. It is unlawful to manipulate or cause to be manipulated the taximeter so as to cause a registration to be made of more time or greater distance than the correct amount of time and distance for the particular trip. Every driver shall, if requested, give a correct receipt upon payment of the correct fare.

     D.    Cleanliness. The interior of each taxicab shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once each twenty-four hours.

     E.     Costs. The cost of the inspections or certifications shall be paid by the vehicle owner. (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

 

Article V. Implementation and Enforcement
5.60.200 Implementation.
     This chapter shall be implemented by the chief of police. The chief shall adopt implementation guidelines.

     By providing for the regulation of taxicabs under this chapter, the city is only protecting the general welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it imposing on the city, or its officers or employees, an obligation for which there may be liability and money damages to any person. (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

 

5.60.210 Appeal.
     An applicant or permittee may request a hearing within ten calendar days of a denial or revocation as applicable, in writing to the department’s patrol division captain. The department’s patrol division captain or designee shall hold a hearing within ten calendar days, after giving at least five days’ written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the permittee. In the case of a revocation, the permit is temporarily suspended during the time until the hearing date.

     A decision of the department’s patrol division captain, or designee, under this chapter may be appealed to the city manager. The person filing an appeal to the city manager shall do so in writing, within ten days after the decision being appealed, shall state specifically the grounds for the appeal, and pay a fee, set by city council resolution, for the processing of the appeal. If the city manager or designee rules in favor of the appellant, then the city will refund the appeal fee.

     The city manager or designee, who may be a city hearing officer, shall hear the appeal within ten working days, after giving the permittee at least five days’ written notice of the time and place of the hearing. The decision of the city manager or designee is final. (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

 

5.60.220 Permit suspension—Revocation.
     A.    Permit Suspension. The chief of police may suspend an owner’s permit or driver’s permit for any violation of this chapter, after twenty-four hours’ written notice to the owner or driver stating the reasons. It is unlawful for the permittee to exercise any of the rights granted under this chapter during the time that the permit is suspended. The suspension shall be lifted upon a showing that the violation has been corrected.

     If no showing of correction has been made within fourteen business days, the city may issue a notice of revocation and proceed as set forth in subsection B.

     B.     Revocation. The chief of police may revoke an owner or driver’s permit issued under this chapter for any of the following reasons:

     1.     The existence of any fact which, at the time of application, would have caused the chief of police to deny the application under Section 5.60.050(C) (Owner’s permit requirement) or 5.60.100(C) (Driver’s permit);

     2.     A violation of law relating to the operation of a motor vehicle including, but not limited to, speeding, reckless driving, or driving under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance;

     3.     A motor vehicle accident resulting in injuries to persons or property caused by the culpable act or omission of the driver or business owner;

     4.     Failure to pay any judgment for damages arising out of the unlawful or negligent operation of any vehicle;

     5.     Failure to maintain insurance, permits or business license as required by this chapter;

     6.     Failure to maintain a vehicle for hire in a safe and sanitary condition such that the vehicle could pass, at any time, the inspection required for the issuance of a vehicle permit;

     7.     A violation of this chapter or the terms of the permit. (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

 

5.60.230 Violations.
     A.    General. It is unlawful for any person to violate a provision or to fail to comply with a requirement of this chapter. The city may enforce this chapter by any lawful means, including suspension or revocation of a permit, and any remedy set forth in BMC Section 1.08.010. (See also Public Utilities Code Section 5412.2.)

     B.     Misdemeanor. A violation of this chapter or the terms of a permit is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine and up to six months in jail. (Government Code Section 36900, Penal Code Section 19.) Each day during which a violation occurs is a separate offense.

     C.     Statutory Fine. If after a hearing, the city determines that any person or corporation is or has operated as a taxicab transportation service without a valid certificate, license, or permit, or has failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter with regard to any written or oral advertisement, that person or corporation shall be subject to a fine of up to five thousand dollars for each violation. In addition, the city shall assess the person or corporation an amount sufficient to cover the reasonable expense of investigation incurred by the city. (Government Code Section 53075.9.)

     D.    Impoundment. A city police officer may impound a vehicle used in violation of this chapter, following the procedures set forth in Government Code Section 53075.61. Any city police officer is considered a transportation inspector under this chapter, within the meaning of Government Code Section 53075.61. (See also Vehicle Code Section 21100.4.)

     E.     Termination of Telephone Service. The city may take enforcement action to disconnect the telephone service of unauthorized taxicab operators who advertise passenger transportation services, following the procedures set forth in Government Code Section 53075.8. (Ord. 913 § 1, 2013)

Chapter 5.68 MOBILE VENDING
5.68.010 Findings and purpose.
     The city council finds and declares as follows:

     A.    To protect the public health and safety, promote fair economic competition and ensure safe pedestrian and motorist traffic, the city needs equitable mobile vending regulations.

     B.     Ordinance 554, adopted by city council on June 13, 1995 and effective on October 1, 1995, permitted motorized and nonmotorized mobile vending units on private property. These units were subject to minimal regulations principally in the form of requiring business licenses and imposing site-specific daily operating hours.

     C.     The city has observed numerous violations by motorized mobile vendors of the requirements of Ordinance 554.

     D.    Motorized and nonmotorized mobile vending causes safety and sanitary hazards on private property, contributes to traffic and pedestrian congestion, contributes to litter accumulation and causes planning and design problems, especially those motorized mobile vendors that become a continual, stationary enterprise. Further, nonmotorized vending from sidewalks, except for continuously moving pedestrian carts, causes safety and sanitary hazards and contributes to pedestrian congestion.

     E.     Mobile vending between the hours of eight p.m. and six-thirty a.m. causes public safety problems inasmuch as some mobile units are poorly lit or operate on streets or properties which have inadequate lighting or interfere with appropriate line of sight distances affecting the safety of vehicular and pedestrian travel. (Ord. 566 § 1, 1996; Ord. 554 § 1, 1995)

 

5.68.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this section:

     A.    “Mobile unit” means any apparatus (i.e., truck, trailer, cart, wagon) or structure not permanently fixed to a permanent foundation and which may be moved under its own power, pushed or pulled by hand, towed by a motor vehicle or carried upon or in a motor vehicle or trailer. A mobile unit does not include news racks nor vending machines but does include produce stands, mobile food preparation units and vehicles as those terms are defined in the Health and Safety Code.

     B.     “Motorized mobile units” means a mobile unit which may be moved under its own power. An example would be catering and ice cream trucks.

     C.     “Nonmotorized mobile units” means a mobile unit which may not be moved under its own power. An example would be pedestrian carts and stands.

     D.    “Public property” means and includes without limitation alleys, parks, and interior and exterior areas of public buildings. Public property does not include city streets where parking is permitted or sidewalks.

     E.     “Pedestrian cart” means a special type of nonmotorized unit which contains one or more wheels, does not exceed four feet in height and three feet in width and is readily moved by a handle(s)

     F.     “Private property” or “site” means an improved private parcel or lot of real property.

     G.    “Vending” means the business of selling, offering for sale, displaying or causing to be sold, for cash or consideration, any item including without limitation, food, beverage, goods, services and merchandise.

     H.    “Vendor” means any person, including without limitation an employee or agent, partnership or corporation, who is in the business of vend ing. A vendor is a peddler, as that term is defined in Section 5.48.020. (Ord. 566 § 1, 1996; Ord. 554 § 1, 1995)

 

5.68.030 Certain mobile vending is prohibited.
     No person shall conduct vending from a motorized mobile unit upon private property, public property and any sidewalk within the city. No person shall conduct vending from a nonmotorized mobile unit upon any public property, street and sidewalk within the city. Violations of this section are punishable as misdemeanors in accordance with state law. (Ord. 566 § 1, 1996)

 

5.68.040 Business license required.
     A.    It shall be a misdemeanor to conduct vending from a nonmotorized mobile unit upon private property within the city, from a pedestrian cart upon any sidewalk, or from a motorized mobile unit upon city streets where parking is permitted without first obtaining a business license in accordance with the provisions of Title 5 and particularly Chapter 5.48 and this Chapter 5.68.

     B.     A business license may be issued for nonmotorized vending upon private property, for pedestrian cart vending upon any sidewalk, and for motorized vending upon city streets where parking is permitted subject to the mobile vendor’s compliance with the regulations herein.

     C.     The provisions of Chapters 8.04, food-handling establishments, and 8.08, restaurants, shall not be applicable to mobile units. (Ord. 566 § 1, 1996; Ord. 554 § 1, 1995)

 

5.68.050 Application procedure.
     A.    The finance department shall issue a business license for mobile vending; provided, the applicant is in compliance with all standards of this chapter. Any aggrieved applicant may submit a written appeal to the city council within thirty days of a determination by the finance department. All applications shall be submitted on a form prepared by the finance department, accompanied by payment of the business license fee and surtax of this Title 5 as periodically fixed by the city council.

     B.     For nonmotorized vending upon private property, the application shall include the signature of the owner of the site upon which the applicant proposes to locate the nonmotorized mobile unit indicating the property owner’s permission to use the site for nonmotorized mobile vending and the nature of the improvements on the site. If the applicant proposes to conduct motorized vending in legally permitted parking areas on city streets or pedestrian cart vending from sidewalks, the application shall include the street addresses of the proposed vending.

     C.     For motorized mobile units, the application shall include proof of the operator’s valid driver’s license and automobile or commercial vehicle insurance.

     D.    Where applicable, the applicant shall provide certified copies of valid food handling or other permits or certifications required by the Contra Costa County Health Department pursuant to the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law (Health and Safety Code § 27500 et seq.) as well as records of any inspections conducted by the county in connection with the applicant’s vending operations. (Ord. 566 § 1, 1996; Ord. 554 § 1, 1995)

 

5.68.060 Standards.
     All mobile vending operations shall comply with the following standards with any violations of such standards punishable as misdemeanors:

     A.    Vending shall not be conducted between the hours of eight p.m. and six-thirty a.m.

     B.     Nonmotorized mobile units shall be permitted for a maximum of four hours per day per site, and each site must be improved with a permitted structure or structures. A maximum of one nonmotorized mobile unit shall be permitted per each site per day.

     C.     Motorized mobile units lawfully permitted to conduct vending from city streets shall comply with the parking and traffic regulations of the state and the city, including without limitation the curb parking requirements of Vehicle Code Section 22502(a) and the requirement not to impede traffic set forth in Vehicle Code Section 22400.

 

     D.    Motorized mobile units lawfully permitted to conduct vending from city streets shall not conduct nor solicit vending from pedestrians or vehicles in the path of street vehicular travel.

     E.     Pedestrian carts are permitted upon sidewalks so long as they are not stationary and do not impede pedestrian traffic nor solicit vending from vehicles or pedestrians in the path of street vehicular travel.

     F.     Mobile vendors shall at all times be in compliance with all regulations of the State Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law, Contra Costa County Health Department and the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     G.    Vending of any alcoholic beverages or controlled substances is prohibited in accordance with state laws.

     H.    Each mobile unit shall possess and at all times display in conspicuous view certified copies of its current city business license as well as its county food handling permit, where applicable.

     I.      A mobile vendor’s business license is not transferable.

     J.      At all times, motorized mobile vendors shall have access to handwashing and restroom facilities which are available to employees and customers of the mobile vendor. Access to the mobile vendor, its customers and employees shall be demonstrated by a letter from the owner of the handwashing and restroom facilities. The letter shall be displayed on the motorized mobile vendor in a conspicuous location for public viewing. Access to the handwashing and restroom facilities must be at all times within sixty meters (two hundred feet) of the mobile vendor’s operation(s). Such distance shall be measured taking into consideration only such lawful passenger routes as permitted by traffic control devices, markings and sidewalks. (Ord. 603 § 1, 1998; Ord. 566 § 1, 1996; Ord. 554 § 1, 1995)

 

5.68.070 Enforcement.
     Violations of this chapter shall be prosecuted criminally as infractions, or through civil means such as by administrative citation, nuisance abatement, or injunctive relief. Each day a violation continues is deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 603 § 2, 1998; Ord. 566 § 1, 1996; Ord. 554 § 1, 1995)

 

5.68.080 Severability.
     If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter, or application thereof to any person or circumstances, be held invalid by a court of law, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or applications of the chapter and, therefore, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 566 § 1, 1996; Ord. 554 § 1, 1995)

Chapter 5.70 MASSAGE
5.70.010 Findings and purpose.
     A.    The city is authorized to regulate massage establishments by imposing reasonable conditions on the operation of massage establishments. This chapter is adopted under the authority of Government Code Sections 51030 through 51034, Government Code Section 37101, Business and Professions Code Section 16000, and California Constitution Article XI, Section 7.

     B.     In adopting these regulations, the city council acknowledges that massage therapy is a legitimate, viable professional field that provides valuable health and therapeutic benefits.

     C.     The city council finds that there are significant risks of injury to massage clients by improperly trained and/or uneducated massage therapists and this chapter provides reasonable safeguards against injury and economic costs.

     D.    The city council finds that it is reasonable to conclude that the presence of untrained, inexperienced trainees in massage establishments would encourage unlawful activity and pose a threat to the quality of life in the local community. Accordingly, it is the purpose and intent of this chapter to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by providing for the orderly regulation of businesses providing massage therapy services and discouraging prostitution and related illegal activities carried on under the guise of massage therapy.

     E.     It is also the purpose and intent of the city council that the operation of massage establishments be regulated in the interests of public health, safety, and welfare to provide minimum building sanitation and health standards, to ensure that persons offering massage possess the minimum qualifications necessary to operate such businesses and to perform such services offered, and to ensure that those offering massage services conduct their work in a lawful and professional manner.

     F.     Furthermore, it is the purpose and intent of this chapter to reduce or prevent neighborhood blight; to protect and preserve the quality of city neighborhoods and commercial districts; and to enhance enforcement of criminal statutes relating to the conduct of operators and employees of massage businesses.

     G.    This chapter relies upon the state certification process of the California Massage Therapy Council under California Business and Professions Code Sections 4600 through 4620. In addition, this chapter provides certain minimum standards for the operation of massage establishments, their managing employees, and massage therapists. (Ord. 1016 § 2, 2020)

 

5.70.020 Definitions.
     In this chapter, the following words and phrases have the following meanings:

     Applicant. In the case of a massage establishment permit, means an individual, or if not an individual, the general partner, chief executive officers, chief advisor, or other person responsible for the ownership and operation of the massage establishment, who applies to obtain a permit under this chapter.

     California Massage Therapy Council or CAMTC. The California Massage Therapy Council created under Business and Professions Code Section 4602.

     Certified Massage Therapist or Therapist. A person who is currently certified as a massage therapist by the CAMTC, and who administers massage for compensation. This includes a CAMTC-certified massage practitioner (certified under Business and Professions Code Section 4604.2).

     The following are not considered massage therapists under this chapter: a person with a current certificate or license to practice the healing arts other than massage under the laws of the State of California (including, but not limited to, a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, nurse, physical therapist, or other health professional), or a person working under the direction of such a person in one of the health facilities listed as not being a massage establishment (see definition below).

     Chief. The chief of police of the city of Brentwood.

     City attorney. The city attorney of the city of Brentwood.

     City manager. The city manager of the city of Brentwood.

     Client. The customer or patron who pays for or receives massage services.

     Compensation. The payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, exchange, or gift of money or anything of value. In addition to accepting other forms of compensation, a person may be deemed to have received compensation for performing a massage when the massage is offered as part of a membership, as part of a package of services or as incidental to the purchase of a product.

     Employee. Includes any owner, partner, operator, manager, supervisor, or worker, whether paid or not, who renders services of any nature in the operation of a massage establishment.

     Independent contractor. A massage therapist who is an independent contractor is one who works at a massage establishment (or provides outcall massage services), but is not a salaried employee and does not share a percentage of therapy proceeds with the massage establishment. Sometimes referred to as a rent-space massage therapist.

     Manager. The person who has been designated by the owner(s) to manage the massage establishment in his/her/their absence, or who is responsible for the day-to-day activities of a massage establishment.

     Massage or bodywork. The application of various techniques to the muscular structure and soft tissues of the human body. Application of massage and bodywork techniques may include, but is not limited to, stroking, kneading, tapping, compression, vibration, rocking, friction, pressure, and similar techniques. Examples of massage include Swedish massage, sports massage, shiatsu, polarity therapy, rolfing, reiki, hellerwork, and reflexology. Massage and bodywork have the same meaning.

     Massage specifically excludes: diagnosis, prescription, intentional manipulation or adjustments of the skeletal structure, or any other service, procedure or therapy which requires a license to practice (chiropractic, osteopathy, orthopedics, physical therapy, podiatry, or medicine), hypnosis, naturopathic, colonic irrigation, acupuncture, vacuum cupping, nutritional or dietary counseling, detoxification programs, yoga, exercise, spiritual healing, or procedures which penetrate body cavities, either manually or with any other method of intrusion.

     Massage establishment. Any business that offers massage in exchange for compensation, whether at a fixed place of business or at a location designated by the client throughout call massage services. Any business that offers any combination of massage therapy and bath facilities, including, but not limited to, showers, baths, wet and dry heat rooms, pools, and hot tubs, will be deemed a massage establishment under this chapter. The following are not considered massage establishments under this chapter:

     1.     A hospital, nursing home, sanitarium, physiotherapy establishment, office of a licensed medical professional, or other state-licensed physical or mental health facility;

     2.     A personal fitness training center, gymnasium, athletic facility, or health club, when the giving of massage is an incidental function of the business constituting ten percent or less of the business.

 

     Operator. Any and all owners and managers of a massage establishment.

     Outcall massage service. A business that provides massage at a location designated by the client or the massage therapist, other than at the premises of a massage establishment.

     Owner. Any of the following persons:

     1.     Any person who is a general partner of a general or limited partnership that owns a massage establishment;

     2.     Any person who has five percent or greater ownership interest in a corporation that owns a massage establishment;

     3.     Any person who is a member of a limited liability company that owns a massage establishment; or

     4.     Any person who has a five percent or greater ownership interest in any other type of business association that owns a massage establishment.

     Reception area or waiting area. An area immediately inside the front door of the massage establishment dedicated to the reception and waiting of clients of the massage establishment and visitors, and which is not a massage therapy room or otherwise used for the provision of massage therapy services.

     Police department. The police department of the city of Brentwood.

     Sole provider. A massage establishment where the individual owner owns one hundred percent of the business, is the only person who provides massage for compensation at or for that business, and has no other employees or independent contractors. (Ord. 1016 § 2, 2020)

 

5.70.030 Requirements.
     A.    Massage Establishment. No person may own or operate a massage establishment in the city unless:

     1.     Each person administering massage for compensation (whether as an employee or independent contractor) is a certified massage therapist; and

     2.     The owner or operator has a current massage establishment permit from the police department under Section 5.70.040; and

     3.     The massage establishment complies with all requirements of this chapter.

     B.     Massage Therapist. No person may practice massage in the city who is not a certified massage therapist. A certified massage therapist must:

     1.     Only work at a city-permitted massage establishment (as an employee or independent contractor); or

     2.     Obtain a massage establishment permit as a sole provider under Section 5.70.040.

     C.     Additional City Permits. It is unlawful for any person to own or operate a massage establishment (including as a sole provider) without obtaining and maintaining in effect:

     1.     A city business tax certificate (Section 5.04.020); and

     2.     City approval for conformance with zoning requirements, building permit requirements, and sign permit requirements. (Ord. 1016 § 2, 2020)

 

5.70.040 Massage establishment permit.
     A.    Permit. A massage establishment must obtain an annual permit from the police department, and will post the permit in the reception area (sole providers must carry a copy of the permit at all times when performing outcall massage). Upon request, the massage establishment will provide a copy of the state certification of any therapist working at the massage establishment. The massage establishment will notify the police department in writing within seven days of any change in the information provided on a form designated by the police chief.

     The permit application will include:

     1.     Name, address, and telephone of the massage establishment;

     2.     Name, address, and telephone of the owner(s) and manager(s);

     3.     Contact information for the primary operator;

     4.     Name and proof of certification of each employee or independent contractor who will offer massage at (or through) the establishment;

     5.     A copy of a photographic government-issued identification card of the owner(s) and manager(s) of the massage establishment;

     6.     A statement that the massage establishment will only employ or use certified massage therapists;

     7.     A statement that the applicant will provide written notification of any changes within seven days;

     8.     Authorization for the city to investigate the truth of the information provided;

     9.     A copy of any lease or rental agreement for the massage establishment and a written acknowledgement from the property owner that states that the applicant has the right to occupy the property and acknowledges that the applicant may use the property for the massage establishment;

     10.   A written acknowledgement that the applicant received a copy of the city’s massage regulations; and

     11.   A fee in the amount established by the city’s cost allocation plan and schedule of city fees as adopted by resolution of the city council.

     B.     Background Check. Each owner and each manager, who is not a certified massage therapist, must apply to the police department for an annual background and history investigation. Each background check applicant will submit the following:

     1.     Information related to the applicant’s business, occupation and employment history for the past five years;

     2.     Other information as the police department may reasonably require;

     3.     Fingerprints from a qualified private fingerprinting service, at the applicant’s sole expense; and

     4.     An application fee in the amount established by the city’s cost allocation plan and schedule of city fees as adopted by resolution of the city council.

     C.     Permit Issuance. The police chief will issue or deny the application for a massage establishment permit within sixty days of receiving a completed application. The police chief will give written notice of the grounds for denial to the applicant personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid, at the address provided on the application. The notice will advise the applicant of the right to appeal as provided in this chapter. The police chief will deny a permit if any of the following circumstances exist:

     1.     The application is incomplete and/or required supplementary material is not submitted within thirty days of the date the material is requested;

     2.     The applicant, or any operator, has previously had a massage establishment permit or any similar license, certificate, or registration revoked by the city, CAMTC or any government agency during the five years preceding the date of the application;

     3.     The applicant, or any operator, has made a material misrepresentation in the application or supplementary material submitted with the application;

     4.     The applicant, or any operator, has been successfully prosecuted under the Red Light Abatement Act (California Penal Code Sections 11225, et seq.) or any similar law in another jurisdiction during the five years preceding the date of the application; or

     5.     The applicant, or any operator, has been convicted of conduct that requires registration under California Penal Code, Section 290; conduct which is in violation of California Penal Code Sections 220, 245.3, 261, 264.1, 266e, 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, 345.5, 647(a), 647(b), 647(d), 653.22, or 653.23; any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, violence, or moral turpitude; conspiracy or attempt to commit any of the aforementioned designated offenses; convictions to a charge of a violation of California Penal Code Sections 415 and 602, or any lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction of, or as substitute for any of the previously listed crimes, or any crime committed while engaged in the ownership or operation of a massage establishment or the practice of massage therapy; convictions that have been expunged and convictions under the laws of other jurisdictions that proscribe the same or similar conduct as the previously listed crimes; or conviction of California Health and Safety Code Section 11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution, or possession of a controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058 during the five years preceding the date of the application.

     D.    Decision Postponed. The police chief may postpone a decision on the permit application in the following circumstances:

     1.     If prosecution is pending against the applicant or any operator for any conduct listed in subsection C of this section, the police chief may postpone the decision on the application until the final resolution of the prosecution is reached. As used in this chapter, prosecution means charges filed by the district attorney, administrative proceedings brought by a local government, state government, or other government agency, or a civil action maintained by the city attorney.

     2.     The police chief may postpone a decision on the permit application until the city receives the applicant’s fingerprint review results from the Department of Justice.

     E.     Not Transferrable. A massage establishment permit is not transferrable. (Ord. 1016 § 2, 2020)

 

5.70.050 Operational requirements.
     The operator of a massage establishment will maintain and operate the establishment in a safe and sanitary manner in compliance with all of the following requirements:

     A.    Comply with all applicable building, fire, safety, health, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, heating and ventilation, sanitation, zoning, signage, and other laws applicable to the premises, and comply with standards established by the Contra Costa County Department of Health Services for such businesses;

     B.     Provide for the regular removal of garbage and refuse, the storage of soiled linens and towels, and the safe storage or removal of flammable materials;

     C.     Maintain all equipment used to perform massage services in a safe and sanitary condition, including the regular application of cleansers and bacterial cleaning agents;

     D.    At all times have an adequate supply of clean sanitary towels, coverings, and linens, and provide these for the personal use of each client;

     E.     Maintain all bathroom and plumbing fixtures in a sanitary condition, provide hot and cold running water, and comply with sanitation requirements of the county health department;

     F.     Provide a wash basin for massage therapists and employees, located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the massage therapy services. Each wash basin will be equipped with hot and cold running water, soap in a dispenser, and sanitary towels;

     G.    Provide either a separate room or dressing and locker facilities for each client. However, dressing and undressing may occur in the same room as massage therapy if the client is alone in the room with the door(s) closed and opaque coverings are present on any windows while undressing or dressing. The massage therapist or other clients may not be present in the same room when the client is undressing;

     H.    In each room or cubicle where massage is administered, have lighting whenever the area is occupied equivalent to a minimum of an incandescent twenty-five-watt clear-glass light bulb;

     I.      All massage services will be paid for in the reception area, and all tips, if any, will be paid in the reception area;

     J.      No massage establishment may discriminate or exclude patrons on the basis of race, sex, religion, age, or physical disability;

     K.    A copy of the CAMTC certificate of each and every massage therapist employed or offering massage services in or through the massage establishment will be displayed in the reception area. The city will be provided with a copy of the CAMTC identification card of each and every massage therapist employed or offering massage services in or through the massage establishment. CAMTC certificates of former employees or independent contractors will be removed as soon as those massage therapists are no longer employed by or offering services through the massage establishment;

     L.     A CAMTC identification card or, for those CAMTC certified massage therapists without a CAMTC identification card, another type of photo identification card (such as a driver’s license or state issued identification card)will be worn by and be clearly visible on each massage therapist’s person at all times when the massage therapist is present on the premises of the massage establishment or providing outcall massage;

     M.    A list of the services available and the cost of such services will be posted in the reception area and/or as a printed brochure available in the reception area, and will be described in readily understandable language. Outcall service providers will provide such a list to clients in advance of performing any service. No operator will permit any service to be provided other than those posted or listed as required herein, nor will an operator or a massage therapist receive compensation for any service other than those posted on the list of services;

     N.    For each massage service provided, every massage establishment will keep a complete and legible written record of the following information: the date and hour that service was provided; the service received; the compensation received for the services, including any gratuity or tip; the name or initials of the employee entering the information; and the name of the massage therapist administering the service. Such records will be open to inspection and copying by the police department, may not be used by any massage therapist or operator for any purpose other than as records of service provided, and may not be provided to other parties by the massage therapist or operator unless otherwise required by law. Such records will be retained on the premises of the massage establishment for a period of two years and be immediately available for inspection during business hours;

     O.    All massage establishment operators and their employees and independent contractors, including massage therapists, will meet the dress code requirements in Business and Professions Code Section 4609, subdivision (a)(10);

     P.     No person will enter, be, or remain in any part of a massage establishment premises while in possession of an open container of alcohol, or consuming or using any alcoholic beverage or drugs except pursuant to a prescription for such drugs. The operator will not permit any such person to enter or remain upon such premises;

     Q.    No massage establishment will operate as a school of massage, or use the same facilities as that of a school of massage;

     R.     No massage establishment will place, publish, or distribute, or cause to be placed, published, or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective clients that any service is available other than those services listed as an available service pursuant to this chapter, nor will any massage establishment employ language in the text of such advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective client that any service is available other than those services as described in compliance with the provisions of this chapter;

     S.     No massage will be given unless the client’s genitals are, at all times, fully covered. A massage therapist will not, in the course of administering any massage, make physical contact with the genitals of any other person regardless whether the contact is over or under the person’s clothing or draping;

     T.     Where the massage establishment has staff available to assure security for clients and massage therapists, the entry to the reception area will remain unlocked during business hours or when clients are present;

     U.    No massage establishment located in a building or structure with exterior windows fronting a public street, highway, walkway, or parking area will, during business hours, block visibility into the interior reception area through the use of curtains, closed blinds, tints, signage, posters, or any other material that obstructs, blurs, or unreasonably darkens the view into the premises. For the purpose of this subsection, there is an non-rebuttable presumption that the visibility is impermissibly blocked if more than ten percent of the interior reception area is not visible from the exterior window;

     V.    No person will be employed in a massage establishment, perform massage therapy, or manage or hold an ownership interest in a massage establishment who is not at least eighteen years of age;

     W.    No massage establishment may permit massage services to be provided between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. A massage commenced prior to nine p.m. will nevertheless terminate at nine p.m., and all clients will exit the premises at that time. It is the obligation of the massage establishment to inform clients of the requirement that services must cease at nine p.m. A massage establishment operating under a conditional use permit (CUP) approved prior to the enactment or amendment of this chapter may continue to operate under the hours permitted in the CUP. Nothing in this chapter will be construed to prevent the city from setting specific operating hours for each massage establishment through the CUP process (if required);

     X.    No persons, including operators, employees, and independent contractors, will be permitted to sleep within the premises of a massage establishment between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. There will be a rebuttable presumption that a person has been sleeping within the premises if there is bedding, clothing, personal hygiene products, and/or suitcases, and the person is present during the restricted hours. (Ord. 1016 § 2, 2020)

 

5.70.060 Inspections.
     The police chief, the chief building official, and code enforcement officers have the right to enter the premises from time to time during regular business hours for the purpose of making periodic, reasonable, inspections to observe and enforce compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1016 § 2, 2020)

 

5.70.070 Suspension and revocation of massage establishment permit.
     A.    Revocation or Suspension of Massage Establishment Permits. The police chief may suspend or revoke a massage establishment permit, according to procedures set forth in subsection B below, if there is good cause to believe that:

     1.     The massage establishment has been operated in a manner which violates any provision of this chapter or of the California Massage Therapy Act (California Business and Professions Code, Sections 4600 through 4621), as each may be amended from time to time;

     2.     The applicant or an employee or independent contractor has committed any offense involving lewdness, indecent exposure, prostitution, human trafficking or any other offense which would be grounds for denial pursuant to Section 5.70.040, or employees or independent contractors of the massage establishment have committed such offenses in the course of their employment and the permit holder has permitted them to do so or has failed to prevent them from doing so;

     3.     An individual who is not CAMTC certified, or whose CAMTC certification has been suspended or revoked, has provided massage at the massage establishment or conducted outcall massage through the massage establishment; or

     4.     The applicant or an employee or an independent contractor has made a false or misleading statement or omission of fact on his/her application for a permit, or for renewal of the permit, or in any records required to be maintained under this chapter.

     Any act or omission of any employee or independent contractor which constitutes a violation of this chapter will be deemed a violation of the owner/operator of the massage establishment.

     B.     Procedure for Revocation or Suspension of Massage Establishment Permits.

     1.     Notice to Applicant. Whenever the police chief has good cause to believe that grounds for the suspension or revocation of a massage establishment permit exist, he/she will give written notice of the intended suspension or revocation to the applicant. The notice will provide for suspension or revocation of the massage establishment permit ten calendar days after service of the notice upon the applicant, unless the applicant appeals the decision pursuant to Section 5.70.080. The notice will provide information on the appeal process and will state the alleged grounds for the proposed revocation or suspension of the permit. Said notice will also state that if no written request for an appeal hearing is timely received, the applicant will be deemed to waive its rights to an appeal. The notice will be served on the applicant personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail by certified mail at the most recent home or business address on file with the police department.

     2.     Surrender of Suspended or Revoked Massage Establishment Permit to Police Chief. Upon a written decision by the police chief; or in the event of an appeal, a written decision by the hearing officer, which suspends or revokes a permit, the permit will immediately be surrendered to the police chief and the massage establishment will cease provision of massage services. In the case of a suspension, the police chief will return the permit after the period of suspension has ended.

     C.     Immediate Suspension or Revocation of a Massage Establishment Permit.

     1.     The police chief may immediately suspend and/or revoke a massage establishment permit if there is reasonable cause to believe that:

     a.     The applicant is operating or managing the massage establishment, or providing services in a manner which poses an immediate danger to the health or safety of employees, clients, or the public; or

     b.     The applicant has been convicted of any offense involving lewdness, indecent exposure, prostitution, sexual battery, human trafficking, or any sex-related crime.

     c.     There are massage therapists onsite, but none of the massage therapists present are CAMTC certified massage therapists.

     2.     If the police chief immediately suspends and/or revokes a permit, the police chief will provide notice to the applicant by personal delivery or by certified mail. The notice will contain a statement that the massage establishment permit is immediately suspended and/or revoked, and such decision will remain in effect during the pendency of the appeal process. The notice will provide information on the appeal process. If applicable, the notice will contain a statement that the suspension may lead to a permanent revocation of the massage establishment permit.

     3.     Following the receipt of such immediate suspension and/or revocation notice and within ten calendar days thereafter, the applicant may file an appeal of the suspension and/or revocation and request a hearing be held in accordance with Section 5.70.080.

     4.     If after ten calendar days from the receipt of the immediate suspension and/or revocation notice, the applicant has not requested an appeal, the police chief’s decision to suspend and/or revoke will become final.

     D.    Effect of Suspension. If a massage establishment permit is suspended, the massage establishment will cease providing massage services for the period of suspension.

     E.     Effect of Revocation. If a massage establishment permit is revoked, no massage establishment will be authorized or permitted to operate in the same location where the massage establishment permit was revoked for a period of two years from the effective date of the revocation. If the applicant is not also the legal owner of the real property on which the massage establishment is situated, notice of such revocation and the two year prohibition will be provided the owner of record of the property as shown on the latest county assessment roll. (Ord. 1016 § 2, 2020)

 

5.70.080 Appeal.
     A.    A person dissatisfied with the action of the chief under this chapter, may appeal the decision by delivering to the city clerk not more than ten days after the effective date of the decision, a written notice of appeal, along with a brief description of the reasons for the appeal. The clerk will immediately forward the request to the city manager for handling. In the event a notice of appeal is timely filed, the chief’s decision is stayed until a final order has been rendered by the hearing officer.

     B.     The city manager will upon receipt of the appeal set the matter for hearing before a hearing officer designated by the city manager. The hearing will be scheduled for not more than thirty days after receipt of the appeal unless a longer time is requested or consented to by the appellant. The hearing will not be conducted under the formal rules of evidence.

     C.     Within ten days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer will make a written finding and decision, which will be delivered to the city manager and chief and to the appellant by first class mail.

     D.    The decision of the hearing officer will be final.

     E.     Failure to appeal an action of the chief under this chapter will be deemed a failure of the person to exhaust their administrative remedies. (Ord. 1016 § 2, 2020)

 

5.70.090 Department coordination with CAMTC.
     The chief will designate a person in the police department to coordinate with CAMTC, including maintaining a list of certified therapists practicing in the city, maintaining a list of massage establishments operating in the city, receiving notices and information from CAMTC, and notifying CAMTC of any information related to alleged criminal activity or unprofessional conduct. (Business and Professions Code Section 4614.) (Ord. 1016 § 2, 2020)

 

5.70.100 Property owner responsibility.
     Any place where lewdness or prostitution occurs is a public nuisance which may be abated and permanently enjoined, and for which the city may recover damages from the property owner, as well as from the person conducting or maintaining the nuisance. (Penal Code Sections 11225 and 11226.) (Ord. 1016 § 2, 2020)

 

5.70.110 Enforcement.
     A.    It is the duty of the chief to enforce this chapter, and to coordinate its enforcement efforts with CAMTC under Section 5.70.090.

     B.     Pursuant to the city’s prosecutorial discretion, the city may enforce violations of this chapter by criminal, civil and/or administrative actions, including, but not limited to, administrative citation fines as set forth in Chapter 1.24 of this code. Notwithstanding Section 1.24.020, the prior written notice required in subsection A and the report required in subsection B of Section 1.24.020, are not required prior to issuing an administrative citation for a violation of this chapter, except as otherwise provided by state law.

     C.     Any person who violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

     D.    Any massage establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter will be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city may, in the exercise of discretion, in addition to or in lieu of the remedies prescribed hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in any manner provided by law, including, but not limited to, the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.00 of this code.

     E.     All remedies prescribed by the provisions of this chapter will be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the city will not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1016 § 2, 2020)

Chapter 5.72 COMPUTER GAMING AND INTERNET ACCESS ESTABLISHMENTS
5.72.010 Findings—Purpose.
     A.    Findings.

     1.     The city council has considered written documentation, included in the staff report, documenting the link between computer gaming and Internet access establishments and criminal behavior and related detrimental neighborhood effects.

     2.     Computer gaming and Internet access establishments also often have local school students and minors as their target market, and thereby may encourage the assembly of significant numbers of minors without supervision by parents or guardians. Further, given concerns about high school attendance, such congregation of students should not be allowed during regular school hours.

     3.     The city council of the city of Brentwood finds that the Brentwood Municipal Code does not currently provide adequate standards and regulations concerning the review, approval and operation of computer gaming and Internet access establishments. As a result, the city may be vulnerable to the detrimental impacts that have become frequently associated with the activities of computer gaming and Internet access establishments.

     4.     The city council seeks to regulate computer gaming and Internet access establishments to promote the protection of the public from the dangers of fire and hazards to health, to ensure the full protection of minors, and for the general preservation of the peace and welfare of this community.

     5.     The intent of this chapter is to protect the city, its neighborhoods, and its inhabitants from the detrimental effect of computer gaming and Internet access establishments, while allowing for their establishment as consistent with state and federal laws and regulations.

     6.     The city council further finds that this chapter constitutes a matter of city-wide importance and is not directed towards or targeted at any particular parcel of property, any particular business or any proposed occupant or development.

     B.     Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate computer gaming and Internet access establishments to promote the protection of the public from the dangers of fire and hazards to health, to ensure the full protection of minors, and for the general preservation of the peace and welfare of this community. It is the intent of the city to establish minimally intrusive protocols to provide reasonable accountability for computer gaming and Internet access and use at computer gaming and Internet access establishments. The city finds such accountability to be reasonably necessary to minimize the risk of use of the computer and/or Internet by persons at computer gaming and Internet access establishments for criminal purposes and to increase the opportunities for safe apprehension of such persons patronizing computer gaming and Internet access establishments for criminal purposes, while recognizing the rights of individuals to use the Internet and computer gaming and Internet access establishments for legitimate purposes. (Ord. 907 § 2, 2012)

 

5.72.020 Definitions.
     A.    “Computer gaming and Internet access establishment” means an establishment that provides more than four computers or other electronic devices for access to the World Wide Web, Internet, e-mail, video games or computer software programs which operates alone or are networked (via LAN, WAN or otherwise) or which function as a client/server program, and which seeks compensation, in any form, from users. Computer gaming and Internet access establishment is synonymous with a personal computer (“PC”) café, Internet café, cybercafé, sweepstakes gaming facilities, Internet sales business and Internet center, but does not include a public use or Internet learning center as defined herein.

     B.     “Public use or Internet learning center” means an establishment that provides computer access which is operated by the city of Brentwood, a school district, a library, a college district, or a private institution of learning which provides classes in computer instruction or uses computers to aid in academic instruction or a nonprofit organization which does not receive compensation in any form other than school tuition. (Ord. 907 § 2, 2012)

 

5.72.030 Computer gaming and Internet access establishments—License required.
     It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises or real property located within the city, the activities of a computer gaming and Internet access establishment, unless such person has been granted a valid license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. A separate license shall be required for each location within the city where a computer gaming and Internet access establishment is to be established. Public use or Internet learning centers shall be exempt from the license requirements herein. (Ord. 907 § 2, 2012)

 

5.72.040 Term of license.
     The term of a computer gaming and Internet access establishment license, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall be one year. (Ord. 907 § 2, 2012)

 

5.72.050 Renewal of license.
     A computer gaming and Internet access establishment license, issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, that has not been suspended or revoked, may be renewed, upon payment of the renewal nonrefundable application fee, for a period not to exceed one year upon written application to the chief of police made at least sixty days prior to the expiration date of the current valid license. This application for renewal of license shall contain all of the information required by Section 5.72.060 of this chapter and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 907 § 2, 2012)

 

5.72.060 License application and issuance.
     A.    Any person desiring to obtain a license or to renew an existing license to operate a computer gaming and Internet access establishment shall file a written application with the chief of police. The application shall be in addition to applications for any land use entitlements necessary to establish the use on the property identified on the application as the site of the proposed business. The application shall be signed under the penalty of perjury. Prior to submitting the application, a nonrefundable fee; in an amount established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the city to defray the cost of the investigation and issuance required by this chapter. The license issuance or renewal fee required under this chapter shall be in addition to any other license or fees required under this code, including, but not limited to, a business license from the city.

     B.     Neither the filing of an application for license or renewal thereof nor payment of an application or renewal fee shall authorize the operation of a computer gaming and Internet access establishment until such license has been granted or renewed by the city.

     C.     The application for a license required hereunder shall be on a form prescribed by the city manager and shall require all applicants for a computer gaming and Internet access establishment license or renewals thereof to furnish the following information:

     1.     The present or proposed address where the business is to be conducted;

     2.     The full and true name under which the business will be conducted;

     3.     The full and true name and any other names used by the applicant and owner if the owner is not the applicant of the business;

     4.     The applicant and owner’s present residential and business addresses and telephone numbers;

     5.     Each residential and business address of the applicant and owner for the five-year period immediately preceding the date of filing the application and the inclusive dates of each address;

     6.     The California driver’s license or identification number of the applicant and owner;

     7.     A precise description of the activities and/or services to be provided;

     8.     A detailed site and floor plan of the proposed business, depicting the building and unit proposed and including interior dimensions and off-street parking spaces required by the city’s zoning code;

     9.     A detailed description of the food and beverage service, if any, that will be offered to patrons;

     10.   The dates and hours during which the computer gaming and Internet access establishment is desired to be conducted and a list of the fees to be charged patrons;

     11.   The names of persons responsible for the operation, management, and supervision of the computer gaming and Internet access establishment;

     12.   A statement as to whether the applicant, owner, or any person to be responsible for operation, management, and supervision of the computer gaming and Internet access establishment has, within the past five years, had any permit or license issued in conjunction with a computer gaming and Internet access establishment in any jurisdiction, and if so, then the application shall provide the name of the issuing agency and the date of issuance of any such permit(s) or license(s). If any such permit or license was revoked or suspended, the application shall provide the date of suspension or revocation and an explanation of the suspension or revocation;

     13.   Signature of the property owner indicating approval of the submission of the license application;

     14.   Live Scan examination (fingerprint check) of all persons responsible for the operation, management and supervision of the computer gaming and Internet access establishment, subject to the discretion of the chief of police; and

     15.   Such other information as the chief of police may require to discover the truth of the information to be provided in the application.

     D.    A notice of intent to apply for permits for a computer gaming and Internet access establishment must be posted on the premises in question within five days of the filing of an application for any permit hereunder in addition to the public notice requirements of this municipal code.

     E.     The applicant shall present proof to the chief of police that the required application or application renewal fee has been paid, and shall present the application containing the information and supporting documentation required by subsection C of this section. A copy of the application shall be distributed to the city’s community development department, the police department and the fire district for review.

     F.     When any change occurs regarding the written information required by subsection C of this section to be included in the application, the applicant or license holder, as the case may be, shall give written notification of such change to the chief of police within five business days of such change.

     G.    The chief of police shall have a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty days, to determine whether the police department has received sufficient information on the application to approve or deny said application. If sufficient information has not been received, the chief of police will notify the applicant of any specific information needed to deem the application complete. Once the chief of police has received sufficient information to deem the application complete, the police department shall have an additional thirty days to investigate the facts set forth in the application and to receive comments from the city’s community development department, the police department and the fire district. The chief of police shall, within thirty days after the date that the application is deemed complete, grant the license or renewal thereof only if it is found that all of the following requirements have been met:

     1.     The required fees have been paid;

     2.     The application is complete, and all information contained therein conforms in all respects to the provision of this chapter;

     3.     The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application;

     4.     The applicant has not owned, operated, or associated with any computer gaming and Internet access establishment, or any similarly licensed or permitted establishment, that has had its license, certificate, or permit revoked by the city or any public agency during the seven years preceding the date of the application;

     5.     The applicant has not been successfully prosecuted under the Red Light Abatement Act (California Penal Code Section 11225 et seq.) or any similar law in another jurisdiction during seven years preceding the date of the application;

     6.     The applicant has never been convicted of, or pled guilty or no contest to an offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, 11058, 11351, 11352, 11358 through 11363 or 11378 through 11380 of the California Health and Safety Code, or equivalent offenses under the laws of another jurisdiction, even if expunged pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4; or

     7.     The computer gaming and Internet access establishment as proposed by the applicant would fully comply with all applicable city, county and state laws, including, but not limited to, the city’s building, zoning, health, and fire safety ordinances and standards;

     8.     The proposal for the computer gaming and Internet access establishment, as described in the application, includes all reasonable measures to ensure that the business would not generate criminal activities, present unnecessary criminal opportunities, or tend to cause violations of curfews by minors due to failure to comply with federal or state law or the municipal code, including, but not limited to, the operational standards set forth in Section 5.72.110;

     9.     The applicant is at least eighteen years of age; and

     10.   The computer gaming and Internet access establishment site and floor plan have been reviewed by the city’s community development department and the police department and fire district, which have approved the same as well as all fire and panic safety equipment required to be installed; all requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act have been satisfied; and that the maximum occupancy has been established, will be posted, and will not likely be exceeded based on the floor plan.

     H.    No operator shall install or allow any Internet gaming or computer equipment to be installed in any place of business that requires a permit as provided for in this chapter unless and until the operator has been issued such a permit.

     I.      If the chief of police does not find that all of the requirements of subsection G of this section have been met, the application shall be denied.

     J.      In the event that an application for a license or renewal thereof is denied, written notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant within sixty days after the date of the filing of the application, specifying the grounds of the denial and a description of the hearing rights provided by Section 5.72.070. Notice of denial of the application may be personally served or served by first class postage-prepaid and addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the application. Mailed notice shall be deemed received three days after mailing. (Ord. 907 § 2, 2012)

 

5.72.070 Appeal.
     A.    A decision of the chief, or designee, under this chapter may be appealed to the city manager. The person filing an appeal shall do so in writing, accompanied by the appeal fee as prescribed by a resolution of the city council, within ten days after the decision being appealed, and shall state specifically the grounds for the appeal.

     B.     The city manager or designee shall hear the appeal within ten working days, after giving the permittee at least five days written notice of the time and place of the hearing. The decision of the city manager or designee is final.

     C.     Failure to appeal an action of the chief of police or designee under this chapter shall be deemed a failure of the applicant/permittee to exhaust their administrative remedies.

     D.    The time for a court challenge to a decision under this section is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8 and notice of the city’s decision and its findings shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 907 § 2, 2012)

 

5.72.080 Transfer of license.
     Unless prior application is made, thereafter approved, and a license issued thereon, upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a computer gaming and Internet access establishment, the license shall immediately become null and void. A new application must be made and a new fee paid by any person desiring to own or operate the computer gaming and Internet access establishment. Any application involving the sale or transfer of any interest in an existing computer gaming and Internet access establishment and any license which may thereafter be granted shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 907 § 2, 2012)

 

5.72.090 Alterations to computer gaming and Internet access establishments.
     A.    A holder of a valid computer gaming and Internet access establishment license shall notify the chief of police, in writing, of any proposed change in the business location, floor plan or business name at least thirty days prior to such change.

     B.     Nothing in this section shall excuse the owner of a computer gaming and Internet access establishment from obtaining any other approvals necessary to change in location, floor plan or business name, including, but not limited to, building permits. (Ord. 907 § 2, 2012)

 

5.72.100 License revocation.
     A.    If the city finds that any person holding a computer gaming and Internet access establishment license has violated or allowed the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or has failed to comply with any requirements of the chief of police issued pursuant to Section 5.72.110(G) or (I), or has conducted business in a manner that could have been grounds for a license denial, the license may be revoked following notice and hearing.

     B.     No application shall become effective until the license holder has been notified in writing of the right to a hearing pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.72.070 of this chapter.

     C.     If the request for hearing is filed within ten calendar days from the notice provided in subsection B, the city shall conduct an appeal hearing as provided in Section 5.72.070. The revocation shall be stayed pending the decision, unless, in the determination of the city manager, immediate suspension pending the hearing is necessary due to an immediate threat to public health, safety or welfare. Otherwise, the revocation shall become effective upon expiration of the appeal period or expiration of the current license, whichever comes first. (Ord. 907 § 2, 2012)

 

5.72.110 Operational standards and regulations.
     Unless an exception is specifically granted by the city to the licensee, all computer gaming and Internet access establishments shall establish and remain in compliance with the following:

     A.    Prohibitions Regarding Minors.

     1.     Minors (under eighteen years of age) shall not be permitted to enter or remain in a computer gaming and Internet access establishment during any time that he or she is required to be in attendance at school unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.

     2.     Minors (under eighteen years of age) shall not be permitted to enter or remain in any computer gaming and Internet access establishment during the hours of the curfew for minors established under municipal code Section 9.68.010 (between the hours of ten p.m. and five a.m., Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, or twelve a.m. and five a.m. on Friday and Saturday).

     3.     Signs shall be placed at the entrance of the business and inside the business setting forth these restrictions in lettering of at least two inches in size.

     B.     Hours of Operation. The computer gaming and Internet access establishment shall not be open to customers, patrons or any member of the public between the hours of twelve a.m. and eight a.m. on Friday, Saturday and Sunday or between the hours of eleven p.m. and eight a.m., Monday through Thursday.

     C.     Interior Waiting Area. An interior waiting area of not less than eight seats shall be provided for customers waiting to use a computer. The number of seats shall be increased by one for every five additional computers beyond twenty-five computers in the business. No outside waiting or seating area is permitted.

     D.    No Smoking or Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages. No person shall be permitted to smoke or consume alcoholic beverages on the inside of the premises. The sale of cigarettes and alcohol on the premises is prohibited. No intoxicated or disorderly persons shall be allowed to remain on the premises.

     E.     Staffing. Employees shall be at least eighteen years of age. There shall be a minimum of two employees staffing the computer gaming and Internet access establishment during all working hours with at least one manager or supervisor. The ratio of employees to computers and/or other electronic devices to access the Internet shall be 2:15. During each employee’s work hours, the employee shall wear a badge identifying the business and the employee’s full name. Security personnel indicated in subsection I, shall not be included in this minimum staffing number.

     F.     Occupancy. Occupancy shall not exceed that required under the uniform building code and the uniform fire code. The maximum occupancy load shall be posted at the main entrance.

     G.    Surveillance System.

     1.     The chief of police may require a computer gaming and Internet access establishment operator to install a digital camera/video surveillance system on the premises if the police department determines, in its sole discretion, that there are or have been repeated calls for police services, or there exists a strong likelihood that the computer gaming and Internet access establishment will create a need for repeated calls for police services, relating to the premises including, but not limited to, assaults, public intoxication, vandalism, gang activities, weapons offenses, disturbances of the peace, and juvenile crimes including truancy. This requirement may be imposed before or after issuance of the license.

     2.     In the event of such a determination, the establishment shall maintain and operate a camera/video surveillance system during all business hours. The system shall cover the entire interior of the premises and all entrances to and exits from the establishment. Tapes/disks shall be kept a minimum of fourteen calendar days, or as required by the chief of police. The owner shall permit a representative of the police department’s office to inspect the tapes/disks during business hours.

     3.     A sign shall be posted inside and at the entrances to the establishment indicating that the premises are under camera/video surveillance.

     H.    Window Coverings. Windows and window areas shall not be covered, tinted or made opaque in any way, or obscured in any way by landscaping, floor displays, equipment or the like, excepting during daylight hours when partial blinds or other equivalent window coverings may be used, provided that the interior remains visible from the public right-of-way.

     I.      Security Guards.

     1.     All computer gaming and Internet access establishment operators shall provide one or more security guards on the premises, with the number of security guards to be determined by the chief of police. In the event there are repeated calls for police services relating to the premises including, but not limited to, assaults, gang activity, weapons offenses, disturbances of the peace and juvenile crimes including truancy, the chief of police may require additional security guards during specific hours or during all business hours, if deemed necessary.

     2.     The security guard shall be uniformed and shall be employed by a private patrol operator that is currently licensed with the California Department of Consumer Affairs. The name of the patrol operator with the state license number and the guard registration numbers shall be provided to the police department. Any changes to the patrol operator shall be approved by the police chief at least two working days prior to the patrol operator taking over security at the business.

     3.     The security guard shall also patrol the exterior of the business and any parking lot areas.

     4.     The chief of police may require more than one security guard if there are more than fifteen computers or similar devices or continued repeated calls for service indicate that one security guard is not adequate.

     J.      No Adult-Oriented Business. No adult-oriented business activities, as defined in Section 17.690.020 of this code, shall be allowed on the premises of any computer gaming and Internet access establishment. Any access to websites featuring adult theater or any use constituting an adult arcade, as each is defined in Section 17.690.020, is prohibited.

     K.    No Other Amusement Devices. No pool tables or other amusement devices not directly related to the Internet and similar computer devices shall be permitted in the business.

     L.     No Tournaments. No gaming tournaments for cash prizes deemed to be gambling under the provisions of state law shall be permitted.

     M.    Interior Signs. User rates and other fees must be conspicuously posted on the premises.

     N.    No Illegal Gambling. Under no circumstances shall electronic game machines, which include computers and other amusement devices, be used for illegal gambling or gaming. The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring customers do not use any electronic game machine for illegal gaming or gambling.

     O.    No Litter. The applicant shall provide adequate trash receptacles both inside and outside of the building. The applicant shall keep the outside of the business, including the parking lot servicing the establishment, free of litter, trash and debris.

     P.     No Private Booths. Any booth or individual computer use area within the business shall be visible from a continuous and accessible main aisle in a public portion of the computer gaming and Internet access establishment, and shall not be obscured by any door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror or other device which would prohibit a person from seeing the entire interior of the booth/individual viewing area from the main aisle. Further, no one shall maintain any booth/individual viewing area in any configuration unless the entire interior wherein the computer that is being used is visible from one main aisle. No doors are permitted on a booth/individual viewing area. No partially or fully enclosed booth/individual viewing areas or partially or fully concealed booth/individual viewing areas shall be maintained.

     Q.    Alarm System. The chief of police may require a specific computer gaming and Internet access establishment operator to install an alarm system that distinguishes between a burglary and a robbery. The system shall monitor twenty-four hours per day. All public entrance and exit doors to the business shall have electronic monitoring systems that produce a sound when a person traverses the doorway. If required by the chief of police, the system shall be electronically connected with the police department if activated.

     R.     Number of Computers. The number of computers or similar devices in any computer gaming and Internet access establishment shall not exceed one per thirty square feet of floor area that is dedicated to the placement of computers for rent or charge.

     S.     Outside Lighting. Lighting shall be provided for security outside the establishment, subject to the review and approval of the community development department. (Ord. 907 § 2, 2012)

 

5.72.120 Abatement of nuisance.
     Any computer gaming and Internet access establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance under Chapter 8.00 of this municipal code, and the city may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedy, commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal or enjoyment thereof, and may take such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief to abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a computer gaming and Internet access establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 907 § 2, 2012)

 

5.72.130 Penalty.
     It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not mere than one thousand dollars, by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or any portion thereof, during which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this section. (Ord. 907 § 2, 2012)

 

5.72.140 License and appeal fees.
     The council shall, by resolution, set a fee for application for, and for renewal of, a computer gaming and Internet access establishment license, and for an appeal of a decision of the chief, or designee, under this chapter as described in Section 5.72.070. (Ord. 907 § 2, 2012)

 

5.72.150 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. (Ord. 907 § 2, 2012)

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL CONTROL
Chapter 6.08 FOWL AND SMALL LIVESTOCK
Chapter 6.12 ANIMAL CONTROL CODE

Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL CONTROL
6.04.010 Certain sections of Food and Agricultural Code adopted.
     It is deemed in the best interest of the city of Brentwood that it request the application of the provisions of Sections 51-2.202 through 51-2.1202 of the Food and Agricultural Code of the state of California as amended, and it requests the board of supervisors that said sections of said code as heretofore and hereafter amended apply throughout the city of Brentwood, which sections as amended are adopted. (Ord. 212, 1970)

 

6.04.020 Food and Agricultural Code— Required to be on file in clerk’s office.
     The city clerk of the city of Brentwood is directed to maintain on file in his or her office, three certified copies of Sections 51-2.202 through 51-2.1202 of the Food and Agricultural Code of the state of California as amended. (Ord. 212, 1970)

Chapter 6.08 FOWL AND SMALL LIVESTOCK
6.08.010 Keeping of fowl and animals restricted—Accumulation of offal unlawful.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep any chickens, ducks, pigeons, geese, turkeys, rabbits, Belgian hares, guinea pigs or other domestic fowl or animals in any enclosure in the city of Brentwood unless the exterior boundaries of the enclosure are more than twenty feet from any dwelling, church or school. It is unlawful to permit the accumulation of offal or manure in any coop or enclosure in which such fowl or animals are kept. (Ord. 32 § 1, 1949)

 

6.08.020 Exceptions—Written consent— Markets.
     The terms of this chapter shall not apply to such domestic fowl or animals kept in any enclosure within twenty feet from any dwelling, with the written consent of the owner thereof, or to domestic fowl or animals kept in a bona fide produce market. (Ord. 32 § 2, 1949)

 

6.08.030 Permitting fowl and animals to run about unlawful.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having possession of any pigeons, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, rabbits, Belgian hares, guinea pigs or any other domestic fowl or animals, to permit the same to run or go upon the premises of any other person, firm or corporation within the city of Brentwood. (Ord. 32 § 3, 1949)

 

6.08.040 Violation a misdemeanor— Penalty.
     Every person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months in the city jail of the city of Brentwood or the County Jail of the county of Contra Costa, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 32 § 4, 1949)

Chapter 6.12 ANIMAL CONTROL CODE
6.12.010 Adoption by reference of county’s animal control code.
     The board of supervisors of the county of Contra Costa, an agency of the state of California within the meaning of Government Code Section 50022.1, has adopted county ordinances Nos. 80-97, 83-10, 85-23, 87-74, 2005-24, 2006-05, 2011-08, 2011-09, 2016-02, 2017-12 and 2018-13 being a codification of provisions for animal control services (and constituting Chapters 416-2 to 416-12 of Division 416 of the County Ordinance Code), and it is a code within the meaning of Government Code Section 50022.2; and certified copies of it are and have been on file with the city clerk where they are open to public inspections, all as required by Government Code Section 50022.3. This animal control code is referred to and adopted by this reference as part of this chapter, as provided for in Government Code Section 50022.2. (Ord. 1003 § 1, 2018; Ord. 914 § 3, 2013; Ord. 591 § 6 (Exh. A), 1997; Ord. 421 § 2, 1988)

 

6.12.020 Penalties.
     A.    Pursuant to Food and Agriculture Code Section 31401, violations of Division 416 of the Contra Costa County Code, excepting Chapter 416-10 and Article 416-12.2, are punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars for the first offense, and not more than one hundred dollars for the second or subsequent offense.

     B.     Notwithstanding subsection A above, violation of Section 416-4.404 Abandonment, excluding abandonments under Section 416-8.014, is a misdemeanor and punishable as such.

     C.     Violation of Chapter 416-10, Rabies Control, except for the provisions of Section 416-10.010(b), is a misdemeanor. Except as otherwise provided by state law, every misdemeanor violation is punishable, upon conviction thereof, by imprisonment in the County Jail for not over six months and/or by a fine of not over one thousand dollars. (See Government Code Section 36901; Penal Code Section 19.) Violation of Section 416-10.010(b) is subject to subsection A above.

     D.    The department may issue an administrative penalty under Article 416-4.8 to any responsible person for a violation of Section 416-12.202, Animal Noise, based on either or both of the following:

     1.     An observation of the violation by a department employee.

     2.     A complaint, signed under penalty of perjury, lodged by a person who has been disturbed by the barking dog or noisy animal.

     E.     Violation of Article 416-12.2, Nuisance, is an infraction. Except as otherwise provided by statute, every infraction violation is punishable, upon conviction thereof, by:

     1.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

     2.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year;

     3.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. (See Government Code Section 25132(b).)

     F.     It shall be a misdemeanor for any owner or keeper of an animal previously designated as dangerous to violate any of the conditions of the dangerous animal permit under Section 416-12.422 of the Contra Costa County Code, punishable as provided by law. If an owner or keeper is convicted of violating this section, the court may, upon good cause, order the dangerous animals seized, declared a nuisance and destroyed. Any person convicted in violation of this section shall be prohibited from owning, harboring or keeping any animal within Contra Costa County for a minimum of five years.

     G.    Prohibited Dog Ownership by Convicted Felons.

     1.     Any person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, of the state of California, or any other state, government, or country, who owns, purchases, receives, or has in his or her possession or under his or her custody or control a dog that poses a danger to the public’s health, safety or welfare if that dog is misused by a convicted felon is guilty of a misdemeanor, unless the person possesses a current, valid prohibited dog permit for that dog as provided in Section 416-12.438 of the Contra Costa County Code. A convicted felon under Article 416-12.4 of the Contra Costa County Code shall not include felons whose convictions were set aside pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4. “Misuse” by a convicted felon means use of a dog in a threatening or aggressive manner, or in the commission of a crime.

     2.     Any dog whose owner or keeper is in violation of this section shall be impounded, or impounded subject to destruction, at the owner’s expense.

     3.     “A dog that poses a danger to the public’s health, safety or welfare if that dog is misused by a convicted felon” under this section means any of the following:

     a.     A dog weighing more than twenty pounds;

     b.     A dog that has been designated a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal under Sections 416-12.402 and 416-12.404 of the Contra Costa County Code;

     c.     A dog designated by the animal services director as posing a danger to the public’s health, safety or welfare if that dog is misused by a convicted felon based upon the following factors:

     i.      The nature of any complaints regarding the dog,

     ii.     The strength of the dog, including jaw strength,

     iii.    The dog’s tolerance for pain,

     iv.    The dog’s tendency to refuse to terminate an attack,

     v.     The dog’s potential propensity to bite humans or other domestic animals,

     vi.    The dog’s potential for unpredictable behavior,

     vii.   The dog’s aggressiveness,

     viii.  The likelihood that a bite by the dog will result in serious injury.

     This section shall not apply to any assistance dog, including guide dogs, signal dogs and service dogs, trained or in training to assist a qualified individual with a disability. (Ord. 1003 § 1, 2018; Ord. 914 § 4, 2013; Ord. 591 § 6 (Exh. A), 1997; Ord. 421 § 3, 1988)

 

6.12.025 Administrative penalties.
     This section sets forth Article 416-4.8 of the Contra Costa County Code, as adopted by Contra Costa County Ord. No. 2017-12, and provides for administrative penalties that the county animal services department may impose, enforce, and collect to address any violation of Division 416 as adopted by the city of Brentwood.

 

416-4.802 - Applicability and Authorization.

        (a) This article provides for administrative fines that the animal services department may impose, enforce, and collect to address any violation of this division.

        (b) Remedies under this article are in addition to any other remedy allowed by this code or applicable law.

        (c) This article is authorized by California Government Code Section 53069.4.

 

416-4.804 - Definitions.

For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases have the following meanings:

        “Complainant” means a person who reports a violation of any section of Division 416 to the department.

        “Department” means the Contra Costa County animal services department.

        “Effective date” means the date by which a violation must be corrected, as specified in a notice of violation.

 

        “Hearing examiner” means the animal services director, or the animal services director’s designee.

        “Responsible person” means any of the following:

        (1) A person who possesses, has title to, has an interest in, or has control, custody or possession of an animal or the property on which an animal is kept.

        (2) A person who allows, or whose agent, employee, or contractor allows, a barking dog or other noisy animal violation to exist, whether through action, failure to act, or failure to exercise control over a barking dog or other noisy animal.

        (3) For purposes of this article, there may be more than one responsible person for a barking dog or other noisy animal violation.

        “Service date” means the date a notice or decision is served in accordance with Section 416-4.816.

 

416-4.806 - Administrative Fines.

        (a) Notice of violation. If a violation is a continuing violation, such as the failure to obtain a dog or cat license, the department will first serve a notice of violation on the responsible person as specified in Section 416-4.816. The notice of violation will include all of the following information:

        (1) The date of the violation.

        (2) The name of the responsible person.

        (3) The address or location where the violation occurred.

        (4) The code section(s) violated and a description of the violation.

        (5) Whether the violation(s) were established by inspection or by complaint, if applicable.

        (6) A description of how the violation can be corrected.

        (7) A specified time period of at least ten calendar days, beginning on the service date, within which the violation must be corrected.

        (8) An advisement that the owner may be subject to an administrative fine under this article if the violation is not corrected by the effective date, and the amount of that fine.

        (b) The department may impose an administrative fine on a responsible person if any of the following occur:

        (1) The violation is not a continuing violation, such as a violation of the animal noise ordinance.

        (2) The continuing violation has not been corrected in the time period specified in the notice of violation.

        (3) The continuing violation was corrected as specified in the notice of violation, but a violation of the same section continues, exists, or occurs within one year after the effective date.

        (c) Notice of fine. An administrative fine will be assessed by means of a notice of fine. The responsible party will be served with the notice of fine as specified in Section 416-4.816. The notice of fine will include all of the following information:

        (1) The date of the violation.

        (2) The code section (s) violated and a description of the violation.

        (3) The amount of the fine.

        (4) An advisement of the right to request a hearing before the hearing examiner, contesting the imposition of the fine.

        (d) For a continuing violation, the amount of the fine is one hundred dollars for the first notice of fine. If the owner fails to correct the violation after the first notice of fine, and a second notice of fine is issued in the same year, the amount of the fine in the second notice is two hundred dollars. If the owner still fails to correct the violation after the second notice of fine, the amount of the fine is five hundred dollars for each additional notice of fine that is sent within one year.

        (e) If the violation is not a continuing violation, the amount of the fine is one hundred dollars for a first violation, two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same section within one year, and five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year.

 

416-4.808 - Hearings.

        (a) Any person upon whom an administrative fine is imposed by the department may request a hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section. The appellant must file a written appeal with the department within fifteen calendar days after the service date of the notice of fine. The written appeal must contain:

        (1) A brief statement explaining who the appealing party is and what interest the appealing party has in challenging the imposition of the fine; and

        (2) A brief statement of the material facts that the appellant claims supports his or her contention that no administrative fine should be imposed or that an administrative fine of a different amount is warranted.

        (b) Notice of the hearing will be served on the appellant and the complainant, if any, as specified in Section 416-4.816. The department will set the hearing no sooner than twenty days and no later than forty-five days following the service date of the notice of hearing.

        (c) The hearing of an administrative fine imposed for violations of this division will be heard by the hearing examiner.

        (d) At the hearing, the appellant and complainant, if any, will be given the opportunity to testify, and present written and oral evidence.

        (e) An appellant’s failure to appear at the hearing shall constitute an abandonment of any defense the appellant may have to the administrative fine.

        (f) Where applicable, a complainant’s failure to appear at the hearing shall constitute an abandonment of the complaint and shall be grounds for a dismissal of the administrative fine.

        (g) After considering the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, or after the appellant or complainant has failed to appear at the hearing, the hearing examiner will issue a written decision to uphold, modify, or cancel the administrative fine and will list in the decision the reason or reasons for that decision. The decision will be served as specified in Section 416-4.816.

 

416-4.810 - Final Administrative Order.

The imposition of the administrative fine becomes a final administrative order at one of the following times:

        (a) On the date the notice of fine is served, if the responsible party fails to file a written appeal to the department within the time specified.

        (b) On the date the written decision by the hearing examiner is served, if the responsible party files a written appeal to the department within the time specified.

 

416-4.812 - Payment of the Fine.

The fine must be paid to the county within thirty days after the imposition of the administrative fine becomes a final administrative order. Payment of a fine under this article does not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of the violation that is the subject of the notice of fine. The payment of a fine does not bar the county from taking any other enforcement action regarding a violation that is not corrected.

 

416-4.814 - Collection.

If the fine is not paid within thirty days after the imposition of the fine becomes a final administrative order, the county may collect the fine, the county’s collection costs, and interest. An administrative fine accrues interest at the same annual rate as any civil judgment, beginning on the twentieth day after the fine becomes a final administrative order. The county may collect by using any available legal means, including but not limited to the following:

        (a) The county may file a civil action. If a civil action is commenced, the county is entitled to recover all costs associated with the collection of the fine, including those costs set forth in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1033.5.

        (b) The county may take such other actions as are allowed for enforcement of a civil judgment as provided for pursuant to the Enforcement of Judgments Law, California Code of Civil Procedure Section 680.010 et seq.

 

416-4.816 - Service.

All notices or decisions required to be served by this article will be served by any of the methods specified below:

        (a) First class mail. First class mail will be addressed to the responsible person at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll, at the address where the violation occurred, or as otherwise known. Service is deemed completed upon the deposit of the notice or decision, postage pre-paid, in the United States mail.

        (b) Personal service. Personal service is deemed complete on the date the notice or decision is personally served on the responsible person.

 

416-4.818 - Judicial Review.

A final administrative order may be appealed to the superior court of the county in accordance with the provisions set forth in Government Code Section 53069.4.

(Ord. 1003 § 1, 2018)

6.12.030 Request enforcement in city.
     The county ordinance referred to and adopted by this chapter contains the provisions of those sections of the California Food and Agricultural Code referred to in Section 30501, and therefore this chapter constitutes the city’s request that the provisions of this county ordinance be applicable within this city, and they shall hereafter so apply, pursuant to Food and Agricultural Code Section 30501. (Ord. 1003 § 1, 2018; Ord. 591 § 6 (Exh. A), 1997; Ord. 421 § 4, 1988)

Title 7 PARKS AND RECREATION
Chapter 7.01 PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
Chapter 7.02 PARKS AND FACILITIES
Chapter 7.03 TREES AND SHRUBS
Chapter 7.04 (RESERVED)
Chapter 7.05 RECREATION
Chapter 7.06 TRAILS
Chapter 7.07 APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAWS/PENALTIES

Chapter 7.01 PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
7.01.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this title is to regulate the use of the parks and recreation facilities of the city in order to provide maximum enjoyment in the use of such parks and facilities and reduce disturbance or interference with the use of surrounding areas. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.01.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this title, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this title are defined as follows:

     “Alcoholic beverage” means alcohol, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.

     “Applicant” means the individual requesting a permit in Chapter 7.02 or a property owner requesting permission to remove a tree on improved property in Chapters 7.03 and 7.04.

     “Bicycle” means any two- or three-wheeled vehicle propelled by the use of human power and includes road bikes, mountain bikes, BMX bikes and similar devices.

     “Brentwood service area” means within the city limits.

     “Certified or consulting arborist” means an arborist who is registered with the international society of arboriculture and approved by the director.

     “City” means the city of Brentwood.

     “City council” means the legislative body of the city of Brentwood.

     “Commercial” means products or services that are produced and/or marketed with an emphasis on salability, profit or the like and includes teaching classes, the sale of services, food and/or drink items, or merchandise.

     “Department” means the city of Brentwood parks and recreation department.

     “Director” means the director of parks and recreation of the city or director’s designee.

     “Dog owner” means any person, firm, or corporation owning, having an interest in, or having control or custody or possession of any dog.

     “Dog park” means a facility set aside for dogs and their owners to exercise and play off-leash in a controlled environment.

     “Facilities” mean and include those buildings, parks, landscape areas, ball fields, parking lots, special use facilities, or any portion thereof, under the supervision of the parks and recreation department.

     “Mobile unit” means any apparatus (i.e., truck, trailer, cart, wagon) or structure not permanently fixed to a permanent foundation and which may be moved under its own power, pushed or pulled by hand, towed by a motor vehicle or carried upon or in a motor vehicle or trailer. A mobile unit does not include news racks or vending machines, but does include produce stands, mobile food preparation units, and vehicles as those terms are defined in the Health and Safety Code.

     “Motorized mobile units” means a mobile unit which may be moved under its own power. Examples would be catering and ice cream trucks.

     “Motorized vehicle” means any automobile, automobile truck, automobile wagon, motorcycle, or any other self-propelled vehicle designed for running on land but not on rails.

     “Nonmotorized mobile units” means a mobile unit which may not be moved under its own power. Examples would be pedestrian carts and stands.

     “Organized league” means a group of more than ten players or a group that hold games on a regular schedule.

     “Other power-driven mobility device” means any mobility device powered by batteries, fuel, or other engines, whether or not designed for use by individuals with mobility disabilities, that is used by individuals with mobility disabilities for the purpose of locomotion, including golf carts, electronic personal assistance mobility devices, such as the Segway PT, or any mobility device designed to operate in areas without defined pedestrian routes, but that is not a wheelchair.

     “Park” means all areas within the city, operated, maintained or controlled by the city that are designated for use as park, recreation or open space purposes, whether such property is a park, parkway, greenbelt, tot lot, sports field, internal or adjacent sidewalks, general trail, parking lot, on-street parking adjacent to park property, detention and retention basins, children’s playground area, picnic area, or is maintained as open space, including undeveloped sites for future parks and includes any structure thereon.

     “Pedestrian cart” means a special type of nonmotorized unit which contains one or more wheels and is readily moved by handle(s).

     “Permit” means a written permit for the permitted use or exclusive use of a park, facility, or other city property as provided for and defined in this title.

     “Personal conveyance” means any unicycle, roller skate, rollerblade, skateboard, or other similar wheeled or non-wheeled device, which is operated by human power, is utilized to move a person or persons across any ground surface or surfaces.

     “Picnic area” means a special area in a park with tables set aside for the purpose of the consumption of food and beverages.

     “Picnicker” means a person on an outing or excursion with food usually provided by such person and eaten in the open.

     “Significant impact” means an unreasonable interference with the normal and intended use of the property. In determining whether there is a significant impact, the typical longevity of the subject tree species, as well as the size of the tree relative to the property, shall be considered. Normal maintenance, including, but not limited to, pruning, and leaf removal and minor damage to paving shall not be considered when making a determination of significant impact.

     “Skateboard park” means a facility designed specifically for riding skateboards, non-motorized bicycles, scooters, in-line skates, roller skates, or wheelchairs, with sculptured events such as ramps, jumps and bowls.

     “Sound amplifying equipment” means any electrical or battery operated machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. “Sound amplifying equipment” shall not include standard vehicle radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the radio is located.

     “Special event” means an event which is scheduled to take place, in whole, or in part, on city property, including events which will be conducted on a city street, sidewalk, alley or other right-of-way, or other public areas.

     “Special event permit” is a permit granted only through an application process that is intended to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and insures that all parties, event participants, attendees, neighbors, residents and passers-by will not be inconvenienced and that their health, safety and welfare have been considered.

     “Special event—umbrella business license” means a business license certificate issued to the promoter only and the vendors will be included on the certificate by virtue of the master list of vendors.

     “Street” means and includes all public streets, roads, alleys, parkways and other public rights-of-way of the city.

     “Street tree” means any tree which grows within or which overhangs any public street or right-of-way. Trees planted in designated thoroughfare rights-of-way where access is restricted or prohibited are specifically excluded from this title.

     “Topping” means heading back of the crown and/or creating large stubs without regard to form.

     “Trail” means a designated land corridor that provides recreational, aesthetic, alternate transportation or educational opportunities to users for all ages and abilities.

     “Vehicle” means a conveyance that transports people or objects.

     “Vending” means the business of selling, offering for sale, displaying or causing to be sold, for cash or consideration, any item, including, without limitation, food, beverage, goods, services and merchandise.

     “Vendor” means any person, including, without limitation, an employee or agent, partnership or corporation, who is in the business of vending.

     “Vendor permit” means a permit issued as a part of an overall special event application and must be considered at the time of event approval.

     “Wheelchair” means a manually-operated or power-driven device designed primarily for use by an individual with a mobility disability for the main purpose of indoor or of both indoor and outdoor locomotion. This definition does not apply to federal wilderness areas; wheelchairs in such areas are defined in Section 508(c)(2) of the ADA, 42 U.S.C. 12207(c)(2). (Ord. 989 § 2, 2017; Ord. 944 §§ 1, 2, 2015; Ord. 902 § 1, 2012; Ord. 843 §§ 1, 2, 2007; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 7.02 PARKS AND FACILITIES
7.02.010 Compliance required.
     No person shall enter, be, or remain in any park or facility of the city unless he or she complies with all the applicable regulations set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.020 Special event permits.
     A.    General Requirements.

     1.     An application for a special event permit, as defined in Section 7.01.020, shall be submitted to the parks and recreation department.

     2.     The city, through the parks and recreation director, may grant a special event permit for specified time limits, but in no instance for more than twelve months, provided the parks and recreation director finds that the use meets all conditions and requirements set forth herein and that the use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed activity.

     3.     The director shall establish, adopt and amend guidelines, policies, rules and regulations for the use of facilities within the boundaries of the city of Brentwood service area.

     B.     Procedure.

     1.     An application for a special event permit, as defined in Section 7.01.020, shall be submitted to the parks and recreation department. Applications are subject to review and approval by all applicable city departments. Applications are subject to review and approved or denied administratively by the parks and recreation director.

     2.     If application is rejected or denied, or if applicant objects to a condition of approval, a request for review may be submitted in writing to the city manager or designee within ten days of notification of denial. The written appeal must state the reason for the appeal and specify any facts or evidence in support of the request. The city manager or designee, who may be a city hearing officer, will promptly consider the appeal and provide a written decision within ten days of the filing of an appeal. The city manager’s determination will be final.

     3.     The applicant shall make a good faith effort to work with the city staff in addressing any concerns that arise relating to the placement or operation of the event.

     C.     Alcoholic Beverages. No consumption or sales of alcohol shall be allowed as part of the event, except as permitted by the city of Brentwood and, if applicable the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

     D.    Conditions of Special Event Permit Approval. Special event permit shall include the following conditions of approval:

 

     1.     Provision of a certificate of insurance acceptable to the city’s risk manager.

     2.     Submission of a cash deposit, performance bond, or other surety devices, if necessary, to ensure that any temporary facilities or structures used will be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event and that the property will be restored to its former condition, to the satisfaction of the parks and recreation director.

     3.     Prior to the event, the applicant shall provide a statement to the city stating that the organizers of the event agree to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all liability or claims that may be brought against the city arising out of its approval of the special events permit, or arising out of the operation of the use or uses allowed under the permit, save and except that caused solely by the city’s active negligence.

     4.     Adequate parking for the anticipated attendance as determined by city staff, shall be provided.

     5.     The applicant shall obtain county health department approval and submit such documentation with the application for any food service beyond what is allowed for existing permitted businesses on-site.

     6.     Any amplified sound used at the event or other noise generation activities shall be subject to Chapter 9.32 (Noise Regulations) of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     7.     Adequate provision for safety and security measures shall be provided. The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring the safety and welfare of the attendees, as determined by the chief of police or designee. The police department may close the event due to failure to satisfy conditions of the permit.

     8.     Each site occupied by a special event permit shall be cleaned of debris, litter, or other evidence of the special event on completion or removal of the event, and shall thereafter be used in compliance with the provision of this title.

     9.     Other conditions determined by the parks and recreation director to ensure the operation of the proposed special event permit in a compatible, efficient, harmonious, nuisance-free, orderly, and safe, manner.

     E.     Other Requirements.

     1.     Issuance of a special events permit does not relieve an applicant of his or her obligation to comply with the requirements of other agencies, including obtaining a business license, resale certificate or to collect and report sales tax proceeds associated with the special event.

     2.     Fire Code Compliance. The applicant shall adhere to all building and fire codes and obtain any necessary permits and inspections prior to the event.

     F.     Revocation. A special event permit may be revoked or modified by the parks and recreation director when it is determined that any of the following occurs:

     1.     That circumstance has changed so that one or more of the provisions of this chapter are not being met or complied with.

     2.     That the special event permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud.

     3.     That one or more of the conditions of approval of the special event permit have not been met.

     4.     That the use is in violation of any statute, ordinance, policy, law or regulation.

     G.    Exempt Special Event Uses. The following special event uses are allowed without the necessity of obtaining a special event permit:

     1.     Emergency Activities. Emergency public health and safety needs/land use activities, as determined by the city manager.

     2.     Events on Sites Approved for Public Assembly. An event on the site of, or within, a golf course, meeting hall/facility, school, theater, or other similar facility designed, and approved by the city for public assembly. (Ord. 944 § 3, 2015; Ord. 843 § 3, 2007; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.030 Exclusive use permits.
     As there may be situations where an exclusive use permit is necessary, the following conditions apply in addition to the conditions set in Section 7.02.020 for special event permits.

     A.    Parks and/or facilities shall be made available for the exclusive use and regulated use by recognized civic groups, nonprofit, service, or youth organizations within the Brentwood service area and for activities sponsored by or supported financially or otherwise by the city, subject to the issuance of a permit by the director. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to change the status of any city park and/or facility from a public park or public facility to a private park or private facility.

     B.     In reviewing applications for use of parks, the director has the authority to allow use of parts of parks or of entire parks. In addition, the director has the authority to determine required staffing levels for use of parts of parks or entire parks on a case-by-case basis. (Ord. 902 § 2, 2012; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.040 Liability insurance required.
     Liability insurance with coverage as determined by the city shall be required for all special events and any other required permit, as determined by the director in consultation with the city’s risk manager. (Ord. 843 § 4, 2007; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.050 Contents of applications.
     All applications shall be signed by an authorized representative of the organization sponsoring the activity, and the organization shall be responsible for compliance with all the provisions of this chapter and the regulations established by resolution or by the director and for all damages resulting from the conduct of the activity sponsored by the organization. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.060 Action on applications.
     A.    The applicant shall be notified of the decision of granting or denying such application.

     B.     The director, in granting the application, may impose reasonable requirements and conditions concerning the use of the park or facility by the applicant.

     C.     The director is authorized to charge, collect, and waive fees as authorized by city council.

     D.    The fee authorized by this chapter shall be set by resolution of the city council.

     E.     Requirement of a deposit for city rentals will be set by resolution of the city council.

     F.     The director shall deny the application if the director finds one or more of the following:

     1.     The activity is not sponsored by an organization specified in Section 7.02.030 or 7.05.040 of this title;

     2.     The proposed activity or use will unreasonably interfere with, or detract from, the promotion of the public health, welfare, safety, or recreation;

     3.     The proposed activity or use is anticipated to incite violence, crime, or disorderly conduct;

     4.     The occupancy load of the park or facility will be exceeded;

     5.     The desired park or facility is already scheduled for use;

     6.     The applicant fails to provide timely and accurately all required information; or

     7.     Prior negative incidents by applicant or history of similar events/activities. (Ord. 902 § 3, 2012; Ord. 843 § 5, 2007; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.070 Security requirements.
     A.    Every person operating, promoting, maintaining or conducting a permitted activity in or at a facility or park shall provide, or cause to be provided, security for the activity based upon the maximum capacity of the building and subject to the review and approval of the chief of police, or director. The cost of such private security shall be borne by the applicant.

     B.     Every person operating, promoting, maintaining or conducting a permitted activity in or at a facility shall sign a detailed statement, under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of California, declaring the nature and type of activity to be held in or at the facility or park and the expected number of guests.

     C.     The chief of police, or director, shall consider, but is not limited to, the following factors in setting the security requirements for an activity held in a city facility or park:

     1.     The maximum capacity;

     2.     The nature and type of activity to be held;

     3.     The hours during which the activity will be held;

     4.     If private security will be provided, the credentials, reputation and practices of the proposed private security company;

     5.     Attire and equipment used by the private security officers;

     6.     Prior incidents by applicant or history of similar events/activities; or

     7.     Whether alcohol is being permitted to be served.

     D.    If alcohol is to be served at the proposed activity, the chief of police or director may establish conditions on the sale, distribution, use, and consumption of any alcoholic beverage in addition to those set forth by alcohol beverage control.

     E.     The parks and recreation department may require use of city staff in addition to security. This will be determined on a case-by-case basis with costs borne by the applicant. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.080 Use of areas.
     A.    The director shall have the authority to regulate the activities in park and facility areas, when necessary, to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use of the park facilities for the comfort and convenience of all and may limit the length of time such facilities are used to avoid crowding. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end. Individual tables and benches shall be used on the basis of “first come, first served” except in such areas designated by “reservation only,” pursuant to the parks and recreation outdoor picnic permit policy on file with the department.

     B.     Park and facility areas shall not be used for the purpose of conducting a commercial business without a vendor permit. The director may authorize the sale of goods at specific permitted special events.

     C.     The director has the authority to designate appropriate areas in parks for free speech activities as to time, place, and manner. (Ord. 902 § 4, 2012; Ord. 843 § 6, 2007; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.090 Hours of public use.
     A.    All parks within the city shall be open from sunrise until sunset unless otherwise posted. No person shall enter or remain within the parks between sunset and sunrise except by permit or permission of the director or chief of police.

     B.     The director has the authority to set and change hours that restrooms will be available for use in parks. (Ord. 843 § 7, 2007; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.100 Trespassing.
     No person shall enter into any facility or park that is closed and/or locked or posted against such entry, except by permit or permission of the director or chief of police. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.110 Lights.
     All park facility lighting shall be turned off by eleven p.m. except by permit and for security or emergency lighting, as approved by the director. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.120 Alcoholic beverages.
     The presence and/or the consumption of any and all alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited except by permit.

     Permit for use of alcohol may be issued by the chief of police or director with notification to director of permit issuance. Permits issued pursuant to this section may be issued only for an activity at a specified park or facility during specified hours. Any permit issued pursuant to this section may contain conditions as to the number of persons, the time and place for service and consumption of alcoholic beverages, litter removal, and any other condition reasonably related to the maintenance of public health and safety. An alcoholic beverage for private consumption, if allowed, becomes the liability and responsibility of the group and/or organization renting the park or facility and permittee shall agree to indemnify, defend, and hold the city harmless for any claim, lawsuit, or action related to issuance of this permit. All alcohol shall remain within the park or facility area as designated on the permit. The chief of police may also require security precautions including, but not limited to, the hiring of security guard(s) or Brentwood police officer(s) at applicant’s expense. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.130 Smoking.
     Smoking is prohibited except in areas so designated for smoking. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.140 Candles.
     Except by permission of the director, candles and other open-flame devices are not allowed in city facilities or parks, as provided and defined by Section 2501.17 of the 1998 California Uniform Fire Code, as that section may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 843 § 8, 2007; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.150 Camping.
     Camping on city owned property is prohibited, except that the director may permit overnight camping by youth organizations and their chaperones in conjunction with an exclusive use permit. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.160 Closing of a portion of park or facility or entire park or facility.
     Any part of a park or facility or the entire park or facility may be declared temporarily closed to the public by the director or chief of police at any time and for any interval of time less than two weeks or longer than two weeks if construction activities, health and safety concerns require it, or if permittee is violating any of the conditions of a permit issued by the chief of police or director. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.170 Skateboard park.
     A.    Skateboard Park Facility.

     1.     Intended Use.

     a.     The skateboard park facility is intended for use by persons twelve years of age or older. (Health and Safety Code Section 115800.)

     b.     The following types of vehicles are permitted in the skateboard park: skateboards, non-motorized bicycles, scooters, in-line skates, roller skates, or wheelchairs. (See Health and Safety Code Section 115800.) No other vehicles are allowed.

     2.     Supervision. The facility may be supervised or non-supervised. If non-supervised, the city must post signs indicating the requirement for users to wear a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads. (Health and Safety Code Section 115800.)

     B.     Rules.

     1.     A person who rides a skateboard, skates and/or BMX bike at a city skate/BMX bike park shall wear well maintained, commercially manufactured helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads that are securely fastened at all times.

     2.     The director may adopt other safety rules, which will be posted at the facility.

     C.     Enforcement. If a person fails to comply with the general rule in subsection (B)(1), he or she is guilty of an infraction.

     A person who fails to comply with any facility rule may be expelled from the facility and is subject to an administrative citation under Chapter 1.24. (Ord. 989 § 1, 2017; Ord. 902 § 5, 2012; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.175 Dog park.
     A.    Dog owners using dog park shall:

     1.     Have dog(s) properly licensed and tagged pursuant to Contra Costa County Code Section 416-6.002 as that section may be amended from time to time.

     2.     Have a current Contra Costa County license worn on their dog(s) within the park.

     3.     Have dog(s) properly vaccinated and current with their vaccinations.

     4.     Be with their dog(s) within the fenced area at all times.

     5.     Have the dog(s) under voice control at all times.

     6.     Carry with them the dog(s) leash.

     7.     Keep dog(s) in the designated enclosed area when off leash.

     8.     Have dog(s) leashed and under control before leaving the dog park area.

     9.     Not use dog park if dog(s) is aggressive towards people or other dogs, is anti-social, is in heat, is unruly or barks excessively.

     10.   Not bring dog(s) younger than four months of age to the dog park.

     11.   Respect the privacy of surrounding residences.

     12.   Be responsible for cleaning up dog(s) feces with the materials provided and place waste in trash receptacles provided.

     13.   Be solely responsible and liable for the actions and behavior of the dog(s) under their supervision at all times while in the dog park area.

     14.   Have no more than three dogs (per owner) at one time in the dog park.

     B.     Children ages twelve and under must be accompanied by an adult when in the dog park.

     C.     Contra Costa County animal services department will be contacted for dogs left unattended at the dog park. (Ord. 843 § 9, 2007)

 

7.02.180 Acts prohibited.
     The following acts are prohibited in a city park or facility and parents of any minor who does any of these prohibited acts shall be responsible for all such damage:

     A.    Wilfully mark, paint, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving or paving material, water line or appurtenances, vending machines, or other public property.

     B.     Litter, soil, or defile restrooms, vending machines, or any facility;

     C.     Construct or erect any building, structure, or tent of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any private or public service utility into, upon, or across such lands, except with the written permission of the director;

     D.    Go upon any lawn, grass plot, or flower bed where such prohibition is indicated by a legible sign posted near or in the area;

     E.     Swim, bathe, wade, fish, boat, or operate powered hobby model boats in any water of any fountain, pond, lake, creek, or detention basin, except in areas designated for such purposes and so posted or by permit. Persons shall not throw, discharge, or otherwise place in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park, or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter, or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters;

     F.     Bring into any park any material which, if spilled or spread, will be injurious to the turf or plant growth;

     G.    Damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant, or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant;

     H.    Attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any tree or plant;

     I.      Dig in or otherwise disturb any park area or in any way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area;

     J.      Climb any tree or walk, stand, or sit upon any monument base, fountain, railing, fence, bridge, sign, or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes;

     K.    Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot, remove, possess or throw objects at any animal, reptile, or bird;

     L.     Remove or have in possession any wild animal, or any bird or fowl, or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile, wild animal, or bird;

     M.    Bring to, or drink in, a park any alcoholic beverage, except as provided in this title;

     N.    Enter or remain in a park while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug;

     O.    Bring, or set off, or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn in a park any fireworks, whether safe and sane fireworks or not, or other flammable or explosive material, or discharge them or throw them into any park from land, or a vehicle, or building adjacent thereto, except persons conducting a city-sponsored or supported public fireworks display;

     P.     Be, remain, stay, or loiter in any public park or facility from sunset to sunrise (or beyond posted hours), except as authorized by the director;

     Q.    Set up tents or other temporary shelters for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park or facility, after closing hours, any movable structure or vehicle to be used, or that could be used, for such purposes, such as a house trailer, motor home, camp trailer, or pickup camper, except as provided in this chapter or approved by the director;

     R.     No person having the control or care of any dog shall suffer or permit such dog to enter or remain in a park (with the exception of an area so designated as off-leash), unless it is led by a leash of suitable strength not more than six feet in length. The person owning, controlling, or having the custody of such dog shall be jointly and severally responsible for all damages caused by such dog and is responsible for removing and disposing of owner’s dog waste;

     S.     Lead, ride, drive, keep, or let loose any animal, reptile, or fowl of any kind;

     T.     Make or kindle a fire for any purpose, except at places provided for campfires or barbecues, unless prior permission shall be obtained therefor from the director, or leave a fire started by such person, or at director’s direction, or used until such fire is completely extinguished;

     U.    Use, carry, or possess firearms of any description or air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings, knives or any other form of weapon potentially dangerous to wildlife or to humans or shoot into park areas from beyond park boundaries;

     V.    No person shall discard or permit unattended any lighted cigar, cigarette, match, pipe or other flammable article;

     W.    Use or allow the use of powered model airplanes, model rockets, or racing cars, except in areas designated for such use or by permit;

     X.    Golfing or use of golf clubs is prohibited in any area of the park, except in areas so designated and posted;

     Y.    Indulge in riotous, boisterous, threatening, or indecent conduct;

     Z.     Dump, deposit, or leave any bottle, broken glass, ashes, paper box, can, refuse, or trash, except in the receptacles provided for such materials. Where such receptacles are not provided, all such materials shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. Household trash is not permitted in city receptacles;

     AA.  Bring to or have in such person’s possession any alcoholic or nonalcoholic glass beverage container or bottle;

     BB.  Bringing portable barbecues into city parks or facilities without a permit;

     CC.  Land hot air balloon, parachute, hang glider, aircraft, helicopter, or bungee jumping without permit;

     DD.  Use any amplification system unless a permit is first secured from the director;

     EE.   Use interactive inflatable equipment without a permit.

     FF.   Use of bicycles or personal conveyances in city parks/facilities in a negligent, unsafe or reckless manner or in a way that endangers the life, limb or property of any person or is in violation of the provisions of California Vehicle Code Section 21201, as that section may be amended from time to time.

     GG.  Use of motorized vehicles in city parks/facilities, with the exception of authorized city vehicles or trails so designated. (Ord. 843 §§ 10, 11, 2007; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.200 Traffic and parking.
     While in parks or facilities, no person shall:

     A.    Fail to comply with all the applicable provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state, in regard to equipment and the operation of vehicles, and the provisions of this code;

     B.     Fail to obey all traffic officers and city employees authorized to direct traffic in the parks;

     C.     Fail to obey all traffic regulations concerning the use of vehicles or caution, stopping, parking, and all other signs posted for control or to safeguard life and property;

     D.    Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding fifteen miles per hour, except upon roads designated by posted signs for different rates of speed;

     E.     Ride or drive any vehicle on any area, except paved roads or parking areas or other areas designated as temporary parking areas and posted for that use. A bicyclist may wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use;

     F.     Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area or use a parking area in a manner not in accordance with the posted directions or the instructions of any attendant who may be present;

     G.    Ride any other person on a bicycle, except where the bicycle is built for operation by more than one person;

     H.    Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack where a bicycle rack is provided and there is space available; and

     I.      Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving, or set against trees, or in any place or position where other persons may ride, drive, or trip over it or be injured by it. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.210 Advertising—Sale of merchandise.
     No person in a park/facility or on public property adjacent to a park/facility shall do any of the following without first receiving a vendor permit from the director:

     A.    Expose, announce, advertise, call public attention to, or offer any article of food, drink, or merchandise for sale; nor shall he or she station or place any stand, cart, pedestrian cart, motorized or nonmotorized mobile units, or vehicle for the transportation, sale, or display of any such article of food, drink, or merchandise in a park/facility; and

     B.     Paste, glue, tack or otherwise affix any banners, signs, placards, advertisements, or inscription in a park/facility. (Ord. 843 § 12, 2007; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.215 Vendor permits.
     A.    The director can authorize the sale of goods at specific, permitted special events. If a vendor wishes to seek approval of the director for the purpose of selling goods or services, a vendor permit application must be submitted for review. Vendor permit applications are available in the parks and recreation department.

     B.     If a vendor permit is issued by the director for a vendor to sell merchandise, food, beverages, or services, the vendor is required to obtain a valid city business license, comply with related applicable city, county, state, and/or federal regulations, and meet the city’s insurance requirements and submit any other required documentation prior to commencement of vending in parks/facilities. A vendor permit must be kept on-site with the vendor and vendor must show such permit upon request.

     C.     If a vendor wishes to seek approval of the director for the purpose of selling goods or services, a vendor permit application must be submitted for review. The city reserves the right not to allow vendors at specific city-sponsored events. The decision of the director related to vendor permits is final. (Ord. 843 § 13, 2007)

 

7.02.220 Donations/dedications.
     The donation of plants, facilities, fountains, sculptures, ponds, pools, or any other item or funds for such item for any park or facility shall follow the rules and policies approved by the city council. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.230 Excessive noise prohibited.
     No person in a park or on public or private property adjacent to a park shall produce, suffer, or allow to be produced any unnecessary loud noise that disturbs the peaceful and quiet enjoyment of any person in a public park or surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.02.240 Photography/videography in parks.
     The city does not regulate the taking of videos or photographs in parks for non-commercial purposes. Persons taking photos/videos in parks and facilities for commercial purposes shall not do so without a vendor permit. The director may authorize photography/videography at specific permitted special events. (Ord. 902 § 6, 2012)

Chapter 7.03 TREES AND SHRUBS
7.03.010 Purpose.
     In the interest of public health, safety, general welfare and aesthetics, the purpose of this chapter is to provide a method for the proper care of trees and shrubs within the city and to define the powers and duties of the director. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.03.020 Parks and recreation director—Powers and duties.
     The director shall direct the kind and variety of landscape material to be planted in any public landscape areas, as per the current approved city of Brentwood standard plans and specifications, engineering procedures manual, urban forest guidelines, or any other city approved specifications. The planting, trimming, and removing of trees and shrubbery upon the streets, public rights-of-way, and public places of the city are vested in the director. It is the duty of the director to administer, control and regulate the street tree program of the city in accordance with the provisions of the urban forest guidelines and this chapter. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.03.030 Permits required to trim or cut in public places.
     It is unlawful for any person to trim, cut, mutilate, or injure any street or city-owned tree, or the roots or branches thereof, growing upon any public street, curb, or place in the city or to injure or impair the growth or life of any such tree, roots, or branches without a permit. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.03.040 Permission required to install poles near trees.
     It is unlawful for any person to install upon any street any telephone pole, electric light pole, or power pole within ten feet of the trunk of any growing tree upon any street in the city without first having obtained permission from the director to erect such pole within such limit of ten feet. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.03.050 Planting of street trees.
     No street trees shall hereafter be planted, removed or replaced except in accordance with the urban forest guidelines and the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.03.060 Permits required—Street trees.
     It is unlawful for any person to plant any tree or shrubbery on any street, public right-of-way (curb to curb or from back of sidewalk to back of sidewalk/curb where sidewalk exits only on one side of the street), park, or public place without first obtaining a permit to do so by applying for and receiving an encroachment permit from the engineering department. All work done pursuant to the permit shall be in compliance with all applicable city ordinances, resolutions, standards and specifications. The director may attach conditions to the permit including the requirement to replace any street tree which is removed. Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit or the conditions attached to it may appeal to the city’s designated tree board provided that such appeal is made in writing within five days of action. The appeal shall be heard by the city’s designated tree board no later than thirty days after receipt of the appeal, at which time the city’s designated tree board may grant or deny the appeal. The action of the city’s designated tree board may be appealed to the city council, whose decision shall be conclusive and final. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.03.070 Maintenance—Street trees.
     All street tree maintenance shall be the responsibility of the property owner. No permit is required for routine maintenance. Routine maintenance includes minor pruning and trimming, tree feeding, spraying, and watering. If a street tree dies, it is the property owner’s responsibility to replace with a tree of the same kind or one that is listed in the urban forest guidelines. All tree maintenance work shall conform to the international society of arboriculture guidelines. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.03.080 Nuisance—Street trees.
     Upon a determination by the director that a street tree has become a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic by obstructing vision or impairing necessary clearance, or in any manner endangering the use of any public street, sidewalk, sewer, waterline or other public property so as to constitute a public nuisance, written notice shall be given to the owner of the property upon which the nuisance tree fronts to remove or otherwise control such tree in such manner as will abate the nuisance. The cost of repair or replacement of public facilities is the responsibility of the property owner. Repair or replacement of sidewalks, curb and gutter or parking area shall be done in conformance with Title 22 of the California Streets and Highway Code Maintenance of sidewalks, as amended. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.03.090 Trees overhanging public places.
     It is the duty of every person having charge or control of any lot or premises, either as owner, agent, lessee, tenant, or otherwise, on which trees are growing but which overhang any public street, alley, or place to trim such trees where they overhang the public street, alley, or place so there is a clear space underneath of at least ten feet above a sidewalk and fifteen feet between the lowest limb or foliage of the trees and the public street, alley, or place. A permit is not required for routine maintenance.

     If a person fails, neglects, or refuses to trim the tree, the director has the power to cause the tree to be trimmed in accordance with the requirements of this section. The cost of the work will be charged to, and become a valid claim against, the person having charge or control of the lot or premises, either as owner, agent, lessee, tenant, or otherwise, and is recoverable in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1000 § 1, 2018; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.03.100 Interpretation of provisions.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as a limitation on the power lawfully vested in the council to cause the removal of any shrubs or trees if, in the opinion of the city council, it is necessary to remove the same for the purpose of improving any street or alley or for any other lawful cause that encroach within the city’s right-of-way. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.03.110 Mutilation of trees unlawful.
     It is unlawful for any person to mutilate or cause damage to any street tree except for work in conformance with this chapter. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 7.04 (RESERVED)

Chapter 7.05 RECREATION
7.05.010 City of Brentwood recreation service area—Established.
     The city service area is authorized and established for conducting recreation and activity programs pursuant to the policies and guidelines established by the city council and effectuated by the parks and recreation department for use of city and school district facilities and for enrollment in city sponsored and co-sponsored recreation activities. (Ord. 843 § 15, 2007; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.05.020 City of Brentwood service area—Boundaries.
     As of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, the city service area boundaries shall be the city limits. The city service area boundaries may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city council of the city with input and recommendation by the park and recreation commission. (Ord. 843 § 15, 2007; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.05.030 City service area—Policy—Fees.
     A.    The director, with recommendation(s) from the park and recreation commission, shall establish, adopt and amend guidelines, policies, rules and regulations for use of facilities within the boundaries of the city service area.

     B.     The city council may by resolution, with recommendation(s) from the park and recreation commission, set fees for participation in recreation programs sponsored or co-sponsored by the city and held at facilities within the boundaries of the city service area. (Ord. 843 § 15, 2007; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.05.040 Organized leagues.
     A.    Organized league play in city parks and facilities is by permit only.

     B.     An organized league is self-supportive and self-administered and shall furnish all necessary materials, finances, and workers to organize, conduct and administer its own program.

     C.     Organized leagues must adhere to the safety and liability rules and regulations for use of available fields set by the city.

     D.    The city reserves the right to identify specific parks and facilities for organized league use for games and/or practices. (Ord. 902 § 7, 2012; Ord. 843 § 15, 2007; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.05.050 Code of conduct.
     All managers, coaches, parents, and participants in any programs, classes, or uses of city facilities must adhere to the code of conduct that has been adopted by the park and recreation commission and is on file with the department. (Ord. 902 § 8, 2012)

Chapter 7.06 TRAILS
7.06.010 Vehicle regulations.
     When riding on a city trail, all vehicles shall be ridden, driven, or operated on the right-hand side of the road paving, as close as physical conditions permit, and shall be kept in single file when two or more are operating as a group. Operators shall at all times operate their vehicles when upon a city trail with reasonable regard to the safety of others, signal all turns, pass to the left of any vehicle or pedestrian they are overtaking, and pass to the right of any vehicle they may be meeting. (Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.06.020 Trail rules.
     When on a city trail, trail users shall abide by the following rules:

     A.    Be safe, considerate, and aware of your impact on the park and other trail users;

     B.     The trails are to be used only during the period between dawn to dusk, unless there is approval by the director for use other than during this period;

     C.     Motorized vehicles are prohibited, except authorized city vehicles or trails so designated and posted;

     D.    Bicycles are permitted only on paved roads and on paved and unpaved multi-use trails;

     E.     Bicycles are prohibited on trails that are designated for hiking and horseback riding use only;

     F.     Excessive speed or reckless trail use are prohibited;

     G.    Bicyclists shall reduce speed and call out, or ring their bell before passing;

     H.    Bicyclists shall be equipped with standard bicycle reflectors and light for hours of darkness;

     I.      Trail users should call out and wait for instructions before passing an equestrian user;

     J.      Trail users shall keep to the right and go single file on curves;

     K.    Dogs must be leashed and under control at all times;

     L.     Owners of dogs shall dispose of their dog’s waste in appropriate waste containers;

     M.    Open containers or consumption of alcoholic beverages are not permitted;

     N.    Hunting or shooting is prohibited;

     O.    All plants and wildlife shall be left alone and are protected by law;

     P.     Advertisements shall not be posted. (Ord. 843 § 16, 2007; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.06.030 Other power-driven mobility devices (OPDMD).
     A.    The city supports recreational opportunities for people with mobility disabilities by allowing the use of other power-driven mobility devices (“OPDMD”) in areas where they can be operated safely, without posing risk of serious harm to natural and cultural resources, and in conformity with federal land management laws and regulations including, but not limited, to Americans with Disabilities Act, Title II regulation, 28 C.F.R. Part 35.

     In order to ensure that OPDMD operation does not pose significant safety risks nor fundamentally alter the nature of services, programs, and activities provided by the city, all OPDMDs operated in parks must meet the standards outlined in this section.

     This section applies only to OPDMD (non-wheelchair) usage. In accordance with federal law, wheelchairs and manually powered mobility aids, such as walkers, crutches, canes, braces, and other similar devices are permitted anywhere in the city where pedestrian travel is allowed.

     B.     Size. OPDMDs shall not be wider than thirty-six inches or longer than forty-eight inches, except for electric bicycles which may exceed forty-eight inches in length.

     C.     Gas Powered OPDMDs Prohibited. OPDMDs shall not exceed zero emissions during use. Only manually or battery/electricity operated devices are permitted. The use of gas powered mobility devices is prohibited.

     D.    Speed Limit.

     1.     Paved and Unpaved Trails. No person shall operate an OPDMD at a speed in excess of ten miles per hour. Electric bicycles shall not be operated in excess of the posted speed limit or fifteen miles per hour.

     2.     Basic Speed Limit. Notwithstanding the above speed limits, no person shall operate an OPDMD at a speed greater than is reasonable or prudent having due regard for trail sight-lines, the traffic on, and the surface and width of a trail, nor at a speed which endangers the safety of persons or property.

     E.     OPDMDs are authorized in any park/trail as defined in Section 7.01.020, Definitions. These devices may be restricted in specific circumstances due to design limitations or operational characteristics of the park/trail. OPDMDs must stay on designated parks/trails at all times. Exceptions can be made when crossing turf areas to leave or rejoin a park/trail.

     F.     Closed/Restricted Areas. OPDMDs are not permitted in areas that are closed or restricted to the general public due to safety concerns or for resource protection.

     G.    OPDMDs are not permitted on trails where the width of the OPDMD exceeds half the trail width.

     H.    The city may restrict OPDMs in certain facilities and buildings. Individuals are encouraged to contact the facility prior to their visit to determine if there are any restrictions or limitations.

     I.      The city reserves the right to further restrict the use of OPDMs during special events or during periods of high volume pedestrian traffic.

     J.      The city shall not ask an individual using a wheelchair or OPDMD questions about the nature and extent of the individual’s disability. The city, however, may ask a person using an OPDMD to provide credible assurance that the mobility device is required because of the person’s disability. The city shall accept the presentation of a valid, state-issued, disability parking placard or card, or other state-issued proof of disability as a credible assurance that the use of the OPDMD is for the individual’s mobility disability. In lieu of a valid, state-issued disability parking placard or card, or state-issued proof of disability, the city shall accept as a credible assurance a verbal representation, not contradicted by observable fact, that the OPDMD is being used for a mobility disability. A “valid” disability placard or card is one that is presented by the person to whom it was issued and is otherwise in compliance with the state of issuance’s requirements for disability placards or cards.

     K.    Persons desiring to use an OPDMD which does not meet the standards for types of devices allowed or for use in a location where OPDMDs are prohibited, may request a change of use by submitting the request in writing to the director. The requested variance shall be evaluated by the city and a decision shall be communicated to the person(s) requesting the variance within a reasonable amount of time. (Ord. 902 § 9, 2012)

Chapter 7.07 APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAWS/PENALTIES
7.07.010 Applicability of other laws.
     A.    Nothing in this title shall exempt any person from applicable provisions of any other laws of this state or the city.

     B.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, where the provisions of this title related to vending conflict with those provisions of Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 5.48 (Peddlers and Solicitors) or 5.68 (Mobile Vending), the provisions of this title shall prevail. (Ord. 843 § 17, 2007; Ord. 788 § 1, 2004)

 

7.07.020 Penalties.
     Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this title or who causes, allows or permits any violation of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of at least one thousand dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment; and/or that person may receive an administrative citation as provided in Chapter 1.08 of this code. (Ord. 902 § 10, 2012; Ord. 843 § 17, 2007)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.00 NUISANCES
Chapter 8.01 RIGHT TO FARM
Chapter 8.04 FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 8.08 RESTAURANTS
Chapter 8.16 SOLID WASTE
Chapter 8.20 RESERVED
Chapter 8.24 INFLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
Chapter 8.32 NO-SMOKING REGULATIONS
Chapter 8.36 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Chapter 8.40 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS RECYCLING
Chapter 8.44 RENTAL PROPERTY INSPECTION
Chapter 8.48 FIREWORKS

Chapter 8.00 NUISANCES
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ords. 856 and 846.

 

8.00.010 Purpose.
     It is declared to be in the public interest to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city by providing procedures for the enforcement of unlawful activities; and for the abatement of nuisances, as declared by the city council, which abatement procedures are in addition to any other proceeding authorized by this code or by law. (Ord. 896 § 4, 2011; Ord. 867 § 3, 2009)

 

8.00.020 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below:

     “Building official” means the city’s chief building official or designee.

     “City” means the city of Brentwood.

     “City clerk” means the city clerk or designee.

     “City manager” means the city manager or designee.

     “Code” means the municipal code of the city of Brentwood.

     “Days,” unless otherwise defined, mean calendar days.

     “Enforcement officer” means any city employee or agent of the city with the authority to enforce any provision of this code.

     “Final order” means the final order to abate ordered by the hearing officer in the event an appeal of the determination of the existence of a nuisance is filed.

     “Hearing officer” means the individual appointed by the city manager to hear the appeal on a determination of the existence of a nuisance.

     “Notice and order” means the written notice and order to abate given by the enforcement officer in accordance with this chapter.

     “Owner” means any person owning the property at issue as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, or the lessee, tenant or other person having control or possession of the property.

     “Person” means any individual or entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership or trust.

     “Property” means any property located within the city and any building located on such property.

     “Responsible party” means any person or persons in charge of the property or location or the person or persons responsible for the event or incident and shall include any of the following:

     1.     The person or persons who own the property where the violations exist;

     2.     The person or persons in charge of the property where the violation exists;

     3.     The person or persons using the property when the violation exists;

     4.     The lienholder as shown on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current;

     5.     If any of the persons in subsections 1 through 3 of this definition are minors, the parent or guardian of such minor; and

     6.     If the person or persons is a business entity, the manager or on-site supervisor where the violation exists.

     “Vacant building” means a building that is unoccupied, or occupied by unauthorized persons for any amount of time. (Ord. 1017 § 1, 2020; Ord. 867 § 3, 2009)

 

8.00.030 Unlawful activities.
     It is unlawful and a violation of this code for any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or having charge or possession of real property in the city to maintain the property or allow the property to be maintained with any of the following conditions:

     A.    Visible From Street. If visible from a public or private street or alley, public right-of-way or sidewalk:

     1.     Broken or discarded furniture, household equipment and furnishings; shopping carts; packing boxes, cardboard boxes, lumber, junk, barrels, drums, salvage materials, recyclable materials, or other debris, except trash enclosed in an approved trash, recycling or yard waste container on pick-up days (see also Chapter 8.16 and Section 8.16.360);

     2.     Overgrown vegetation; dead, decayed or diseased trees, or other vegetation; or weeds in violation of Section 8.36.035, Weed abatement (see also Section 17.630.008(H) for landscape standards);

     3.     Personal property such as a vehicle, boat, trailer or vehicle parts which are left in a state of partial repair in a front yard, side yard, driveway, sidewalk or walkway;

     4.     A vehicle parked or stored in/on the front, side, or rear yard in violation of Section 17.620.016, Vehicle storage;

     5.     Wall or fence maintained in a defective or hazardous condition;

     6.     Construction equipment or machinery, including farm equipment, or storage of dirt, sand, gravel, concrete or other similar material, except: (1) during excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an active city permit; or (2) during active farming operations on property zoned for agricultural use;

     7.     Unmounted camper or camper shell stored in front, side or rear yard, not behind a solid fence;

     8.     Clothesline or clothes hanging unless screened from view.

     B.     Obstruction.

     1.     Vegetation or an item that: (a) obstructs the view of drivers from streets or driveways; or (b) impedes, obstructs or denies pedestrian or other lawful travel on sidewalks or other public rights-of-way; or (c) interferes with a visibility triangle as that term is defined at Section 17.640.004, Definitions (Sign Ordinance);

     2.     Anything that obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of a public park, square, street, trail, sidewalk or highway; or a river, stream, canal, creek, or basin.

     C.     Attractive Nuisance. Attractive nuisance dangerous to children and others, including abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, machinery, appliances, refrigerators and freezers, and unsecured or unmaintained pools, ponds and excavations.

     D.    Substandard or Dangerous Building. Substandard or dangerous buildings, in violation of Chapter 15.04, California Building Standards Codes, including a building:

     1.     That is abandoned, partially destroyed, left in an unreasonable state of partial construction, or has been declared substandard or dangerous by the building official (see Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3);

     2.     Exhibiting dry rot, vermin infestation or termite infestation;

     3.     Where twenty percent or more of the exterior, painted surface observable from public view is peeling, flaked, cracked, blistered, mildewed, or lacking paint; or building lacking weather protection due to lack of paint or other approved protective coating;

     4.     With windows containing broken glass or no glass, where the windows are of a type which normally contains glass; or

 

     5.     With improperly anchored canopies, awnings, stairways, exhaust ducts, or overhead extensions.

     E.     Materials on Roof. Temporary materials, such as tarps or similar non-permanent articles, on a roof for more than thirty days.

     F.     Vacant Building. No owner shall allow a building approved for occupancy to be vacant for more than thirty days, unless any one of the following applies:

     1.     The building is the subject of an active building permit for repair, rehabilitation, or improvement and the owner is making substantive progress to complete the project;

     2.     The building meets all applicable codes, is ready for occupancy, and is being actively offered for sale, lease, or rent;

     3.     All entry points, including doors and windows, have either been: (a) locked and secured against intrusion, or (b) covered with materials, as provided in this chapter, for preventing entry by persons or animals.

     G.    Failure to Maintain Vacant Building or Site. No owner of a building approved for occupancy shall fail to maintain a vacant building or site. An owner will be determined to have failed to maintain a vacant building or site if any of the following conditions are found:

     1.     Twenty percent or more of the exterior, painted surface observable from public view is peeling, flaked, cracked, blistered, mildewed, or lacking paint; or building lacking weather protection due to lack of paint or other approved protective coating;

     2.     Exterior walls, windows, doors, and/or roof coverings: (a) are deteriorated to the point of failing to fulfill their function, broken, or missing; or (b) do not provide weather protection adequate to protect against dry rot, termite infestation, or vector infestation;

     3.     Temporary Coverings Over Doors and Windows. Temporary coverings over doors, windows, and other openings are not provided for any vacant building: (a) consisting of a minimum 0.177-inch thick clear or semi-clear shatter-proof polycarbonate sheeting material on a site zoned to allow residential or adjoining a property zoned to allow residential development; or (b) consisting of exterior boarding materials painted with a color consistent with the exterior’s primary background color for vacant buildings in all other zones;

     4      Exterior trash, debris, and graffiti are not removed on a weekly basis;

     5.     The owner fails to post a sign of no less than eighteen inches by twenty-four inches on the front of the building exterior stating the name, address, and telephone number of either the owner, responsible party, or property management company.

     H.    Commercial Vehicle. A commercial vehicle having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of six thousand pounds (three tons) of base pound weight or more parked or stored in a residential district for any length of time, except a delivery truck operating in the short term, in the normal course of business (see also Section 17.840.008(J), Home occupation use permit).

     I.      Sleeping in Vehicle. Sleeping or living in a vehicle, except: (1) a vehicle within an approved mobile home park; or (2) a temporary caretaker’s residence during construction with an active building permit, with a temporary use permit.

     J.      Vectors. (Organisms that transmit pathogens, such as insects, rodents).

     1.     Water that is a breeding place for vectors, with the presence of vectors in their developmental stages in the water being prima facie evidence that the water is a public nuisance;

     2.     An activity that supports the development, attraction, or harborage of vectors, or that facilitates the introduction or spread of vectors.

     K.    Substandard Temporary Fencing and Barriers. With the exception of any temporary fencing and/or barrier permitted for construction purposes:

     1.     Any chain link or similar metal fence installed on a property that either is zoned to allow residential uses or adjoins a property zoned to allow residential uses; or

     2.     Any k-rail or Jersey barrier, concrete or plastic, installed on a property that either is zoned to allow residential uses or adjoins a property zoned to allow residential uses.

     L.     Disruptive Activities. Repeated disruptive activities including disturbances of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood that causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, sale of stolen goods, public urination or defecation, theft, assaults, battery, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, illegal parking, loud noises, traffic violations, curfew violations, or police detentions and arrests.

     M.    Release of Hazardous or Other Materials. The unpermitted deposit, disposal, spill, or release on public property of materials, hazardous or otherwise, in or on city streets or the public right-of-way (see also Chapter 14.20, Stormwater management and discharge control).

     N.    Graffiti. Graffiti, prohibited under Chapter 9.90, Graffiti control of this code.

     O.    General. A violation of the municipal code, a city permit, condition of development approval, ordinance, resolution, regulation adopted by the city council, or any condition of property contrary to the public peace, health and safety (see also Section 1.16.010, Code enforcement – General). (Ord. 1017 § 1, 2020; Ord. 999 § 2, 2018)

 

8.00.035 Declaration of nuisances.
     It is declared a nuisance and subject to abatement pursuant to this chapter for any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or having charge or possession of any property in the city to maintain such property or allow such property to be maintained in such a manner that any of the conditions listed in Section 8.00.030 of this code are found to exist thereon or to allow any of the conditions listed in Section 8.00.030 of this code to occur. (Ord. 896 § 6, 2011)

 

8.00.040 Notice of public nuisance and order to abate.
     Whenever an enforcement officer determines that any property is being maintained or kept in violation of this chapter, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to proceed under Section 1.08.010 of this code and/or to give written notice and order to abate to the owner and/or responsible party. The notice and order to abate will contain the following, at a minimum:

     A.    A description of the property by reference to its address and assessor’s parcel number;

     B.     The sections of this chapter being violated;

     C.     A reasonable time limit for the responsible party to abate the condition, which will be no less than three calendar days and no more than thirty calendar days from the date of the notice;

     D.    If applicable, the suggested methods to reasonably abate the nuisance;

     E.     A statement that the owner and/or responsible party must abate the violation(s) or request an administrative hearing within the time specified; and

     F.     A statement that if the nuisance is abated by the city, the costs of such abatement may be assessed against the property and, if not paid, may constitute a lien against the property. (Ord. 896 § 7, 2011; Ord. 867 § 3, 2009)

 

8.00.050 Manner of giving notice and order.
     A copy of the notice and order will be provided by: (1) personal service; or (2) first class mail to the owner at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the responsible party, if applicable, and by posting a copy on the subject property. (Ord. 867 § 3, 2009)

 

8.00.060 Appeal and notice of hearing.
     Within seven days from the date of the notice and order, the responsible party may file an appeal of the determination of the nuisance with the city clerk. Such appeal must be in writing and identify the property subject to the notice and order and a statement setting forth the specific grounds for the appeal. The city clerk will cause the matter to be set for hearing before a hearing officer. Notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be given in writing to the responsible party. The date of the hearing will be no sooner than seven days from the date when notice of the hearing is given to the appellant and the hearing officer. Failure to appear at the hearing or to appeal the determination of the nuisance shall be deemed a failure of the responsible party to exhaust their administrative remedies. (Ord. 896 § 8, 2011; Ord. 867 § 3, 2009)

 

8.00.070 Administrative hearing.
     A.    At the hearing, the hearing officer will hear the testimony of all competent persons desiring to testify regarding the condition claimed to constitute a nuisance.

     B.     At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer will determine whether or not a nuisance exists and if the hearing officer so concludes, he or she may declare the conditions to be a nuisance and order the condition abated within a specified number of days of service of the hearing officer’s order.

     C.     The decision of the hearing officer on the determination of a nuisance is final. Any appeal of the hearing officer’s decision is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 867 § 3, 2009)

 

8.00.080 Abatement by city.
     If a nuisance is not abated by the responsible party within the time limits set forth in the notice and order or, if appealed, the time limits set forth in the final order, the city, by its employees or a hired contractor, may abate the nuisance or cause the nuisance to be abated. (Ord. 867 § 3, 2009)

 

8.00.090 Summary abatement.
     Notwithstanding and in addition to any other remedy available under this chapter or other federal, state or local laws or regulations, if a nuisance as defined in this chapter exists and constitutes an immediate threat to public health or safety, the city may summarily and without notice or hearing abate such nuisance at the expense of the responsible party. Costs will be recovered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 867 § 3, 2009)

 

8.00.100 Recoverable costs.
     Recoverable costs shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     A.    As established by resolution of the city council, the fully loaded hourly rates for personnel time in preparing for and attending all inspections, preparing all written reports and memos, preparing for and attending all meetings at which the enforcement actions against the person/property being charged with the expense is subject, preparing for and attending all official enforcement proceedings, including, but not limited to, proceedings before an administrative hearing officer, preparing for and attending civil or criminal proceedings instituted in state or federal court.

     B.     The cost of services rendered by third parties such as the preparing of title reports, investigative service, process servers, consulting services (including costs of estimates and appraisals), costs of collection, lien and/or assessment, reproduction services and aerial photography and mapping services.

 

     C.     Any person who fails to pay to the city any abatement costs imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter on or before the due date also shall be liable for the payment of any applicable late payment charges set forth by council resolution.

     D.    In administrative abatement proceedings under this chapter, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys’ fees, but only if the city elects in writing, at the initiation of an individual abatement proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees. In no event shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the abatement proceedings. The city may recover its attorneys’ fees in the same manner as other costs of nuisance abatement pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 867 § 3, 2009)

 

8.00.110 Recovery of abatement costs.
     A.    The procedure set forth in this section for the recovery of abatement costs is adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5 which allows the city council to establish a procedure to make the cost of abatement of a nuisance upon a parcel of land a special assessment against that parcel.

     1.     The enforcement officer will cause a report of action and an accurate account of the costs of abatement to be filed with the finance department.

     2.     An invoice for the abatement costs will be mailed to the property owner and/or responsible party. The invoice will include notification that if unpaid, a lien and/or assessment on the property may be recorded.

     3.     If the property owner and/or responsible party does not pay the cost of abating the nuisance within thirty calendar days after receiving the invoice a lien on the property may be recorded.

     4.     If the cost of abating the nuisance remains unpaid, the city council may adopt a resolution assessing unpaid costs of abatement as a special assessment upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current.

     5.     The notice of assessment shall be mailed by certified mail to the property owner, if the property owner’s identity can be determined from the county assessor’s or county recorder’s records. The notice of assessment shall contain the date and time that the city council will consider a resolution assessing unpaid costs of abatement as a special assessment upon the respective parcels and shall specify that the property may be sold after three years for unpaid delinquent assessments. The power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice.

     6.     The assessment shall continue until it is paid, together with interest at the legal maximum rate computed from the date of confirmation of the statement until payment. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes.

     7.     The finance department shall prepare and file with the county assessor a certified copy of the resolution of the city council assessing the costs of abatement on the land pursuant to this section.

     8.     The county assessor shall enter each assessment on the county tax roll upon the parcel of land. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and procedure and sale in case of delinquency as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. The tax collector’s power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice.

     B.     On behalf of the city, the city manager or designee may collect any past-due abatement costs or late payment charges by use of all available legal means and the choice of one remedy does not affect the city’s ability to use alternative remedies.

     C.     In no event will the city collect the abatement costs more than once. (Ord. 867 § 3, 2009)

 

8.00.120 Treble damages.
     Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with this chapter, except for conditions abated pursuant to Section 17980 of the Health and Safety Code related to substandard buildings, the court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. (Ord. 867 § 3, 2009)

 

8.00.130 Recordation of notices.
     The building official may cause to be recorded with the county recorder notices or instruments relating to the abatement proceedings or special assessments described in this chapter. (Ord. 867 § 3, 2009)

 

8.00.140 Alternative remedies.
     The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil, administrative or other legal or equitable remedies established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this code or applicable state codes and the use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city, including, but not limited to, the ability to collect and assess administrative citation fines. (Ord. 867 § 3, 2009)

 

8.00.150 Cost of abatement a personal obligation.
     Along with placing a lien or assessment upon the real property pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter, the city may make all costs and penalties the personal obligation of the property owner, tenant or other person creating, causing, committing or maintaining the nuisance. In such a case, all of the procedures of this chapter apply except those specifically related to liens and assessments. (Ord. 867 § 3, 2009)

Chapter 8.01 RIGHT TO FARM
8.01.010 Purpose and intent.
     This chapter is intended to carry out and advance several city agricultural goals and policies set forth in the city’s 1993 general plan; such as, conservation/open space element policy 1.3.2.

     It is the declared purpose of the city to preserve, protect and encourage ongoing agricultural operations within the city.

     The city recognizes that when nonagricultural land uses extend into or are adjacent to agricultural areas, agricultural operations can become the subject of public nuisance complaints.

     As a result, agricultural operators may be pressured to cease or curtail their operations.

     Such actions result in premature conversion of agricultural and open space land to the detriment of adjacent agricultural uses and the economic viability of the agricultural industry as a whole.

     One purpose for this chapter is to prevent loss of agricultural resources and damage to the local agricultural industry by creating a presumption that proper agricultural operations may not be deemed a public nuisance.

     An additional purpose of this section is to promote a good neighbor policy by requiring notification to purchasers and users of property near agricultural operations of the inherent inconveniences associated with such operations.

     Potential concerns may include, but are not limited to, the noises, odors, dust, chemicals, smoke and hours of operation that may accompany agricultural operations.

     Through mandatory disclosures and a grievance procedure, purchasers and users will better understand the impact of living near agricultural operations. (Ord. 612 § 1, 1999)

 

8.01.020 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section:

     “Agricultural land” means all that real property within the boundaries of the city of Brentwood, within its sphere of influence and within its planning area upon which agricultural activities, uses, operations or facilities exist at the time of the adoption of this ordinance or in the future.

     “Agricultural operation” means normal and customary farming and agricultural activities which may occur during any twenty-four-hour period of the day. Normal and customary farming and agricultural activities include, but are not limited to, the cultivation and tillage of the soil, the production, irrigation, cultivation, growing, harvesting and processing of any agricultural commodity for wholesale or retail markets, including viticulture, horticulture, the raising of livestock, fur bearing animals, fish or poultry, and any commercial agricultural practices performed as incident to or in conjunction with such activities including preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market, or to carriers for transportation to market.

     “Proper and accepted customs and standards” means compliance with all applicable local, state and federal statutes and regulations governing agricultural operations to a degree which is consistent with compliance by agricultural operations in Brentwood and the surrounding region. (Ord. 612 § 1, 1999)

 

8.01.030 Properly operated agricultural operation not a nuisance.
     No present or future agricultural operation conducted or maintained on agricultural lands, and in a manner consistent with proper and accepted customs and standards, shall be or become a public nuisance due to presence of a nonagricultural use near the agricultural operation if the agricultural operation has been established and was not a nuisance when it began. It shall be recognized that farm vehicles using public roadways oftentimes travel at slower speed than is customary for nonfarm vehicles. This shall not be considered a public nuisance. (Ord. 612 § 1, 1999)

 

8.01.040 Disclosure to current owners.
     Following adoption of this chapter, the city shall publish once a year in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city and/or the city newsletter the following disclosure statement:

 

             “The City of Brentwood has declared its policy to protect and encourage agricultural operations in its 1993 General Plan and has recently adopted a “Right to Farm Ordinance.” If your property is located in the City, near an agricultural operation, you may at times be subject to inconvenience or discomfort arising from those operations, including noise, odors, fumes, dust, smoke, insects, the operation of machinery (including aircraft) during any time of day or night, the storage and disposal of manure, and the ground or aerial application of fertilizers, soil amendments, seed, herbicides, and pesticides. These and other similar inconveniences will not be considered a public nuisance if they are conducted according to proper and accepted customs and standards. The Right to Farm Ordinance establishes a grievance procedure to help resolve any disputes between agricultural operators and their neighbors. This is only a summary of the Right to Farm Ordinance. If you wish further information about the meaning or effect of the ordinance or the grievance procedure set forth in it, please contact the City’s Community Development Department at 104 Oak Street, Brentwood, CA 94513.”

 

The disclosure statement set forth above is given for informational purposes only, and nothing in this section or in the disclosure statement shall prevent any person from taking any other available remedy concerning any unlawful or improper agricultural practice. (Ord. 612 § 1, 1999)

 

8.01.050 Disclosure in land use entitlements.
     Upon the issuance of a discretionary development entitlement, from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, including, but not limited to, tentative subdivision maps, parcel maps, and land use permits, for use on, adjacent to, or within two thousand feet of agricultural land, the entitlement shall include a condition that the owner(s) of the property shall be required to sign and record the disclosure statement set forth above in a final form approved by the city’s community development department. The signed disclosure statement shall be recorded by the owner(s) and run with the land. (Ord. 612 § 1, 1999)

 

8.01.060 Disclosure to buyers.
     In accordance with the provisions of Section 1102.6a of the California Civil Code, upon any transfer of real property adjacent to, or within two thousand feet of agricultural land by sale, exchange, installment land sale contract, lease with an option to purchase, any other option to purchase, or ground lease coupled with improvements, or residential stock cooperative improved with one to four dwelling units, the transferor shall deliver to the prospective transferee the disclosure statement set forth below, as soon as practicable following the transferee’s offer to purchase, or similar offer, but no later than five days before transfer of title. In all other respects, the disclosure statement shall be delivered in the manner set forth in Civil Code Sections 1102.3 and 1102.10, as may be amended.

     Exceptions to the application of this section are set forth in Civil Code Section 1102.2, as may be amended.

 

     Disclosure Statement:

 

“RIGHT TO FARM

REAL ESTATE TRANSFER DISCLOSURE

STATEMENT

THIS DISCLOSURE STATEMENT CONCERNS

THE REAL PROPERTY SITUATED IN THE

CITY OF BRENTWOOD, COUNTY OF

CONTRA COSTA, STATE OF CALIFORNIA,

DESCRIBED AS

 

_____________________________

     (Address and APN)

 

     DISCLOSURE OF THE CONDITION OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED PROPERTY OR PROPERTIES ADJACENT THERETO IS IN COMPLIANCE WITH BRENTWOOD MUNICIPAL CODE CHAPTER 8.01. IT IS NOT A WARRANTY OF ANY KIND BY THE SELLER(S) OR ANY AGENT(S) REPRESENTING ANY PRINCIPAL(S) IN THIS TRANSACTION, AND IS NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR ANY INSPECTIONS OR WARRANTIES THE PRINCIPAL(S) MAY WISH TO OBTAIN.

 

I.

SELLER’S INFORMATION

 

     The Seller discloses the following information with the knowledge that even though this is not a warranty, prospective Buyers may rely on this information in deciding whether and on what terms to purchase the subject property. Seller hereby authorizes any agent(s) representing any principal(s) in this transaction to provide a copy of this statement to any person or entity in connection with any actual or anticipated sale of this property.

 

     THE FOLLOWING ARE REPRESENTATIONS MADE BY THE SELLER(S) AS REQUIRED BY THE CITY OF BRENTWOOD, AND ARE NOT THE REPRESENTATIONS OF THE AGENT(S), IF ANY. THIS INFORMATION IS A DISCLOSURE AND IS NOT INTENDED TO BE PART OF ANY CONTRACT BETWEEN THE BUYER AND SELLER.

 

     The City of Brentwood permits and supports operation of properly conducted agricultural operations, as defined in the City’s Right To Farm Ordinance (Chapter 8.01 of the City Municipal Code), within its boundaries. If the property you are purchasing is located in the City, within two thousand (2000) feet of agricultural lands or operations, or within two thousand (2000) feet of an area zoned or designated by the City General Plan for agricultural purposes, you may be subject to inconveniences or discomfort arising from such operations. Such discomfort or inconveniences may include, but are not limited to, noise, odors, fumes, dust, smoke, insects, operation of machinery (including aircraft) during any 24-hour period, storage and disposal of manure, and the application by spraying or otherwise of chemical fertilizers, solid amendments, seed herbicides and pesticides. One or more of the inconveniences described may occur as a result of any agricultural operation that is in conformance with existing laws and regulations and with proper and accepted customs and standards. The City has determined that the use of real property for agricultural operations is a high priority and will not consider those inconveniences or discomforts arising from established agricultural operations to be a public nuisance, provided such operations are consistent with proper and accepted customs and standards.

 

     If you live near an agricultural area, you should be prepared to accept such inconveniences or discomfort as a normal and necessary aspect of living in a City with a historically strong rural character and an active agricultural sector. By utilizing the County of Contra Costa Agricultural Commissioner’s Office, the Brentwood Right to Farm Ordinance has a grievance procedure to help resolve any disputes which might arise between agricultural operators and their neighbors. This is only a summary of the Right to Farm Ordinance. If you wish further information about the meaning or effect of the ordinance or the grievance procedure set forth in it, please contact the City of Brentwood, Community Development Department.

 

     Seller certifies that the information herein is true and correct to the best of the Seller’s knowledge as of the date signed by the Seller.

 

     Seller______________Date:____________

 

     Seller______________Date:____________

 

II.

BUYER INFORMATION

 

     BUYER(S) AND SELLER(S) MAY WISH TO OBTAIN PROFESSIONAL ADVICE AND/OR INSPECTIONS OF THE PROPERTY AND TO PROVIDE FOR APPROPRIATE PROVISIONS IN A CONTRACT BETWEEN BUYER(S) AND SELLER(S) WITH RESPECT TO ANY ADVICE/INSPECTIONS/DEFECTS.

 

     I/WE ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT OF A COPY OF THIS STATEMENT.

 

     Seller:                     Date:

 

     Seller:                     Date:

 

     Buyer:                     Date:

 

     Buyer                      Date:

 

     Agent (Representing Seller):

 

     Date:

 

     (Associate Licensee or Broker):

 

     Agent (Obtaining the Offer):

                                     Date:

     (Associate Licensee or Broker)

 

     Present Assessor’s Parcel Number:

 

     A REAL ESTATE BROKER IS QUALIFIED TO ADVISE ON REAL ESTATE. IF YOU DESIRE LEGAL ADVICE, CONSULT YOUR ATTORNEY.”

(Ord. 612 § 1, 1999)

 

8.01.070 Refusal to sign disclosure statement (for seller only).
     If a transferee refuses to sign the disclosure statement set forth in Section 8.01.060, the transferor may comply with the requirements of this chapter by delivering the statement to the transferee and affixing and signing the following declaration to the statement:

 

     “I, (Name), have delivered a copy of the foregoing disclosure statement as required by law to (Transferee’s Name), who has refused to sign.

 

     I declare the foregoing to be true.

 

     Date:                       Signature:

 

     Print Name:                                     “

(Ord. 612 § 1, 1999)

 

8.01.080 Initial notification.
     A party who believes in good faith that an agricultural operation is causing inconvenience or discomfort and is conducted in a manner inconsistent with proper and accepted agricultural customs and standards shall notify the operator in writing of such concerns. The submission of such notification should be accompanied by personal discussions, if possible, to enable the claimant and the operator to attempt to reach a mutually agreeable reconciliation. (Ord. 612 § 1, 1999)

 

8.01.090 Grievance procedure.
     Should any controversy arise regarding any inconveniences or discomfort occasioned by agricultural operations, which cannot be settled by the required initial notification, the parties involved may agree to submit the controversy to the grievance committee established by the Contra Costa County Right to Farm Ordinance (County Ordinance No. 97-38) as set forth below.

     A.    An aggrieved party may submit the controversy to the Contra Costa County agricultural commissioner, by written request, within thirty days after the initial notification.

     B.     Thereafter, the grievance committee may investigate the facts of the controversy, but must, within thirty days hold a meeting to consider the merits of the matter and within twenty days of the meeting render a written decision to the parties. At the time of the meeting both parties shall have an opportunity to present what each considers to be pertinent facts.

     C.     The decision of the grievance committee shall be advisory only.

     D.    The effectiveness of the grievance committee to resolve disputes is dependent upon full discussion and complete presentation of all pertinent facts concerning the dispute in order to eliminate any misunderstandings. The parties are encouraged to cooperate in the exchange of pertinent information concerning the controversy. (Ord. 612 § 1, 1999)

 

8.01.100 Arbitration.
     If any controversy is not resolved by the initial notification or grievance procedure to the satisfaction of either party, the parties may agree to enter into an arbitration agreement providing for an arbitration proceeding in accordance with Title 9 (commencing with Section 1280) of Part III of the Code of Civil Procedure, or similar proceedings authorized by other applicable laws. (Ord. 612 § 1, 1999)

 

8.01.110 Agricultural buffer/transition area.
     In addition to the disclosure requirements described above, an agricultural buffer/transition area may be included in certain new developments adjacent to land designated in the city general plan for agricultural use in order to prevent the loss of productive agricultural land, minimize future potential conflicts between agricultural and nonagricultural land uses and protect public health and safety. The analysis to justify imposition of an agricultural buffer/transition area shall be undertaken on a case-by-case basis. (Ord. 612 § 1, 1999)

 

8.01.120 Construction with other laws.
     This chapter is not to be construed in any way as modifying, preempting or abridging any federal, state or Contra Costa County law or regulation. This chapter shall take precedence over all other provisions of this code, city ordinances or parts of ordinances, and council resolutions or parts of resolutions, in conflict herewith. (Ord. 612 § 1, 1999)

Chapter 8.04 FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
8.04.010 Definitions.
     A.    “Employee” means any person who works or handles food, with or without pay, in a food-handling establishment or who offers food for sale.

     B.     “Food” includes all articles used for food, drink, confectionery or condiment, whether simple or compound, and all substances and ingredients used in the preparation thereof.

     C.     “Food-handling establishment” includes restaurants and food-selling and food-processing establishments. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to meat-, milk- and poultry-processing establishments, frozen-food lockers, canneries and slaughter houses inspected by federal or state agencies, nor to such other plants and establishments for the packing, treatment and processing of agricultural products and crops of all kinds, including but without limiting the generality of the foregoing plants or establishments for the packing, treating, canning, freezing, dehydrating and other processing and packaging of agricultural products and crops, and the manufacture or other processing of byproducts therefrom, where such plants or establishments and/or the products thereof are subject to inspection by federal and/or state agencies, to insure that such products are in a good and sanitary state and condition and suitable for human consumption and which plants or establishments do not sell or deliver directly to the ultimate consumer.

     D.    “Food-selling and food-processing establishment” means any room, building, vehicle, facility, structure, place or portion thereof, whether stationary, movable, permanent or temporary, which is maintained, used or operated for the purpose of commercially selling, storing, packaging, transporting, making, cooking, mixing, processing, bottling, canning, packing, slaughtering or otherwise preparing or handling food, or vendors servicing vending machines handling unwrapped, unbottled, unpackaged or readily perishable food. This does not include restaurants, tank trucks, fresh-produce trucks, farm trucks or vehicles delivering only nonperishable food products in sealed, wrapped or bottled containers, or vending machines dispensing only bottled beverages or wrapped candy.

     E.     “Health officer,” unless otherwise modified, means the health officer of the city of Brentwood, his or her medical deputies, his or her sanitarians or his or her duly authorized representatives.

     F.     “Itinerant food-handling establishment” means one which operates for a temporary period in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or other similar gathering.

     G.    “Person” means any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation or association.

     H.    “Restaurant” means any restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order café, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, soda fountain, vehicle and any other eating or drinking establishment which sells or offers food or drink for sale to the public, as well as kitchens in which food or drink is prepared on the premises for sale or distribution elsewhere.

     I.      “Utensils” includes kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, containers, machinery, implements, receptacles, supplies or other equipment used for the storage, preparation, distribution or serving of food or drink. (Ord. 156 §§ 1, 2, 1966; Ord. 99 §§ 1.1—1.9, 1958)

 

8.04.020 Permit required—Application contents.
     It is unlawful for any person to operate a food-handling establishment in the city of Brentwood without having a valid, unsuspended, unrevoked permit from the health officer, as provided in this chapter. In any establishment where there are separate operations under separate management or ownership, each such operation is required to have a separate permit. Permits must be conditioned on compliance with all laws and regulations applicable to the subject person, premises or operation. Permits shall be issued only on written application, on forms provided by the health officer, containing such information regarding the applicant and the premises or operation involved as he deems necessary to facilitate enforcement of this chapter. Permits shall be dated and contain the name of the permittee and briefly describe or identify the licensed premises or operation. (Ord. 99 § 2.1, 1958)

 

8.04.030 Permit—Term.
     Permits shall be valid to and including the last day of the calendar year in which issued, unless sooner suspended or revoked. (Ord. 271, 1976; Ord. 156 § 3, 1966; Ord. 99 § 2.2, 1958)

 

8.04.040 Permit—Nontransferability.
     Permits shall not be transferable from one establishment, location or premises to another. (Ord. 99 § 2.3, 1958)

 

8.04.050 Permit—Posting for display.
     The permit shall be posted and displayed in a conspicuous place. (Ord. 99 § 2.4, 1958)

 

8.04.060 Permit—Not required for certain vehicles.
     No permit is required for vehicles transporting food to food-handling establishments. (Ord. 99 § 2.5, 1958)

 

8.04.070 Permit—Issuance limitation.
     No permit shall be issued by any city agency to any person proposing construction or alteration of any structure for use as a food-handling establishment until such plans as relate to this chapter have been approved by the health officer. (Ord. 99 § 2.6, 1958)

 

8.04.080 Permit—Inspection fees.
     The inspection fees set forth below are required for permits under this chapter, and are due and payable within thirty days from the billing date:

     A.    Food-handling establishments, eight dollars per year:

     1.     Restaurants,

     2.     Food-selling and food-processing establishments;

     B.     Exceptions from the eight-dollar per year fee:

     1.     Incidental food selling, including snack stands and vending machines, incidental to main business operations, with less than one hundred dollars retail value of food in stock, including vending machines, two dollars per year for each location,

     2.     Itinerant food handling, two dollars per booth or vehicle per year:

     a.     Carnivals and fairs,

     b.     Itinerant fruit and/or vegetable peddlers,

     3.     Delivery vehicles, two dollars per vehicle per year: This applies to any vehicle delivering food products directly to the consumer,

     4.     Nonprofit temporary food stands, no fee: This applies to food-handling establishments for fairs, carnivals or special events for nonprofit organizations;

     C.     Inspection fees for operations commencing between annual billing periods shall be as follows:

     1.     Upon the sale or transfer of a food-handling establishment, the permit for its operation shall be void until a new application is approved.

     2.     Inspection fees for operations commencing between annual billing periods shall be prorated on a monthly basis. (Ord. 156 §§ 4—6, 1966; Ord. 99 §§ 3.1—3.4, 1958)

 

8.04.090 Health permit—Required for employees.
     Every person working or handling food, with or without pay, in any food-handling establishment, must secure a health permit from the health officer within thirty days of the first employment in this city. (Ord. 99 § 4.1, 1958)

 

8.04.100 Health permit—Description, term and availability for inspection.
     The health permit shall be the negative report of the county health department chest X-ray or a letter from the health officer to the same effect, shall be valid for two years from date of issuance and must be replaced with a new permit prior to the expiration date. This permit must be in the possession of such person and readily available for inspection by the health department. (Ord. 114 § 1, 1961; Ord. 99 § 4.2, 1958)

 

8.04.110 Health permit—Responsibilities of employer and employee.
     It shall be the duty of each manager, operator or owner of any food-handling establishment to employ only persons having a valid health permit. It shall be the employee’s duty to have the permit in his or her possession, or immediately accessible, during working hours. (Ord. 99 § 4.3, 1958)

 

8.04.120 Sanitation—Compliance requirement.
     All food-handling establishments must comply with all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations of federal, state and local agencies. (Ord. 99 § 5.1, 1958)

 

8.04.130 Sanitation—Effect on exemption from permit or fee.
     An exemption from any permit or fee required under this chapter does not constitute exemption from sanitary requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 99 § 5.2, 1958)

 

8.04.140 Sanitation—Specifications for food-service openings.
     A.    When food-service openings to the outside are used in restaurants they shall have an area not exceeding two hundred seventy square inches with a maximum width of eighteen inches and a maximum height of fifteen inches. Triangular wide-base openings with a height not exceeding twenty-four inches are allowed. Additional service openings must be separated by a minimum of three feet.

     B.     Such openings shall be closable, at least with a wire screen of not coarser than sixteen mesh, when not in use. Each opening shall be further protected by overhead fans, or internal positive pressure which would produce an outward air flow of at least seventy-five linear feet per minute as measured by a standard velometer or have a system of duct work such that the discharge of air produces this outward flow of air through the opening. (Ord. 99 § 5.3, 1958)

 

8.04.150 Sanitation—Sinks for use in cutting meat, poultry and fish.
     A.    Every establishment where fresh meat, poultry and fish are cut shall be provided with a two-compartment metal sink with metal drain boards located conveniently to the meat, poultry and fish department, with an adequate supply of hot and cold water under pressure. Such sink is to be used exclusively for washing utensils commonly used by meat cutters.

     B.     This section does not apply to those establishments in existence before April 10, 1958, which have a single-compartment sink which effectively meets the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations governing the sanitization of utensils. When such sink is replaced, it must meet the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 156 § 7, 1966; Ord. 99 § 5.4, 1958)

 

8.04.160 Sanitation—Storage of readily perishable foods.
     A.    All readily perishable food must be maintained at either forty degrees Fahrenheit or lower or at one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit or higher when in storage, on display or in transit. Accurate Fahrenheit thermometers, suitable for measuring temperatures of food, shall be conspicuously affixed to food storage equipment, where possible, or shall be available at every establishment. Waste water from refrigeration equipment in fixed establishments shall be disposed of into an approved sanitary sewage disposal system through an indirect connection. Except for properly handled game, only food intended to be sold or served to the public shall be kept in refrigerated storage cabinets.

     B.     The following items are determined to be readily perishable: custard and cream-filled pastries, both real and synthetic; prepared salads with dressing; sandwiches using mayonnaise or salad dressing in the filling; and precooked meat, poultry and fish products which are not hermetically sealed. (Ord. 156 § 8, 1966; Ord. 99 § 5.5, 1958)

 

8.04.170 Sanitation—Instruction in handling food or discontinuance of food handling required when.
     If a person working in any food-handling establishment is found by the health officer to be handling food in a manner dangerous to the public health, the health officer may require the person and/or his or her employer to attend a course of instruction provided free by the health officer, or to discontinue handling of food, or both. (Ord. 156 § 8, 1966; Ord. 99 § 5.6, 1958)

 

8.04.180 Emergency suspension of permit authorized when—Revalidation.
     Where the health officer him or herself or his or her medical deputy in charge, makes a written finding that the public health is endangered by some act, omission or condition regulated under this chapter, in connection with any premises or operation licensed under this chapter, he may order the immediate cessation of such act, or abatement of such condition, or action to correct such condition, and may order the temporary emergency suspension of the permit applicable thereto and its removal from the person or premises and may post notice of such action in a conspicuous place. Such emergency suspension is in addition to and not limited by nor in derogation of any other authority or power which the health officer may have under present statutes or regulations. Such emergency suspension, as distinct from any other action authorized by law, is effective for a period of five days, including the first day upon which the permit is suspended. Any activity during that period which is regulated by this chapter is unlawful. At the end of that period, or sooner if a similar finding is made that the public health is no longer endangered, the permit becomes valid again unless a hearing is ordered pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 99 § 6.1, 1958)

 

8.04.190 Hearing on complaint—Suspension of permit—Revalidation.
     Where a written complaint is filed with the health officer that some applicable law or regulation is being violated by any person, premises or operation required to be licensed under this chapter, the health officer may order a hearing, and after the hearing may suspend the permit for not more than ninety days or until he is assured of compliance with the applicable laws or regulations, whichever is less, and may post notice of such action in a conspicuous place. At the end of said period, or when the health officer is satisfied of compliance, the permit becomes valid again. Any activity during that period which is regulated by this chapter is unlawful. (Ord. 99 § 6.2, 1958)

 

8.04.200 Revocation of permit authorized when.
     A permit may be revoked and confiscated where it has been suspended once and violations of this chapter or other applicable laws or regulations, or acts or omissions endangering the public health continue, and where the health officer him or herself or his or her medical deputy in charge, makes a written finding that correction of the situation is impracticable and that the public health is endangered thereby. The health officer may post notice of such action in a conspicuous place. (Ord. 99 § 6.3, 1958)

 

8.04.210 Hearings procedure—Notice required.
     In the case of hearings under Section 8.04.180, notice must be written and delivered to the person involved in or in charge of the premises or operation at least forty-eight hours before the hearing. Other hearings must be preceded by written notice, personally delivered or mailed to the person to whom the permit was issued at the latest address on file with the health officer not less than five nor more than fifteen days prior to the hearing date. The hearings shall be held in the City Hall unless some other location is specified in the notice. The hearings shall be conducted by the health officer him or herself or his or her medical deputy in charge. Hearings may not be continued or postponed for longer than ten days from the original date without the consent of the permittee. (Ord. 99 § 6.4, 1958)

 

8.04.220 Hearings procedure—Filing notice of appeal.
     Appeals may be taken from the results of any hearing to the city council by a written notice of appeal stating fully the matters or action appealed from, and the grounds for the appeal, which must be filed with the city clerk within fifteen days of the action appealed from. The city council must then schedule the appeal for hearing within thirty days of the filing of the notice of appeal. (Ord. 99 § 6.5, 1958)

 

8.04.230 Exemptions.
     This chapter is not intended to regulate the sanitation of retail food production and marketing establishments. (Ord. 271, 1976; Ord. 99 § 6.7, 1958)

 

8.04.240 Violation a misdemeanor.
     Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor, and constitutes a separate offense on each day committed. (Ord. 99 § 6.6, 1958)

Chapter 8.08 RESTAURANTS
8.08.010 Definitions.
     The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the enforcement of this chapter:

     A.    “Restaurant” means restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order café, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, soda fountain and all other eating or drinking establishments, as well as kitchens or other places in which food or drink is prepared for sale elsewhere.

     B.     “Itinerant restaurant” means one operating for a temporary period in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or other similar gathering.

     C.     “Employee” means any person who handles food or drink during preparation or serving, or who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils, or who is employed in a room in which food or drink is prepared or served.

     D.    “Utensils” includes any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, utensils, containers or other equipment with which food or drink comes in contact during storage, preparation or serving.

     E.     “Health officer” means the health officer of the city or county, or authorized representative.

     F.     “Person” means person, firm, corporation or association. (Ord. 16 § 1, 1948)

 

8.08.020 Permit required—Posting, suspension and revocation.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person who does not possess an unrevoked permit from the health officer to operate a restaurant in the city of Brentwood. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place. Only persons who comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. A person conducting an itinerant restaurant shall also be required to secure a permit.

     B.     Such a permit may be temporarily suspended by the health officer upon the violation by the holder of any of the terms of this chapter, or revoked after an opportunity for a hearing by the health officer upon a serious or repeated violation. (Ord. 16 § 2, 1948)

 

8.08.030 Permit suspension—Reinstatement procedure.
     Any restaurant, the permit of which has been suspended, may at any time make application for the reinstatement of the permit. Within one week after the receipt of a satisfactory application, accompanied by a statement signed by the applicant to the effect that the violated provision or provisions of this chapter have been conformed with, the health officer or assistant shall make a reinspection, and thereafter as many additional reinspections as he may deem necessary to assure him or herself that the applicant is again complying with the requirements. In case the findings indicate compliance, the health officer shall reinstate the permit. (Ord. 16 § 5, 1948)

 

8.08.040 Diseased person—Employment restrictions.
     No person who is affected with any disease in a communicable form or who is a carrier of such disease shall work in any restaurant, and no restaurant shall employ any such person or any person suspected of being affected with any disease in a communicable form or of being a carrier of such disease. If the restaurant manager suspects that any employee has contracted any disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of such disease he or she shall notify the health officer immediately. (Ord. 16 § 6, 1948)

 

8.08.050 Diseased person—Duties of health officer.
     When suspicion arises as to the possibility of transmission of infection from any restaurant employee, the health officer is authorized to require any or all of the following measures:

     A.    The immediate exclusion of the employee from all restaurants;

     B.     The immediate closing of the restaurant concerned until no further danger of disease outbreak exists, in the opinion of the health officer;

     C.     Adequate medical examinations of the employee and of his or her associates, with such laboratory examinations as may be indicated. (Ord. 16 § 7, 1948)

 

8.08.060 Examination and condemnation of unwholesome food.
     Samples of food, drink and other substances may be taken and examined by the health officer as often as may be necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness or adulteration. The health officer may condemn and forbid the sale of, or cause to be removed, denatured, or destroyed, any food or drink which is unwholesome or adulterated. (Ord. 16 § 3, 1948)

 

8.08.070 Sanitation—Generally.
     All restaurants shall comply with all of the items of sanitation set out in Sections 8.08.080 through 8.08.230 and all state and municipal regulations or statutes. (Ord. 16 § 4, 1948)

 

8.08.080 Sanitation—Floors.
     The floors of all rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or served, or in which utensils are washed, shall be constructed of an impervious substance and shall be kept clean and in good repair. In restaurants of new construction, all floors shall be constructed with a cove base and shall be rat-resistant throughout. (Ord. 16 § 4(1), 1948)

 

8.08.090 Sanitation—Walls, ceilings, stoves and ventilation.
     The walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be kept clean and in good repair. All walls and ceilings of rooms in which food or drink is stored or prepared shall be finished in a light color. The walls of all rooms in which food or drink is prepared or utensils washed shall have painted surfaces which are smooth and washable. All stoves and ranges shall be provided with metal hoods, ventilated with a ventilator or a flue of adequate size arranged and

 

maintained to carry off odors. Cooking stoves and ranges shall be placed not less than twenty inches from any wall in restaurants of new construction. (Ord. 16 § 4(2), 1948)

 

8.08.100 Sanitation—Doors and windows.
     All openings into the outer air shall be effectively screened and doors shall be self-closing, unless other effective means are provided to prevent the entrance of flies. All windows shall be of flush construction without sills in the case of new construction or remodeling of premises. (Ord. 16 § 4(3), 1948)

 

8.08.110 Sanitation—Lighting.
     All rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or served, or in which utensils are washed, shall be well lighted. (Ord. 16 § 4(4), 1948)

 

8.08.120 Sanitation—Ventilation.
     All rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or served, or in which utensils are washed, shall be well ventilated. (Ord. 16 § 4(5), 1948)

 

8.08.130 Sanitation—Toilet facilities.
     Every restaurant shall be provided with adequate and conveniently located toilet facilities on the premises for its employees. All toilets shall be ventilated adequately to the outside air and shall not open into a room in which food is prepared. The doors of all toilets shall be self-closing. (Ord. 16 § 4(6), 1948)

 

8.08.140 Sanitation—Water supply.
     Running water under pressure shall be accessible to all rooms in which food is prepared or utensils are washed. The water supply shall be adequate and of safe, sanitary quality. (Ord. 16 § 4(7), 1948)

 

8.08.150 Sanitation—Lavatories.
     Adequate and convenient hand-washing facilities shall be provided, including running water, soap and single-service towels. The use of a common towel is prohibited. No employee shall begin work on arrival or resume work after using the toilet room without first washing his or her hands. (Ord. 16 § 4(8), 1948)

 

8.08.160 Sanitation—Utensils and other equipment.
     All multiuse utensils and all show and display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerating equipment, sinks and other equipment used in connection with the operation of a restaurant shall be so constructed as to be easily cleaned and shall be kept clean and in good repair. Utensils containing or plated with cadmium or lead shall not be used, but solder containing lead may be used for jointing. Cutting boards or service tables shall be made of hard wood and shall be readily removable to allow cleaning the sides and bottom. Wood shelves or racks shall be of smooth finish and oil-painted. In restaurants of new construction, sinks shall have three compartments and metal drain boards, and shall be provided with burners capable of maintaining a temperature of one hundred seventy degrees in the rinse compartment. (Ord. 16 § 4 (9), 1948)

 

8.08.170 Sanitation—Cleaning specifications for utensils and other equipment.
     A.    All equipment including display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerators, stoves, hoods and sinks shall be smooth and kept clean and free from dust, dirt, insects and other contaminating material. All cloths used by waiters, chefs and other employees shall be clean. Single-service containers shall be used only once.

     B.     After thorough cleaning, all multiuse eating and drinking utensils shall be effectively subjected to either:

     1.     Immersion for at least two minutes in clean water at a temperature of at least one hundred seventy degrees Fahrenheit; or

     2.     Immersion for at least two minutes in a lukewarm chlorine solution containing at least one hundred parts per million of available chlorine. All multiuse utensils used in the preparation or serving of food and drink shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process immediately following the day’s operation. If used, drying cloths shall be clean and used for no other purpose.

     C.     No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanide preparation or other poisonous materials shall be used for the cleaning or polishing of utensils. (Ord. 16 § 4(10), 1948)

 

8.08.180 Sanitation—Storage requirements for utensils.
     After bactericidal treatment, utensils shall be stored in a clean dry place, protected from flies, dust and other contamination, and shall be handled in such a manner as to prevent contamination as far as practicable. Single-service utensils shall be purchased only in sanitary containers, shall be stored therein in a clean dry place until used, and shall be handled in a sanitary manner. (Ord. 16 § 4(11), 1948)

 

8.08.190 Sanitation—Disposal of wastes.
     All wastes shall be properly disposed of and all garbage and trash shall be kept in metal garbage cans with tight-fitting covers. Garbage shall be removed regularly. It should be kept at all times in such a manner as not to become a nuisance. (Ord. 16 § 4(12), 1948)

 

8.08.200 Sanitation—Refrigeration requirements.
     All readily perishable food and drink shall be kept at or below fifty degrees Fahrenheit except when being prepared or served. Waste water from refrigeration equipment shall be disposed into a sanitary sewer. (Ord. 16 § 4(13), 1948)

 

8.08.210 Sanitation—Food required to be wholesome.
     All food and drink shall be clean, wholesome, free from spoilage and so prepared as to be safe for human consumption. (Ord. 16 § 4(14), 1948)

 

8.08.220 Sanitation—Storage, display and serving of food.
     All food and drink shall be so stored, displayed and served as to be protected from dust, flies, vermin, pollution by rodents, unnecessary handling, droplet infection, overhead leakage and other contamination. No animals or fowl shall be kept or allowed in any room in which food or drink is prepared or stored. Bulk foods stored inside the building shall be kept at least six inches off the floor on racks, except when stored in metal cans. Bulk foods stored outside the building shall be kept at least eighteen inches above the ground on racks. (Ord. 16 § 4(15), 1948)

 

8.08.230 Sanitation—Miscellaneous regulations—Clothing for employees.
     The premises of all restaurants shall be kept clean and free of litter or rubbish. None of the operations connected with a restaurant shall be conducted in any room used as living or sleeping quarters. Adequate lockers or dressing rooms shall be provided for employees’ clothing and shall be kept clean. Soiled linens, coats and aprons shall be kept in containers provided for this purpose. Employees’ clothing shall not be kept in rooms where food is prepared or served, nor in the toilets. (Ord. 16 § 4(16), 1948)

 

8.08.240 Violation a misdemeanor—Penalty.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the city jail of the city of Brentwood or the County Jail of the county of Contra Costa for a term not exceeding ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 16 § 8, 1948)

Chapter 8.16 SOLID WASTE
8.16.010 Applicability of provisions.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all of the territory lying within the city of Brentwood. The provisions of this chapter relating to the city’s provision of solid waste service shall also apply in any additional areas where the city provides service. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.020 Declaration of purpose.
     In enacting this chapter, the city council finds as follows:

     A.    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate solid waste handling in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to meet the city’s obligations under the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (Public Resources Code Section 40000 et seq.) (Hereinafter “AB 939”).

     B.     The city is obligated by AB 939 to implement plans for solid waste source reduction, reuse, and recycling to meet specified achievement milestones.

     C.     The city is obligated by AB 341 to make commercial and multifamily recycling services available to customers.

     D.    Pursuant to the California Constitution, the city is authorized to enact ordinances to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 40059 aspects of solid waste handling of local concern include, but are not limited to, the frequency of collection, means of collection and transportation, level of service, charges and fees, and whether solid waste services are to be provided by means of non-exclusive, partially exclusive, or wholly exclusive franchise, contract, license or permit, and the terms and conditions of such franchise, license, or permit. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.030 Severability.
     If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. The city council declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, clause, and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional, and would have passed and adopted the same even though any parts, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases that may be held invalid had been omitted therefrom. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.040 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

     “AB 341” means the California Jobs and Recycling Act of 2011 (Chapter 476, Statutes of 2011 (Chesbro, AB 341)), also commonly referred to as “AB 341,” as amended, supplemented, superseded, and replaced from time to time.

     “Agreement” means a contract entered into between the city and a contractor providing for, among other things, the award of a franchise, payment of franchise fees, and procedures for the contractor’s collection, transportation, processing, and/or disposal of materials and the setting of rates and charges for services.

     “Applicable law” means all laws, statutes, rules, regulations, guidelines, permits, actions, determinations, orders, approvals, or requirements of the United States, state of California, regional or local government authorities, agencies, boards, commissions, courts, or other bodies having applicable jurisdiction, that from time to time apply to or govern the management of solid waste, hazardous waste, medical waste, or any other materials described in this chapter.

     “Biohazardous waste” means laboratory waste including human or animal specimen cultures from medical and pathology laboratories; cultures and stock of infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories; waste from the production of bacteria, viruses, spores, discarded live and attenuated vaccines used in human health care or research, and discarded animal vaccines; human or animal surgery specimens or tissues, which may contain infectious agents known to be contagious to humans; waste containing discarded materials contaminated with excretion exudates or secretions from humans that are required to be isolated by infection control staff, the attending physician, or local health officer to protect others from highly communicable diseases.

     “Cart” means a wheeled container, thirty-two gallons, sixty-four gallons, or ninety-six gallons (or similar sizes) in size provided by the city for solid waste, recyclable materials, green waste, or organic materials collection.

     “City” means the city of Brentwood, a municipal corporation, and its duly authorized representatives.

     “City-authorized service provider” means a permittee or franchisee authorized by the city council which has received written approval, through a contract or otherwise, to collect, transport, process, or dispose of solid waste, recyclable materials, green waste, organic materials, or C&D debris within the city.

     “Commercial” describes any property, premises, or place which is not residential, as that term is defined in this section.

     “Construction and demolition debris” or “C&D debris” includes, but is not limited to, concrete, cinder blocks, brick, mortar, wood, glass, metal, and other materials removed and discarded during the alteration, renovation, remodeling, repair, construction, or demolition of pavements, houses, commercial buildings or structures which can be separated from solid waste for the purpose of reuse, reprocessing, or remanufacture.

     “Container” means a receptacle used to accumulate solid waste, recyclable materials, green waste, or organic materials on premises for scheduled or periodic collection. Container may be carts, bags, front loader bins, front loader compactor bins, roll-off boxes, roll-off compactors, or other city-approved receptacles.

     “Customer” means a person subscribing with the city for collection services.

     “Director of finance” means the director of finance and information systems for the city of Brentwood or any designee of the director of finance as being authorized to address specific issues covered by this chapter.

     “Director of public works” means the director of public works for the city of Brentwood or any designee of the director of public works as being authorized to address specific issues covered by this chapter.

     “Electronic waste” means any refuse created by discarded electronic waste and components as well as substances involved in their manufacture or use as defined under various federal, state, local, or municipal laws, rules, orders, regulations, statutes, ordinances, codes, decrees, or requirements, as they may be amended from time to time, of any government authority regulating, relating to, or imposing liability or standards of conduct concerning any hazardous waste.

     “Fire service provider” means the authorized agency or company providing fire fighting, management, permitting, and other related services to the city.

     “Food scraps” means food scraps such as those discarded organic materials that will decompose and/or putrefy including: (1) all kitchen and table food waste, and animal or vegetable waste that attends or results from the storage, preparation, cooking or handling of food stuffs; and (2) paper waste contaminated with food (such as, but not limited to, paper plates, napkins, pizza boxes, and paper towels contaminated with food). Food scraps is a subset of organic materials.

     “Franchise” means the exclusive or non-exclusive rights granted by the city council to provide collection services to customers in the city.

     “Franchisee” means the holder of a franchise in the city.

     “Franchise fee” means the fee paid by contractor to city for the privilege to hold a franchise.

     “Front loader bin” means a metal container with a hinged lid and wheels, less than ten cubic yards in size, for the deposit of solid waste, recyclable materials, or green waste, designed to be collected with a front- or rear-loading collection vehicle.

     “Front loader compactor bin” means a bin with an attachment that compacts waste placed in the bin.

     “Green waste” means those materials that will decompose and/or putrefy, including, but not limited to, green trimmings, grass, weeds, leaves, prunings, branches, dead plants, brush, tree trimmings, dead trees, small pieces of unpainted and untreated wood, and other types of organic waste. Green waste is a subset of organic materials.

     “Hazardous waste” includes any waste material or mixture of waste material(s) which is toxic, corrosive, flammable, an irritant, a strong sensitizer, which generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other means, if such a waste or mixture of waste may cause substantial personal injury, serious illness or harm to humans, domestic animals, or wildlife, during, or as an approximate result of any disposal of such waste or mixtures of waste as defined under various federal, state, local, or municipal laws, rules, orders, regulations, statutes, ordinances, codes, decrees, or requirements of any government authority regulating, relating to, or imposing liability or standards of conduct concerning any hazardous substance, together with any amendments of or regulations promulgated under such laws, and any other federal, state, or local law, statute, ordinance, or regulation in effect prior to the time of adoption of this chapter or later enacted that pertains to occupational health or industrial hygiene, or the regulation or protection of the environment, including ambient air, soil, soil vapor, groundwater, surface water, or land use.

     “Household hazardous waste” means those hazardous waste materials discarded, typically in small quantities, by households (as opposed to large quantities disposed by businesses). Typical household hazardous waste includes used motor oil and oil filters, antifreeze and other vehicle fluids, paints and varnish, pesticides, electronic waste, universal waste and cleaning supplies.

     “Infectious waste” refers to all waste materials which are defined as being injurious to the public health or safety by federal, state, or county statutes, legislation, policies, or rules and regulations as they may be amended from time to time. Examples include, but are not limited to, needles and syringes and other instruments used to administer medication, disposable diapers, rags or other materials used to clean areas infected by human or animal waste, and other materials contaminated with or exposed to infected or contagious individuals, animals, or materials.

     “Junk” refers to trash, scrap, solid waste, dirt, litter, debris, and similar matter and materials, but excluding swill, and green waste. Examples of junk includes, but are not limited to, metals, concrete, rocks, earth, sand, milled wood, rough lumber, glass, rubber, leather, bricks, minerals, plastics, oils, grease, rags, crockery, cardboard, paper, cans, bottles, jars, ashes and house sweepings, vehicle parts, packing boxes, and similar items. Junk also includes, but is not limited to, the following when located out-of-doors: any refrigerator, washing machine, clothes dryer, sink, stove, heater, boiler, tank, toilet, appliances, household equipment or machinery, furniture (other than furniture designed and used for outdoor activities), parts of any of the above, and similar items, but shall not include any machinery or equipment installed for household and recreational use which is in a fully operational condition.

     “Litter” consists of solid waste, waste matter, junk, debris, vehicle parts, and all other materials, things, or objects which creates a public nuisance and particularly when such items exist within the public right-of-way, parks, or other city-owned or managed property.

     “Medical waste” means waste which is generated or produced as a result of any of the following actions: diagnosis, treatment, or immunization of humans or animals; research pertaining to the above; the production or testing of biologicals and sharps waste.

     “Multifamily” refers to a dwelling which includes two or more individual dwelling units and is billed as one account, but serves multiple dwelling units. Multifamily is a subset of residential.

     “Organic materials” means those materials that will decompose and/or putrefy and that the city’s municipal code permits, directs, and/or requires generators to separate from solid waste and recyclable materials for collection in specially designated carts for organic materials collection. Organic materials include green waste and food scraps. No discarded material shall be considered organic materials, however, unless such material is separated from solid waste and recyclable material.

     “Person” means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, business concern, partnership, association, limited liability company, public entity, and corporation.

     “Premises” means a specific lot or area of real property served by the city or any such lot or area in general. Premises include permanent and transient human dwellings and places of accommodation, commerce, or recreation.

     “Putrescible” means to rot, subject to decomposition by microorganisms.

     “Recyclable materials” means all materials approved by the city for collection in its recycling program.

     “Residential” describes any property, premises or place on which is constructed one or more buildings or other structures containing one or more dwelling units. Residential includes both multifamily and single-family premises.

     “Roll-off box” means a solid waste container of ten cubic yards or larger.

     “Roll-off compactor” means solid waste containers approximately ten to fifty cubic yards in capacity with a trash compaction mechanism attached that pushes and compresses waste into the container, and that must be removed from the collection site for disposal.

     “Salvage” or “salvaging” refers to the authorized and controlled accumulation of solid waste materials for subsequent reuse.

     “Salvageable materials” refer to items that can be put to subsequent reuse.

     “Sharps” means any device having acute rigid corners, edges, or protuberances capable of cutting or piercing, including, but not limited to, all of the following:

     1.     Hypodermic needles, hypodermic needles with syringes, blades, needles with attached tubing, syringes contained with biohazardous waste, acupuncture needles, and root canal files.

     2.     Broken glass items, such as Pasteur pipettes and blood vials contaminated with biohazardous waste.

     3.     Any item capable of cutting or piercing that is contaminated with trauma scene waste.

     “Single-family” refers to residential premises or customers receiving individual solid waste collection services. Single-family is a subset of residential.

     “Solid waste” or “waste” means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semi-solid, and liquid wastes, including trash, paper, ashes, commercial and industrial wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes, and other discarded solid and semi-solid wastes. Solid waste or waste includes recyclable materials that are discarded by the generators of such materials and mixed waste which include both recyclable and non-recyclable materials. Solid waste or waste does not include any of the following waste: (1) hazardous waste, as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40141; (2) radioactive waste; and (3) medical waste regulated pursuant to the Medical Waste Management Act.

     “Swill” means all putrefactive or easily decomposable animal or vegetable matter, which is likely to attract flies or rodents and which has a property value.

     “Universal waste” means any waste where the resultant materials from a process cannot be clearly identified as the source of generation because they come from an infinite number of sources as defined under various federal, state, local, or municipal laws, rules, orders, regulations, statutes, ordinances, codes, decrees, or requirements, as they may be amended from time to time, of any government authority regulating, relating to, or imposing liability or standards of conduct concerning any hazardous waste. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.050 Division of solid waste—Authority of director of public works.
     The director of public works shall have authority to make and enforce rules and regulations concerning the collection, recycling, reconstitution, recovery, processing, and disposal of solid waste, recyclable materials, organic materials, and C&D debris pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. This authority shall include, without limitation, the authority to require any person or entity receiving solid waste, recyclable materials, organic materials, and/or C&D debris collection service, whether such service is provided by the city or by another party, to implement specified measures to prevent the accumulation of materials outside of the container(s) used by the person or entity, or to prevent the container(s) from creating a hazard or interference with the use of any public right-of-way. Such measures may include, but are not limited to, requiring that the container(s) be locked, and restricting or prohibiting the placement of containers on city streets, alleys, or on sidewalks. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.060 Division of solid waste—Equipment and employees.
     The city is authorized and directed to employ all persons necessary for the collection, recycling, reconstitution, recovery, processing, and disposal of solid waste, recyclable materials, and organic materials by the city and, in conformance with the city’s purchasing rules and regulations, is further authorized and empowered to purchase or lease, or to recommend the purchase or lease, of all necessary trucks, trailers or other vehicles, supplies or other equipment, land and real or personal property, necessary for carrying into effect the provisions of this chapter relative to the collection, recycling, reconstitution, recovery, processing, and disposal of solid waste, recyclable materials, organic materials, and/or C&D debris by the division of solid waste of the public works department of the city. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.070 Division of solid waste—Exclusive right to collect.
     The city, its duly authorized agents, contractors, volunteers, permittees, franchisees, or employees, shall have the exclusive right to gather, collect, recycle, reconstitute, recover, and dispose of by landfilling or sale, all solid waste, recyclable materials, and organic materials, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, within the city. The city council may authorize and empower the director of public works to dispose of the same in such manner as it may deem proper for the best interest of the city and in compliance with applicable law. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.080 Exceptions to exclusive right to collect.
     It is unlawful for any other person to engage in solid waste handling services within the city, except as provided for below and all persons currently engaging in solid waste handling services within the city may cease such operations immediately upon receiving written notice from the city. The city has granted permission for the following exceptions to the city’s exclusive collection:

     A.    Certain Permittees or Franchisees. Any permittees or franchisees granted a non-exclusive right to collect by the city.

     B.     Certain Recyclable Materials. Recyclable materials generated on and collected from business premises where the recyclable materials collector holds a valid permit from the city, subject to the requirements of the permit and of Section 8.16.090(E) of this chapter.

     C.     Actual Solid Waste Generators. The actual generators of solid waste and the owners of property upon which solid waste has accumulated may personally engage in solid waste handling services, but only as to the solid waste which they have actually produced or which has accumulated on their own property, and provided that they comply with the provisions of this chapter and with any other applicable laws. Except in accordance with this subsection and subsection D, actual generators and property owners shall not allow any other person, except the city or city-authorized service provider(s), to perform solid waste handling services for the solid waste which they have produced, which has accumulated on their property, or which they otherwise own or control.

     D.    Construction Contractors. The actual generators of C&D debris and the owners of property upon which C&D debris has accumulated, may engage the contractor who produced all or a part of said C&D debris to perform solid waste handling services for all or part of the C&D debris generated during the construction project, provided that all such contractors comply with the provisions of this chapter and with any other applicable laws. Said actual generators and property owners shall not allow any other person, except for the city, city-authorized service provider to perform solid waste handling services for the C&D debris which they have produced, which has accumulated on their property, or which they otherwise own or control.

     E.     Gardeners and Landscapers. Gardeners or landscapers may transport green waste generated by their work, only if transported by their own employees in the gardener or landscaper’s own vehicles to permitted facilities where such material will be diverted from landfilling through composting or other beneficial use which is not counted as disposal by the California Integrated Waste Management Board, without obtaining a solid waste collection permit.

     F.     Cleanup Services. Any person whose primary business is the cleanup of solid waste on the property of another and who, incidental to such business:

     1.     Hauls only the solid waste which he or she cleans up and no other solid waste;

     2.     Performs cleanup services such as removing junk from businesses, garages, and residential properties, but does not remove solid waste from construction sites;

     3.     Uses their own vehicle to haul the solid waste which they clean up;

     4.     Does not use a front loader bin, roll-off box, or other container, whether or not such container is left at the cleanup site, to accomplish the cleanup, collection, or transportation of the solid waste, may transport solid waste in accordance with this subsection without a permit or franchise; and

     5.     Does not use a commercial collection vehicle such as a front loader, side loader, rear loader, end-dump truck or roll-off truck.

     G.    Non-Profit Charities. Non-profit charities registered with the Attorney General of the state periodically accepting donations of recyclable or salvageable materials may transport said materials, provided that the charity transport the materials to a recycling facility or re-use store and that charity volunteers and employees comply with the provisions of this chapter and with any other applicable laws.

     H.    e-Steward Recycler. Any person, company, or entity may collect electronic waste within the city as long as the recycler meets the Basel Action Network e-Stewards Recycler certification standards. No electronic waste recycler located within the city may accept any electronic waste for recycling unless that recycler meets the certification standards as required by the city.

     I.      Transport Only. Any person may transport solid waste generated and collected in other jurisdictions over city streets provided they comply with the provisions of this chapter and with any other applicable laws, and provided further that they do not engage in any solid waste handling services within the city.

     J.      Document Destruction Companies. Companies whose primary purpose is the destruction of documents or records that, incidental to this purpose, collect paper and deliver such paper, after shredding and or destruction, to a recycling facility, are not required to obtain authorization from the city to transport this material.

     K.    Emergencies. In the event of an emergency, including, but not limited to, the breakdown of equipment or other unforeseen or unpreventable circumstances, or where in the judgment of the city the particular situation justifies such action, the city may issue limited or temporary permits or contracts to any person to perform solid waste handling services, subject to reasonable fees, charges, and conditions as the circumstances may warrant and as the parties involved may agree upon, provided that such fees and charges received from or paid to any person under this subsection for any period exceeding fifteen days in duration shall be approved by the city council.

     L.     Request for Exemption. Parties may request a written exemption from the director of public works to permit the collection and/or transport of solid waste for niche services not otherwise provided exclusively by the city. Approval is at the sole discretion of the director of public works and is subject to the requirements of a permit or franchise.

     This chapter shall not be construed as prohibiting the owner or tenant of any premises in the city from carrying away any such solid waste, on an infrequent or occasional basis in order to reduce the amount to be taken away by the city or its duly authorized agents, but no person shall be authorized by this section to carry away such solid waste if such person receives the benefits of the use of any such solid waste for feed for poultry, hogs, or other livestock unless such person receives permission from the director of public works.

     This section shall not be construed as relieving any person from paying the regular fees and charges associated with collection service. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.090 Contracting for solid waste services.
     A.    Authorized. The city may let contracts, including franchises, permits, contracts, or agreements for exclusive or limited collection, processing, disposal, and/or transportation services, with any person for the removal of solid waste, recyclable or salvageable material, organic materials, or other materials described in this chapter. The city may set bond and insurance requirements as a condition of such authorization.

     B.     Revocation. Any such agreement may be revoked at any time by the city council for noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter, subject to the terms and conditions of such agreement, including any applicable notice and cure provisions.

     C.     Authorized Service Providers. Each person authorized to provide specified collection services within the city may obtain and maintain all appropriate licenses and all forms of agreement, authorization, permit, franchise, or contract. Each city-authorized service provider shall comply with all applicable laws. City-authorized service providers may not perform services outside the scope permitted by the city or by this chapter.

     D.    Solid Waste Facilities. No person shall construct or operate a solid waste management enterprise or facility including, but not limited to, a material recovery facility, landfill, composting facility, or buy-back recycling center, or collect any form of solid waste in the city, without first satisfying all applicable city requirements for land use approval, franchises, permits, payment of development impact fees and/or host fees, and any other approvals required under applicable law.

     E.     Collection Permits and Franchises. The city is required to comply with detailed requirements to the state of California regarding managing and reporting the disposition of solid waste and recyclable materials generated within the city. In order to facilitate compliance with these requirements the director of public works may require persons collecting solid waste, C&D debris, recyclable or salvageable materials, or organic materials from residential or commercial premises within the city to obtain a permit or franchise and hold a business license in the city. The permit or franchise may require such persons to provide the city with certain information regarding collection services provided in the city by the permittee or franchise holder that include, but are not necessarily limited to: service address, service volume, service frequency, proof of recycling or material diversion, and proof of city business license. The particular terms and conditions of the permit shall be determined by the director of public works approved to form by the city attorney and shall be applied consistently for all permit holders. Each permit shall be renewed annually on or before July 1st. The city may require a permit fee and/or application fee for such permits to cover the cost of administration and application review as set forth in the city’s cost allocation plan. The particular terms and conditions of a franchise shall be approved by the city council and may be applied differentially to franchisees based on the types of services for which they have received a franchise. The city council may, in the granting of any individual franchise, establish a franchise fee specific to that franchise. Such a franchise fee shall be retained by the general fund. The city council may also adopt an administrative fee applicable to any franchise which shall be retained by the solid waste enterprise fund to offset the enterprise’s cost of tracking solid waste compliance with state and local recycling mandates. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.100 Inspection of collection premises.
     The director of public works may visit all premises within the city limits from time to time and examine the sanitary conditions of said premises to determine whether the provisions of this chapter are complied with. Upon notification by the director of public works or other authorized representative thereof, all persons, including city-authorized service providers, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.110 Improper deposit of solid waste.
     It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, keep, or bury any solid waste, recyclable materials, or organic materials on, in, or under any premises, as hereinafter provided. It is unlawful for any person to dump or place any material into, or to utilize, any container without consent of the owner or lessee of the container. It is unlawful for any person to deposit any solid waste, green waste, or recyclable materials in any city sewer or plumbing fixture or pipe connected thereto, except through an approved mechanical device which shreds and grinds said material. It is unlawful for any person to bury solid waste, recyclable materials or organic materials. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.120 Accumulation of solid waste.
     It is unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person in charge of any premises to allow the accumulation of any solid waste or green waste in, on, or under any premises at any time which is, or may become, a menace to health and sanitation or a fire hazard. It is unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person in charge of any premises to ever at any time suffer, permit, or allow any solid waste of any kind to remain in, on, or under such premises for a period in excess of seven days and/or recyclable materials and/or organic materials for a period in excess of fourteen days. All solid waste, recyclable materials, and organic materials shall be kept in containers as hereinafter provided. Notwithstanding the foregoing, junk which is too large or bulky to be placed in such containers may be kept instead in an enclosed structure or storage unit. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any property or premises is hereby declared an unlawful public nuisance, is hereby prohibited, and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 8.00 (Nuisances) of this code. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.130 Placing litter on street, sidewalk, alley, or public place.
     It is unlawful for any person to throw, place, scatter, or deposit, or cause to be thrown, placed, scattered, or deposited, upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or public place in the city, any litter, solid waste, recyclable materials, or organic materials, except that a property owner, occupant, tenant, customer, or their employee may place properly containerized or packaged materials at the curbside, parkway, or alley on regularly scheduled days provided by the city for removal of the same. Any litter, solid waste, recyclable materials, organic materials, or other materials located in the public right-of-way immediately adjacent to a premises shall be deemed to have originated from that premises unless the owner thereof can prove, to the reasonable satisfaction of the director of public works, that such materials did not originate from their property. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.140 Burning of solid waste in public places.
     It is unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste, recyclable material, organic materials, hazardous waste, infectious waste, or any other material described in this chapter on any street, alley, park, or public place within the city limits. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.150 Burning of solid waste on private property.
     Burning solid waste, recyclable material, organic materials, hazardous waste, infectious waste, or any other material described in this chapter on private property within the city is prohibited, unless a permit to do so has first been obtained from the city’s fire service provider and shall be subject to any conditions as the chief of the city’s fire service provider shall impose and shall be subject to the regulations of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District and any other applicable regulatory agency. No permit may be issued for the burning of any material which will emit dense soot or smoke or liberate obnoxious odors, nor shall any permit be granted for burning which will create hazards to persons or property. The residue from such burning shall be thoroughly extinguished without delay, so that no smoldering occurs. The city’s fire service provider may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this section for failure to comply with the regulations of this chapter, with regulations of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District, or such reasonable conditions as the city’s fire service provider shall have imposed in granting such permit. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.160 Scavenging.
     It is unlawful to collect recyclable or salvageable materials placed for collection in containers labeled for use in connection with a recycling program sponsored by the city or city-authorized service provider. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.170 Collection—Subscription to service mandatory.
     It is found and determined that the periodic collection, removal, and disposal of solid waste from all places and premises in the city benefits all owners of all places and premises in the city where solid waste accumulates and requires removal therefrom. Such owners are made liable for the payment of charges and fees for collection service hereinafter prescribed, irrespective of the actual use of the collection service provided by the city. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to prevent any property owner from requiring their tenant to subscribe to service for the collection of solid waste, recyclable materials, and/or organic materials; provided, however, that such arrangement does not excuse the owner of their obligations under this chapter if the tenant fails to comply.

     Solid waste, organic materials, and recyclable materials shall not be transferred from non-subscribing premises to any other premises.

     Unoccupied premises, for which the property owner can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director of public works that there is no solid waste generated therein, may be exempted from the requirements of this section. Any property owner must demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the director of public works that any unoccupied premises remains an unoccupied premises at any time upon city request. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.180 Collection—Failure to subscribe.
     Subject to the limitations of Section 8.16.170, failure to subscribe for the collection of solid waste, recyclable materials, and organic materials as required by this chapter is unlawful. If the director of public works determines that any person has failed to subscribe for collection service as required by this chapter, a written notice may be sent to the person informing them of the violation and the requirements of this chapter. The notice shall direct the recipient to subscribe to service from the city within three days or seventy-two hours after the date of the notice and shall describe the penalties for continued failure to comply.

 

     A continued failure to subscribe is unlawful and shall be subject to enforcement under Section 8.16.600 of this chapter. Additionally, failure to subscribe for the collection and disposal of solid waste may also result in abatement action by the city, including the city subscribing to the collection service on behalf of the property owner and the imposition of a special assessment lien upon the property for recovery of costs thereof. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.190 Collection—Exemption from mandatory service.
     A property owner may apply to the city for an exemption from subscribing to city collection service. Property owners approved for an exemption will be required to submit monthly reports to the city identifying the disposition of all generated waste, by amount and location, demonstrating that a minimum of fifty percent of the waste generated was diverted from landfill disposal, and demonstrating that all material was handled in accordance with applicable law. Reports are due within five business days of month-end, in a format prescribed by the director of public works. The city may require property owners to re-apply for exemption on an annual basis. If a property owner fails to fulfill any requirements of this section, the city may provide service at the property and bill property owner as though the property owner had voluntarily subscribed to service. The director of public works reserves the right to charge an administrative fee to recover the costs incurred by this provision which will be included in the cost allocation plan. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.200 Collection—Minimum service level.
     Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, the minimum level of service for all residential and commercial properties, places and premises within city limits shall be as set forth in this chapter and other applicable laws, including, without limitation, as follows:

     A.    Residents must subscribe to and receive from the city not less than once-per-week solid waste collection. One standard thirty-two-gallon (or similar size) cart per week shall be the minimum solid waste service for each dwelling unit. The city may determine whether a residence will receive cart or bin service, what size containers are appropriate, and whether less than one standard size cart per unit may satisfy the minimum service requirement for each unit of a particular duplex, triplex, fourplex, or multifamily premises.

     B.     Customers must establish solid waste collection service sufficient to remove solid waste generated by or accumulating weekly from the premises. If the city identifies a customer that consistently generates more solid waste than can be accommodated by the currently subscribed-to service level, the city is permitted to increase the subscribed-to service level and charge the associated fee as approved in the cost allocation plan. The city may consider three overages out of four sequential collections as consistent.

     C.     The city has the right to provide commercial customers the correct level of service. All commercial customers must subscribe to at least thirty-two gallons of solid waste service. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.210 Collection—City to determine service levels and pick up location.
     In all cases of disputes or complaints arising from or concerning where containers shall be placed awaiting removal of their contents, the quantities to be removed, and the number of times of removal; the director of public works shall determine the place, estimated quantities, and times and manner of removal. This shall apply to customers of city service as well as to customers of service from other city-authorized service providers. The director of public works may also prescribe the hydraulic hose, electrical, and hook up procedures for front loader compactor bins and roll-off compactors. The director of public works may also prescribe the requirements for locking of containers and enclosure doors. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.220 Collection—Frequency of collection.
     A.    Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, all solid waste created, produced or accumulated in or about premises in the city, other than solid waste listed in subsection B, shall be collected not less frequently than once every seven days.

     B.     Commercial customers may request solid waste container collection up to five times per week.

     C.     The following materials may be collected less frequently unless the city deems otherwise:

     1.     Temporary solid waste containers on construction or demolition sites containing no putrescible material shall be collected at least monthly.

     2.     Recyclable materials which are source separated from solid waste shall be collected at least monthly.

     3.     Organic materials which are source separated from solid waste shall be collected no less than once every fourteen days.

     D.    More frequent collections shall be made at those premises where it is determined by the director of public works that one collection each week is insufficient to maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary condition.

     E.     An overflowing container is hereby declared unlawful and a public nuisance; is hereby prohibited; and, may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 8.00 (Nuisances) of this code.

     F.     Customers may request suspension of solid waste service for a period of no less than one month and no longer than six months in a twelve-month period. Customer must provide the city with a start and end date for service suspension. The city may remove containers when service is suspended. Service will resume and associated charges will be re-instated on the customer-service resumption date. Should the containers not be removed and the customer places any container for collection during the period of the requested vacation hold, without previously notifying the city of an early end to the service suspension, the customer shall be responsible for all charges associated with service as though service had never been suspended. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.230 Collection—Recyclable materials.
     A.    Ownership of Recyclable Materials. Upon placement of recyclable materials at a designated collection location, such recyclable materials shall become the property of the city or a city-authorized service provider engaged to collect such material.

     B.     Collection by Persons Other Than City or City-Authorized Service Provider Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person, except for the city or a city-authorized service provider, engaged to provide such service, to collect recyclable materials from a designated recycling collection container.

     C.     Generator’s Right to Recycle. Nothing in this chapter limits the right of any person to sell, donate, or otherwise divert their own recyclable materials from landfilling, except that recyclable materials deposited into containers provided by city or a city-authorized service provider and placed for collection shall become the property of the city or city-authorized service provider as provided for in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.240 Collection—Mandatory recycling and exemption.
     Consistent with the requirements of AB 341, owners and occupants of all premises in the city that receive four cubic yards or more of solid waste collection service per week are under a mandatory obligation to separately place for collection all recyclable materials generated at said premises. Customers may request a written exemption from the director of public works if customer(s) can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director of public works an insufficient volume of recyclable materials or insufficient space to accommodate additional containers required for separation of recyclable materials. An insufficient volume may be considered less than thirty-two gallons per week of recyclable materials generated by customer. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.250 Collection—Provision of multifamily recycling services.
     Property managers and/or owners of multifamily premises are required to provide adequate space for recyclable materials containers in addition to solid waste containers. Property managers and/or owners of multifamily premises are further required, upon request by any tenant, to subscribe to recyclable materials collection services for all tenants. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.260 Collection—Event and venue recycling.
     Event organizers and operators of events defined in Section 42648(b) or (c) in Part 3 of Division 30 of the Public Resources Code, otherwise known as AB 2176, shall assist the city in complying with Sections 42628 through 42911 of the Public Resources Code by completing a waste reduction plan and submitting documentation of diversion at the venues or events to the director of public works.

     Section 42648(b) or (c) in Part 3 of Division 30 of the Public Resources Code applies to organizers and operators of events that charge admission or are operated by a local agency, and facilities or venues that serve an average of more than two thousand individuals per day of operation. Such facilities or venues may include, but are not limited to: street fairs; school, amateur, or professional sporting events; movie theaters; concert or performing arts venues; and carnivals. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.270 Collection—Prohibited collection locations.
     A.    Fire Hazard. All containers must be placed as to minimize fire hazards and not be a public nuisance. If, upon notification by the city’s fire service provider that the containers are in a fire hazardous location, they shall be relocated. Failure to relocate is unlawful.

     B.     Below Ground Surface. City personnel shall not service containers stored below the surface of the ground.

     C.     Inside Any Premises. City personnel shall not service containers from above the first floor of any premises, nor from the basement of any premises.

     D.    Private Property. City personnel shall not service containers from within buildings or on the property of any customer except any multifamily or commercial front-load bins that are within an enclosure without first receiving a private property waiver of liability in a form approved by the city risk manager in consultation with the city attorney. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.280 Collection—Temporary service.
     The tenant, occupant, owner, or lessee of any premises in the city may obtain a city-provided bin or roll-off box for the purpose of disposing of solid waste accumulated infrequently at the premises and over a thirty-day period. The person requesting special service is responsible to pay for the service in accordance with rates established by the city council. The city may be responsible for delivery and pickup of the container from the premises of the persons requesting service. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.290 Collection—Special handling service.
     The city may offer service assistance to residents who qualify for the city’s special handling service as specified in the special handling services application. Such assistance will be set forth as established by the director of public works. Applications for special handling service must be approved by the city and reviewed annually or on such other schedule the director of public works deems appropriate. The city may limit such assistance to premises in which only an adult resident with a physical condition that prevents them from moving their carts to the curb on a regular basis also reside. Assistance may include bringing containers to and from the point of collection, and/or permitting residents to store containers closer to the point of collection. The city must be notified if any change(s) in premises occurs, including additional individuals inhabiting the property. Any customer receiving special handling service may be exempted by the director of public works from the requirements of Sections 8.16.360(B) and (C). No customer shall receive special handling service without first agreeing to and signing a private property waiver of liability form as described in Section 8.16.270. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.300 Collection—Interference with collection.
     It is unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with the collection, removal, or disposal of materials including, but not limited to, solid waste, recyclable materials, or organic materials by the city. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.310 Collection—Vehicles.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to collect, transport, or carry solid waste, recyclable materials, organic materials, hazardous waste, infectious waste, and/or special handling materials in any vehicle which does not comply with all applicable laws.

     B.     It is unlawful for any individual to discard any object directly into any vehicle owned or operated by the city or a city-authorized service provider except for any city personnel, its duly authorized agents, contractors, volunteers, permittees, or franchisees. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.320 Containers—Placement of discards.
     The person in charge of any premises in the city may gather the solid waste together and put it into a container approved by the city for that premises which can be conveniently handled by the city. For materials including, but not limited to, solid waste, recyclable materials, green waste, and organic materials collection purposes, carts, bins, roll-off boxes, compactor bins, and roll-off compactors shall be deemed acceptable for use by customers where approved by the city. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.330 Containers—Contamination of recyclable materials and organic materials.
     No person shall place non-recyclable materials into city-provided containers that are designated for the collection of recyclable materials or organic materials. Commercial or residential recyclable materials or organic materials containers may be removed from service if excessive and frequent contamination is found in the container regardless of the source. Collection of recyclable materials or organic materials that are contaminated with solid waste may be charged a contamination fee as approved in the city’s cost allocation plan. Excessive contamination shall be determined by the director of public works. Frequent contamination is defined as three violations within a one-year period. If a residential container is removed from service, no rate reduction will be provided. If a commercial container is removed from service, the existing charge will be discontinued concurrently with the removal of the bin. Fees may be charged to remove containers, both residential and commercial. Additional charges, as specified in the cost allocation plan, may be added if contamination is found after material is delivered to the transfer station or other facility. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.340 Containers—Commercial enclosures.
     All commercial customers shall comply with the following requirements regarding container enclosures:

     A.    All commercial premises must have container enclosures with adequate space accommodations for both solid waste and recyclable materials containers, in accordance with the city’s standard plans and specifications. All new commercial enclosures are subject to a plan check process including review, at a minimum, by the division of solid waste of the public works department of the city.

     B.     Enclosures must be located in places convenient for the removal of solid waste, recyclable materials, and/or organic materials and must be approved by the director of public works. Enclosures, including gates and gate hardware, must be maintained, in good working condition, and readily accessible by the city. If an enclosure is not adequately maintained, service may be withheld until condition is remedied to the satisfaction of the director of public works.

     C.     City-approved container enclosures are to be used for solid waste, recyclable materials, and organic materials containers only. Storage of other equipment or material is prohibited unless specifically approved in writing by the director of public works. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.350 Containers—Commercial containers.
     All commercial customers shall comply with the following requirements regarding containers and their placement:

     A.    All containers shall be placed and maintained in a location readily accessible to the city and not constituting either a fire hazard or a public nuisance.

     B.     Upon written notification from the city that containers are being maintained in a hazardous or offensive condition, they shall be relocated immediately by the customer.

     C.     Failure to relocate the containers following notice is unlawful and punishable as specified in this chapter. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.360 Containers—Location of containers at residential premises.
     Residential containers shall be placed as follows:

     A.    Carts must be placed for collection curbside in front of residence. The wheels of the cart will be placed in the gutter with the handle facing the residence. Carts will be at least three feet from each other and at least six feet from any obstruction such as, but not limited to, automobiles, trailers, motor homes, fences, lamp posts, mailboxes, or other containers. Carts are not to block pedestrian access.

     B.     Carts shall be screened from view, except when placed for collection. Each cart shall be placed for collection by five a.m. of collection day and no earlier than the preceding evening, and shall be removed by ten p.m. of collection day. Any customer receiving special handling service may be exempted from this section pursuant to Section 8.16.290 at the sole discretion of the director of public works.

     C.     For purposes of this section, “screened” means blocked from public view from the street or public right-of-way with a permanent fence, enclosure, landscaping, or other comparable facility as approved by the director of public works. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.370 Containers—Ownership and replacement.
     A.    Provision of Containers. The city may provide containers to customers for services provided.

     B.     Ownership. The city may retain ownership of the city-provided containers. Persons owning or renting property served by such containers are responsible for the security of the containers. Persons owning or renting property served by such containers shall, upon vacating the premises, leave the containers for the next occupant in a secure location upon the premises or, upon request of the city, place the container curbside for removal. Persons who have ordered an extra container shall, upon vacating the premises, call the city to have the extra container removed. Persons owning or renting property served by such containers are responsible for the appearance and cleanliness of the container.

     C.     Replacement Containers. The city shall have the authority to assess the fee as listed in the city-approved cost allocation plan for the replacement of containers that have been lost, stolen, damaged, unreturned, or destroyed due to any cause other than sole negligence or misuse by the city or its employees. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.380 Containers—Exclusive use.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to dump or place any material into, or to utilize, any container without consent of the owner or lessee of the container.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner or lessee of the container, to enter into a container, for the purpose of salvaging any item therein or for the purpose of utilizing the container to rest or sleep therein. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.390 Prohibited materials—General.
     Materials not permitted to be placed in containers for collection by the city include hot ashes, sharps, flammables, live ammunition, household hazardous waste (including electronic and other universal waste), infectious waste, explosive substances, poison, hazardous chemicals, offal, animals, and similar materials. The city may charge a contamination fee as approved in the city’s cost allocation plan if any prohibited materials are found in any containers.

     No person shall place any wearing apparel, bedding, or other material from homes or other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.400 Prohibited materials—Right to refuse service.
     The city reserves the right to refuse collection service in the presence of any materials that could pose a health or safety risk to any city employee or contractor. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.410 Prohibited materials—Electronic waste and other universal waste.
     The disposal of electronic waste, such as televisions and computer monitors, and other universal waste, such as fluorescent bulbs and household batteries, is prohibited as per applicable law. Generators are responsible for transporting such waste to an approved facility for proper recycling and diversion from landfilling. The city may, but is not obligated to, provide for collection of select materials at rates established by the city council. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.420 Prohibited materials—Medical and biohazardous waste.
     The tenant, occupant, owner, or lessee of any premises in the city shall not dispose of any medical or biohazardous waste in a city-owned container. Disposal of medical or biohazardous waste shall be performed through a licensed collection and disposal company, which complies with all applicable laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, California Health and Safety Code Sections 117600 through 118360. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.600 Enforcement.
     Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city, will be given written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory corrective action. Except in the case of emergencies when the public interest and necessity require otherwise, and for the nonpayment of bills as set forth in Chapter 3.26, the time limit to correct such violation will be three working days. The property owner will be held strictly responsible for any and all acts of their tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees, permittees, guests or invitees.

     In addition to all the enforcement mechanisms and penalties specified in this code, including those contained in Section 1.08.010, for violations of any rule or regulation established in this chapter or any other provision of this code related to the solid waste system, the city may recover all costs incurred by the city in attending to the violation and require payment of all applicable fees in the cost allocation plan as well as legal fees and costs as set forth in Chapter 3.26.

     The city may file civil actions to request the court to grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies:

     A.    A temporary and/or permanent injunction.

     B.     Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this chapter.

     C.     Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs of suit.

     The city may also pursue criminal prosecution for violations pursuant to Penal Code Section 498 or such other applicable laws. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.610 Non-payment of solid waste service charges.
     If a customer fails to pay a solid waste bill pursuant to this code, the city may discontinue water and/or solid waste service and assess any late charges and penalties as set forth in Chapter 3.26 of this code. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.620 Service comments or complaints.
     A customer may comment or complain about solid waste, recyclable materials, or organic materials collection service by writing, emailing or telephoning the city. The director of public works or designee will meet with the customer in person or by telephone, at the customer’s request, and endeavor to resolve the issue. The director of public works will issue a decision on the issue in writing, which decision will be final unless appealed in writing to the city manager as set forth in Section 8.16.630. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.625 Billing comments or complaints.
     A dispute over billing will be addressed through the procedures set forth in Chapter 3.26. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

 

8.16.630 Appeals to city manager.
     A customer may appeal a decision of the director of public works in writing to the city manager within five days of receipt of the director of public works’ ruling. The written appeal must state the reason for the appeal and specify any facts or evidence in support of the request. The city manager or designee, who may be a city hearing officer, will promptly consider the appeal and provide a written decision within ten days of the filing of an appeal. The city manager’s determination will be final. A dispute over billing will be addressed through the procedures set forth in Chapter 3.26. (Ord. 921 § 2, 2013)

Chapter 8.20 RESERVED

Chapter 8.24 INFLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
Note
*      For general provisions regarding fire prevention, see Chapter 15.08.

 

8.24.010 Definitions.
     A.    Class one inflammable liquids include all liquids with flash point below one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit as determined in a Saybolt electric open-cup tester.

     B.     Class two inflammable liquids include all liquids which emit a flammable vapor with flash point at or above one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit, as determined in a Saybolt electric open-cup tester. (Ord. 19 § 2, 1948)

 

8.24.020 Specifications for dispensing—Protection of pumps.
     A.    Class one and class two inflammable liquids, as defined in Section 8.24.010, shall be delivered from dispensing devices only by the operators of such devices and employees or authorized representatives. When unattended, all pumps and other facilities for the delivery of class one and class two inflammable liquids shall be locked or other effective provision shall be made to prevent public access to supplies of such inflammable liquids.

     B.     However, this chapter shall not prohibit remote dispensing systems which conform to the current Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code of the National Fire Protection Association where the dispensing unit is controlled from inside of a building where the person controlling the dispensing unit has a clear view of the pump island. (Ord. 219, 1971; Ord. 19 § 1, 1948)

 

8.24.030 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment in the City Jail of the city of Brentwood, or the County Jail of the county of Contra Costa for a term of not more than six months, or to both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 19 § 3, 1948)

Chapter 8.32 NO-SMOKING REGULATIONS
8.32.010 Purpose and findings.
     A.    The city council of the city of Brentwood, county of Contra Costa, does hereby find that:

     1.     Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution; and

     2.     Reliable studies have shown that breathing side stream or secondhand smoke is a significant health hazard for certain population groups, including elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease; and

     3.     Health hazards induced by breathing sidestream or secondhand smoke include lung respiratory infection, decreased exercise tolerance, decreased respiratory function, bronchoconstriction, and bronchospasm; and

     4.     Nonsmokers with allergies, respiratory diseases and those who suffer other ill effects of breathing sidestream or secondhand smoke may experience a loss of job productivity or may be forced to take periodic sick leave because of adverse reactions to same; and

     5.     The smoking of tobacco, or any other weed or plant, is a proven danger to health.

     B.     Accordingly, it has been determined that the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of, persons employed in, and persons who frequent this city would be benefited by the regulation of smoking in designated enclosed places, including places of employment. (Ord. 383 § 1.1, 1985)

 

8.32.020 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as hereafter set out, unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning.

     A.    “Bar” means an area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages.

     B.     “Employee” means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.

     C.     “Employer” means any person, partnership, corporation, including municipal corporation, who employs the service of more than three persons.

     D.    “Enclosed” means closed in by roof and four walls, with appropriate openings for ingress and egress.

     E.     “Place of employment” means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, conference rooms, and employee cafeterias. A private residence is not a place of employment.

     F.     “Smoking” means the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment, or the lighting or emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind. (Ord. 303 § 1.2, 1985)

 

8.32.030 Regulation of smoking in city-owned facilities.
     All enclosed facilities owned by the city of Brentwood shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 303 § 1.3, 1985)

 

8.32.040 Smoking prohibited in designated enclosed public places.
     Smoking shall be prohibited in the following places within the city:

     A.    All enclosed areas available to and customarily used by the general public and all businesses patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, retail stores, hotels and motels, pharmacies, banks, attorneys’ offices, and other offices;

     B.     Within all restaurants having an occupied capacity of fifty or more persons; provided, however, that this prohibition does not prevent:

     1.     The designating of a contiguous area within the restaurant that contains no more than sixty percent of the seating capacity of the restaurant as a smoking area; or

     2.     The providing of separate rooms designated as smoking rooms, so long as the rooms do not contain more than sixty percent of the seating capacity of the restaurant;

     C.     Waiting rooms, hallways, wards, and semiprivate rooms of health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors’ offices and dentists’ offices, except that health facilities shall also be subject to the provisions of Section 8.32.050 regulating smoking in places of employment;

     D.    Elevators, public restrooms, indoor service lines, buses, taxicabs and other means of public transit under the authority of the city, while within the boundaries of the county, and in ticket, boarding and waiting areas of public transit depots; provided, however, this prohibition does not prevent (1) the establishment of separate waiting areas for smokers and nonsmokers, or (2) the establishment of at least forty percent of a given waiting area as a nonsmoking area;

     E.     In public areas of museums, galleries;

     F.     Enclosed theaters, auditoriums and halls which are used for motion pictures, stage dramas and musical performances, ballets or other exhibitions, except when smoking is part of any such production;

     G.    Retail food marketing establishments, including grocery stores and supermarkets, except those areas of such establishments set aside for the purpose of serving of food and drink, restrooms and offices, and areas thereof not open to the public, which may be otherwise regulated by this chapter;

     H.    Public schools and other public facilities under the control of another public agency, which are available to and are customarily used by the general public, to the extent that the same are subject to the jurisdiction of the city;

     I.      Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare that entire establishment as a nonsmoking establishment. (Ord. 383 § 1.4, 1985)

 

8.32.050 Smoking in places of employment—Restrictions.
     A.    It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide smoke-free areas for nonsmokers within existing facilities to the maximum extent possible, but employers are not required to incur any expense to make structural or other physical modifications in providing these areas.

     B.     Within ninety days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, each employer and each place of employment located within the city shall adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy, which shall contain at a minimum the following requirements:

     1.     Prohibitions of smoking in conference and meeting rooms, classrooms, auditoriums, restrooms, medical facilities, hallways, and elevators.

     2.     Any employee in a place of employment shall be given the right to designate his or her immediate work area as a nonsmoking area and to post the same with an appropriate sign or signs, to be provided by the employer. The policy adopted by the employer shall include a reasonable definition of the term “immediate work area.”

     a.     In any dispute arising under this smoking policy, the rights of the nonsmoker shall be given precedence.

     b.     Provision and maintenance of a separate and contiguous nonsmoking area of not less than forty percent of the seating capacity and floor space in cafeterias, lunchrooms and employee lounges.

     c.     The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees within three weeks of its adoption, and at least annually thereafter.

     d.     Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A)(2)(a) of this section, every employer shall have the right to designate any place of employment, or portion thereof, as a nonsmoking area. (Ord. 383 § 1.5, 1985)

 

8.32.060 Smoking—Optional areas.
     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this chapter:

     A.    Private residences;

     B.     Bars;

     C.     Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests;

     D.    Retail stores that deal exclusively in the sale of tobacco and smoking paraphernalia;

     E.     Restaurants, hotel and motel conference or meeting rooms, and public and private assembly rooms while these places are being used for private functions;

     F.     A private residence which may serve as a place of employment;

     G.    A private enclosed place occupied exclusively by smokers, even though such a place may be visited by nonsmokers, and a private enclosed office, excepting places in which smoking is prohibited by the fire department or by any other law, ordinance or regulation. (Ord. 383 § 1.6, 1985)

 

8.32.070 Other applicable laws.
     This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. (Ord. 383 § 1.11, 1985)

 

8.32.080 Posting requirements.
     A.    “Smoking” or “no smoking” signs, whichever are appropriate, with letters of not less than one inch in height or the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every building or other place where smoking controlled by this chapter, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or other place.

     B.     Every restaurant regulated by this chapter will have posted at its entrance a sign clearly stating that a nonsmoking section is available, and every patron shall be asked as to his or her preference. (Ord. 383 § 1.7, 1985)

 

8.32.090 Nonretaliation.
     No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any rights affording by this chapter. (Ord. 383 § 1.10, 1985)

 

8.32.100 Enforcement.
     A.    Enforcement shall be implemented by the city manager or designees.

     B.     Any citizen who desires to register a complaint hereunder may initiate enforcement with the city manager, or designees.

     C.     Any owner, manager, operator or employer of any establishment controlled by this chapter shall have the right to inform persons violating this chapter of the appropriate provisions thereof. (Ord. 383 § 1.8, 1985)

 

8.32.110 Unlawful acts designated—Penalties.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the restrictions of this chapter to fail to properly post signs required hereunder; to provide signs for the use of employees in designating their areas; to properly set aside “No Smoking” areas; to adopt a smoking restriction policy; or fail to comply with any other requirements of this chapter.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person to smoke in any area restricted by the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     Any person/business who violate subsections A or B of this section, or any other provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable:

     1.     A fine, not exceeding one hundred dollars, for first violation;

     2.     A fine, not exceeding two hundred dollars, for a second violation of this chapter within one year;

     3.     A fine, not exceeding five hundred dollars, for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. (Ord. 383 § 1.9, 1985)

Chapter 8.36 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
8.36.010 Findings.
     In enacting this chapter, the city council finds as follows:

     A.    The property values and the general welfare of the city are founded, in part, upon the appearance and maintenance of property located within the city.

     B.     In 1987, by Ordinance No. 408, the city council placed minimum landscaping requirements on new residential developments.

     C.     The lack of maintenance of residential landscaping and structural maintenance including overgrown, dead, or decayed vegetation and weeds, broken windows and fences and the accumulation of rubbish and debris, are conditions which are injurious to the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city and contributes substantially and increasingly to the deterioration of the city.

     D.    Unless corrective measures, as established in this chapter, are undertaken to alleviate such existing conditions and to assure the avoidance of future problems in this regard, the public health, safety and general welfare, specifically aesthetic, social and economic standards, will be depreciated.

     E.     The uses and abuses of property as described in this chapter are reasonably related to the proper exercise of the police power to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public. (Ord. 852 § 1, 2007)

 

8.36.020 Residential landscaping requirements—Structures completed prior to and including the year 1987.
     It is unlawful and declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any property used or able to be used for residential purposes, the primary structure on which was completed prior to or during the year 1987, regardless of whether such property contains a conforming or legal nonconforming use or structure, to:

     A.    Allow on such property overgrown vegetation including trees, shrubbery, ground covers, lawns and other plantings in the front yard areas and side yard areas on corner lots which from the overall appearance would substantially depreciate the aesthetic environment or property values of surrounding properties.

     B.     Allow on such property dead, decayed or diseased trees, shrubs, grass or other vegetation, in the front yard areas and side yard areas on corner lots, which are otherwise in need of landscape maintenance attention and that, would substantially depreciate the aesthetic environment or property values of surrounding properties.

     C.     Maintain front yard areas and side yard areas on corner lots with a lack of vegetation in such a manner that substantially depreciates the aesthetic environment or property values of surrounding properties. (Ord. 852 § 1, 2007)

 

8.36.030 Residential landscaping requirements—Structures completed after the year 1987.
     It is unlawful and declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any property used or able to be used for residential purposes, the primary structure on which was completed after the year 1987, regardless of whether such property contains a conforming or legal nonconforming use or structure, to maintain that property contrary to the following standards:

     A.    All front yard areas and side yard areas on corner lots, except surfaces of driveways, parking spaces, and pedestrian paths, shall be covered with groundcover incorporated into an overall landscaped design. The groundcover should allow the ground to absorb rainwater, provide drainage to trees on the site, and reduce runoff. Use of native planting or compatible species of drought-tolerant plants is encouraged as much as possible to reduce water demand. Use of permeable surfaces such as gravel or bricks are also encouraged for paths and walkways to allow absorption of rainwater. Synthetic grass with lifelike individual blades of grass that emulates real grass and has a pile height of one and three quarter inches or more may also be used subject to approval of the community development director or designee.

     B.     In residential zones at least fifty percent of the front yard areas and side yard areas on corner lots shall be covered and maintained with some combination of live trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, flowers, lawns, vegetable gardens or other type of vegetation. The calculation of fifty percent may include the area between plants that are spaced in consideration of their mature size, and any area under an existing drip line of a tree that is covered and maintained with a permeable material such as mulch or decomposed granite. Synthetic grass may also be included in this calculation provided that there is some foundation planting consisting of live vegetation, the area of which is equal to least ten percent of the total yard areas visible from the street.

     C.     Landscaped areas and landscaped materials shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and healthful condition. This shall include the pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, and removal of trash and debris. Any damaged, dead, diseased, or decaying plant material shall be replaced. Turf/lawn grass species shall not exceed twelve inches in height. Plants shall not be allowed to extend over public sidewalks, streets, alleys, or other public property such that they interfere with traffic signs or the passage of pedestrians, bicycles, or vehicles.

     D.    Gravel, stones, decomposed granite, mulch, or other hardscape materials shall be compacted or secured in such a way as to avoid spreading over any portion of a public sidewalk or street.

     E.     “Ground cover” shall be defined as vegetative material, or permeable materials such as mulch, decomposed granite or similar permeable materials. (Ord. 852 § 1, 2007)

 

8.36.035 Weed abatement.
     A.    Findings. Weeds are both a fire hazard that may endanger life and property, and an eyesore, leading to the deterioration of property values (see Chapter 15.06, Fire Code; see also Chapter 8.36, Property maintenance, and Sections 17.630.008(H), Landscape standards and 8.00.030(A)(2), Unlawful activities).

     B.     Definition—Applicability.

     1.     Definition. In this code, “weeds” means any of the following:

     a.     Dry, dead or dying grasses and vegetation more than three inches in height, including cut vegetation that has not been mulched;

     b.     Weeds that bear seeds of a fluffy nature or that are subject to flight;

     c.     Sagebrush, chaparral (including Chamise, Coyote Brush/Greasewood, Brooms, and Buckwheat), and any other brush that attains such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved property;

     d.     Weeds that are otherwise noxious or dangerous;

     e.     Poison oak and poison sumac when the conditions of growth constitute a menace to public health;

     f.      Dry grass, brush, tree litter, litter, or other flammable materials that endanger the public safety by creating a fire hazard.

     2.     Applicability. In its enforcement, the city may apply this section, or the fire code regulations adopted in Chapter 15.06, or both. The city may also apply the most recent Minimum Weed Abatement Standards approved by the East Contra Costa County Fire Protection District.

     C.     Regulation—Exceptions.

     1.     Regulation: Parcel Five Acres or Less in Size. A person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of a parcel five acres or less in size must remove the weeds from the parcel.

     2.     Regulation: Parcel More Than Five Acres in Size. A person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of a parcel more than five acres in size must maintain a fuel break of at least thirty feet and crossbreaks of at least fifteen feet: around each structure, combustible storage, tree, shrubs and brush; along each ridge; and on each side of a road, fence line, ditch and creek. A “fuel break” means a continuous strip of disked, dozed, or mowed ground. A “crossbreak” is a break that divides a parcel into approximately five-acre sections.

     3.     Exceptions. At the discretion of the community development director, the regulations in this section may not apply to:

     a.     Animal pasture or agricultural field growing hay or grains, including the interior portion of a fenced pasture where the quantity of livestock significantly reduces the vegetative growth, therefore bringing the parcel into compliance. An agricultural field must be cut at the harvest time of the crop being grown;

     b.     Habitat for endangered or threatened species, if weed removal is prohibited by an agency of the state of California or the Federal Government;

     c.     A parcel designated as open space on a city map or by recorded agreement, as long as required fire breaks are maintained;

     d.     Flood control channel or city-approved detention basin. (Ord. 999 § 3, 2018)

 

8.36.040 Drought conditions.
     During drought conditions the city council may, by resolution, suspend the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter as they relate to dead or dying vegetation due to a lack of water. (Ord. 852 § 1, 2007)

 

8.36.050 Exterior structural requirements.
     It is unlawful and declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any property used or able to be used for residential purposes, regardless of whether such property contains a conforming or legal nonconforming use or structure, to maintain such buildings:

     A.    Where twenty percent or more of any painted surfaces of the building’s exterior observable from public view is peeling or buildings lacking weather protection due to lack or paint or other approved protective coating;

     B.     With windows containing broken glass or no glass at all, where the windows are of a type which normally contains glass; or

     C.     With walls, fences, driveways or walkways in the front yard areas and side yard areas on corner lots, which are maintained in such condition as to become defective or a hazardous condition, including, but not limited to, lifting sidewalks or leaning fences. (Ord. 852 § 1, 2007)

 

8.36.060 Responsibility for property maintenance.
     A.    Every owner of property used or able to be used for residential purposes within the city is required to maintain such property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this chapter and such owner remains liable for violations of the provisions in this chapter regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding such property.

     B.     Every occupant, lessee or holder of any interest in property used or able to be used for residential purposes, other than as owner, is required to maintain such property in the same manner as is required of the owner, and the duty imposed by subsection A of this section on the owner shall in no instance relieve those persons referred to in this subsection B from the same duty.

     C.     For the purposes of this chapter, “responsible party,” “person,” “owner,” “occupant,” “lessee” or “holder of any interest in property other than owner” includes, but is not limited to, any individual, entity, corporation, partnership or trust. (Ord. 852 § 1, 2007)

 

8.36.070 Enforcement.
     A.    When a designated city enforcement officer determines there is a violation of the provisions of this chapter, he or she is authorized to issue an administrative citation to a responsible party, as provided by Chapter 1.08.

     B.     When a designated city enforcement officer determines there is a violation of the provisions of this chapter, he or she is authorized to issue an infraction citation to a responsible party as provided by Chapter 1.08. After receipt of three infraction citations for the same or similar violation, the responsible party may be charged with a misdemeanor.

     C.     Any condition found to constitute a public nuisance under this chapter may be abated pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.00. (Ord. 852 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 8.40 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS RECYCLING
8.40.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of Chapter 8.40, the following definitions shall apply:

     A.    “Applicant” means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable permits to undertake construction, demolition, or renovation projects within the city.

     B.     “Construction” means the building of any facility or structure or any portion thereof including tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure.

     C.     “Construction and demolition debris” or “C&D debris” means used or discarded materials removed from premises during construction or renovation of a structure resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on any pavement, house, commercial building, or other structure.

     D.    “Conversion rate” means the rate set forth in the standardized conversion rate table approved by the city pursuant to this code for use in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in a waste management plan.

     E.     “Covered project” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 8.40.020(A).

     F.     “Deconstruction” means the process of carefully dismantling a building or structure in order to salvage components for reuse or recycling.

     G.    “Demolition” means the decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior.

     H.    “Divert” means to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation facility.

     I.      “Diversion requirement” means the redirection from the waste stream of at least fifty percent of the total construction and demolition debris generated by a project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an infeasibility exemption pursuant to Section 8.40.050, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the WMP compliance official for the project.

     J.      “Noncovered project” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 8.40.020(B).

     K.    “Project” means any activity, which requires an application for a building or demolition permit, or any similar permit from the city.

     L.     “Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace.

     M.    “Renovation” means any change, addition, or modification in an existing structure.

     N.    “Reuse” means further or repeated use of materials in their original form.

     O.    “Salvage” means the controlled removal of construction or demolition debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse.

     P.     “Tenant improvements” means a “project” involving structural or other modifications of an existing property resulting in the generation of C&D debris. “Total costs” means the total construction value of the project using standard commercial and residential valuation formulas.

     Q.    “Vendor” means a licensed city of Brentwood hauler of commercial recycling material.

     R.     “Waste management plan” means a completed WMP form, approved by the city for the purpose of compliance with this chapter, submitted by the applicant for any covered project. Prior to project start, the WMP shall identify the types of C&D debris materials that will be generated for disposal and recycling. A completed WMP contains actual weight or volume of the material disposed recycled receipts.

     S.     “WMP compliance official” means the community development director or designee. (Ord. 754, 2003)

 

8.40.020 Threshold for covered projects.
     A.    Covered Projects. Any construction, demolition, and renovation projects within the city, the total costs of which are, or are projected to be, greater than or equal to seventy-five thousand dollars or which involve the construction, demolition (“covered projects”) shall comply with Section 8.40.020(A). For the purposes of determining whether a project meets the foregoing threshold, all phases of a project and all related projects taking place on a single or adjoining parcels, as determined by the WMP compliance official, shall be deemed a single project.

     B.     Noncovered Projects. Applicants for construction, demolition, and renovation projects within the city which are not covered projects (“noncovered projects”) shall be encouraged to divert as much project-related construction and demolition debris as possible.

     C.     Building and Demolition Permits. No building, site development or demolition permit shall be issued for a covered project unless and until the WMP compliance official has approved a WMP for the project. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be listed as a condition of approval on any building, site development or demolition permit issued for a covered project.

     D.    Projects Sponsored by the City or Redevelopment Agency. All construction, demolition and renovation projects sponsored by the city or redevelopment agency shall be considered covered projects for the purposes of this chapter. The project sponsor shall submit a WPM to the official prior to beginning any activities and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 754, 2003)

 

8.40.030 Submission of waste management plan.
     A.    WMP Forms. Applicants for building, demolition or site development permits involving any covered project shall complete and submit a waste management plan (“WMP”), on a form provided by the city for this purpose as part of the application packet for the building, demolition, or site development permit. The completed WMP shall indicate all of the following:

     1.     A list of the C&D debris material types, to be generated;

     2.     The vendor or facility that the applicant proposes to use to collect or receive the materials; and

     3.     Acknowledgement of responsibility.  The WMP shall be signed by both the contractor and owner indicating: 1) understanding of consequences of not meeting the fifty percent diversion requirement including being subject to fines; and 2) they are responsible for the actions of their subcontractors with regard to this diversion requirement.

     B.     Deconstruction. In preparing the WMP, applicants for building, demolition, or site development permits involving the removal of all or part of an existing structure shall consider deconstruction, to the maximum extent feasible, and shall make the materials generated thereby available for salvage prior to landfilling. Materials generated in this process shall be considered divertible C&D debris and included in the amount of waste generated. (Ord. 754, 2003)

 

8.40.040 Review of waste management plan.
     A.    Approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no building, demolition, or site development permits shall be issued for any covered project, nor shall any demolition, construction or renovation take place on any covered project, unless and until the WMP compliance official has approved the WMP. The WMP compliance official shall only approve a WMP if he or she first determines that all of the following conditions have been met:

     1.     The WMP provides all of the information set forth in Section 8.40.030.

     2.     The WMP indicates that at least fifty percent of all C&D debris generated by the project will be diverted.

     3.     The WMP form has been signed by the contractor and the property owner.

     If the WMP compliance official determines that these three conditions have been met, he or she shall mark the WMP “approved” and return a copy of the WMP to the applicant.

     B.     Nonapproval. If the WMP compliance official determines that the WMP fails to comply with the above listed conditions for approval, he or she shall either:

     1.     Return the WMP to the applicant marked “denied,” including a statement of reasons, or

     2.     Return the WMP to the applicant marked “further explanation required.” (Ord. 754, 2003)

 

8.40.050 Infeasibility exemption.
     A.    Application. If an applicant for a covered project experiences unique circumstances that the applicant believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time that he or she submits the WMP required under Section 8.40.030 above. Increased costs to the applicant generally will not be a sufficient basis for an exemption unless such costs are extraordinary. The applicant shall indicate on the WMP the maximum amount of diversion he or she believes is feasible for each material and the specific circumstances that he or she believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement.

     B.     Meeting with WMP Compliance Official. The WMP compliance official shall review the information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement. The WMP compliance official may request that staff from the city’s solid waste division attend this meeting or may require the applicant to request a separate meeting with solid waste division staff. Based on the information supplied by the applicant and, if applicable, solid waste division staff, the WMP compliance official shall determine whether it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement.

     C.     Granting of Exemption. If the WMP compliance official determines that it is infeasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement due to unique circumstances, he or she shall establish a minimum feasible diversion rate for each material and shall indicate this rate on the WMP submitted by the applicant. The WMP compliance official shall return a copy of the WMP to the applicant marked “Approved for Infeasible Exemption.”

     D.    Denial of Exemption. If the WMP compliance official determines that it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement, he or she shall so inform the applicant in writing. The applicant shall have thirty days to resubmit a WMP form in full compliance with Section 8.40.030 above. If the applicant fails to resubmit the WMP, or if the resubmitted WMP does not comply with Section 8.40.030, the WMP compliance official shall deny the WMP. (Ord. 754, 2003)

 

8.40.060 Appeal.
     Appeal of a determination made under this chapter shall be made to the city council pursuant to Section 17.880.003(B)—17.880.003(I) of the Brentwood Municipal Code and shall be limited to: 1) the granting or denial of an exemption; or 2) whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with the WPM. (Ord. 754, 2003)

 

8.40.070 Submittal of completed waste management plan.
     A.    Documentation. No permit or approvals related to the project site shall be issued by the city until the applicant complies with the provisions of this section. The completed WMP must be approved prior to final occupancy, or project completion, in the case of demolitions.

     The applicant shall submit documentation to the WMP official along with a completed WMP that demonstrates that the diversion requirement for the project has been met in order to receive final occupancy approval or final of demolition permits. This documentation shall include the following:

     1.     The completed WMP submitted for approval shall list for each construction and demolition material type generated, the actual material volume or weight the project generated, and receipts from both the disposal and recycling facilities and/or licensed haulers and vendors that received each material showing clearly whether the material was disposed or recycled; and

     2.     Any additional information the applicant believes is relevant to determining its efforts to comply in good faith with this code.

     B.     Weighing of Wastes. Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all C&D debris diverted or landfilled are measured and recorded using the most accurate method available. To the extent practical, all construction and demolition debris shall be weighed on scales. Such scales shall be in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For construction and demolition debris for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose.

     C.     Determination of Compliance and Release of Permit. The WMP compliance official shall review the information submitted under subsection (A) of this section and determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement, as follows:

     1.     Full Compliance. If the WMP compliance officer determines that the applicant has fully complied with the diversion requirement applicable to the project, he or she shall indicate such compliance on the WMP.

     2.     Good Faith Effort to Comply. If the WMP compliance official determines that the diversion requirement has not been achieved, he or she shall determine on a case-by-case basis whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter. In making this determination, the WMP compliance official shall consider the availability of markets for the C&D debris landfilled, the size of the project, and the documented efforts of the applicant to divert C&D debris. If the WMP compliance official determines that the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, he or she shall so indicate on the WMP.

     3.     Noncompliance. If the WMP compliance official determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by subsection (A) of this section within the required time period, then the applicant shall be in violation of this chapter and be liable for a civil penalty, in addition to any other remedy provided by this chapter. No certificates of occupancy or other permits or approvals relating to the project site shall be issued by the city until the civil penalty has been paid in full. (Ord. 754, 2003)

 

8.40.080 Enforcement.
     A.    Criminal Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, including, but not limited to, noncompliance with a WMP, is guilty of an infraction. The penalty upon conviction of such person shall be a fine as set forth in Section 1.08.040 of this code.

     B.     Civil Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, including, but not limited to, noncompliance with a WMP, is liable to the city for a civil penalty of one thousand dollars or one percent of the total cost of the project, whichever is greater. The WMP compliance official may, in his or her sole discretion, reduce the amount to the civil penalty in the event of mitigating circumstances.

     C.     Cumulative Remedies. The foregoing remedies shall be deemed nonexclusive, cumulative and in addition to any other remedy the city may have at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief to prevent violations of this chapter. (Ord. 754, 2003)

Chapter 8.44 RENTAL PROPERTY INSPECTION
8.44.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to establish a periodic and proactive rental property inspection program for residential housing so as to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by ensuring the proper maintenance of such housing; by identifying and requiring correction of substandard housing conditions; and by preventing conditions of deterioration and blight that could adversely affect economic conditions and the quality of life in the city. (Ord. 858 § 1, 2008)

 

8.44.020 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below:

     “Applicable laws” mean the provisions of this code, the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this code; permits issued by the city; conditions of development approval; or ordinances and regulations adopted by the city.

     “City” means the city of Brentwood, California.

     “Deficiency” means any failure of a rental property subject to this chapter to comply with applicable laws.

     “Enforcement officer” means a code enforcement officer or other city employee designated under Chapter 1.08 of this code to issue notices of violations and administrative citations for violations of applicable laws.

     “Rental property” means a residential dwelling within the city occupied by or intended for occupancy by a person other than the owner of record as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

     “Responsible party” means any person or persons who has ownership or control of the rental property and shall include any of the following:

     1.     The person or persons who own (as shown on the last equalized assessment roll) the property where the violations exist;

     2.     The person or persons in charge of the property where the violation exists;

     3.     The person or persons using the property when the violation exists;

     4.     If any of the persons in subsections 1 through 3 of this section are minors, the parent or guardian of such minor; and

     5.     If the person or persons is a business entity, the manager or on-site supervisor where the violation exists, the owner, partner, corporate officer or business entity itself. (Ord. 858 § 1, 2008)

 

8.44.030 Applicability—Exemptions.
     A.    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all rental properties except those enumerated in subsection C of this section.

     B.     The provisions of this chapter are supplementary and complementary to other provisions of this code. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit any existing right of the city to inspect rental properties and enforce violations on a more frequent basis than the time periods set forth herein.

     C.     The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

     1.     Those rental properties which are exempt from municipal regulation pursuant to state or federal law or regulations, but only so long as such government ownership, operation or management or exemption from municipal regulation continues in effect;

 

     2.     All mobile homes, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles and other dwelling units located in a mobile home park;

     3.     Hotels and motels. (Ord. 858 § 1, 2008)

 

8.44.040 Periodic inspections.
     The enforcement officer shall cause the exterior of each rental property to be inspected at least once every two years to ensure compliance with all applicable laws. (Ord. 858 § 1, 2008)

 

8.44.050 Notice of deficiencies.
     The enforcement officer shall provide the responsible party with written notice of deficiencies noted during the inspection and/or reinspection of the rental property. (Ord. 858 § 1, 2008)

 

8.44.060 Reinspections.
     A rental property that exhibits a deficiency or deficiencies shall be subject to re-inspections to ensure that all deficiencies are corrected. (Ord. 858 § 1, 2008)

 

8.44.070 Relocation of tenants.
     If any rental property is found unsafe to occupy, the costs and expenses of relocation of any tenant from that property shall be the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 858 § 1, 2008)

 

8.44.080 Penalties.
     Failure of a responsible party to comply with the written notice of deficiencies may result in the issuance of administrative citations; abatement of any nuisances; criminal and/or civil penalties; recordation of a notice of pending action; the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 17274 and 24436.5; and/or any other enforcement method permitted by law. (Ord. 858 § 1, 2008)

 

8.44.090 Administrative regulations.
     The city manager is authorized and directed to promulgate administrative procedures pertaining to the implementation and enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 858 § 1, 2008)

 

8.44.100 Program review.
     The provisions of this chapter shall be reviewed by the city council three years after its effective date in order to determine the effectiveness of its provisions and its impact on the city general fund. At that time, the city council shall determine whether to continue, amend or repeal this chapter. (Ord. 858 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 8.48 FIREWORKS
8.48.010 Definition.
     In this chapter “fireworks” means a device containing chemical elements and chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and producing audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effects which are useful as pyrotechnic devices or for entertainment. The term “fireworks” includes, but is not limited to, devices designated by the manufacturer as fireworks, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, rockets, Daygo bombs, sparklers, paper caps, chasers, fountains, smoke sparks, aerial bombs, and fireworks kits. (Health and Safety Code Section 12511.) (Ord. 966 § 1, 2016)

 

8.48.020 Prohibition.
     It is unlawful for any person to use, possess, discharge, offer for sale, store, or manufacture any fireworks in the city, unless under an exception set forth in Section 8.48.030. (Ord. 966 § 1, 2016)

 

8.48.030 Exceptions.
     Exceptions to this chapter are:

     A.    Snap caps and party poppers (classified by the State Fire Marshal as pyrotechnic devices). (See also Section 15.06.020, Chapter 56, Explosives and Fireworks, of this code.)

     B.     The possession, transport, sale, and use of red flares (highway fuses) as a warning device.

     C.     Items that the State Fire Marshal has investigated and determined to be limited to industrial, commercial or agricultural use, when authorized by a permit issued by the city under Section 15.06.020 (Section 5601.2.1, Prohibited and Limited Acts) of this code, or by the East Contra Costa Fire Protection District under the California Fire Code.

     D.    A public fireworks display event authorized by the city under a special event permit, if that special event permit also includes a permit for fireworks issued by the city under Section 15.06.020 (Section 5608.2, Permit required) of this code, or by the East Contra Costa Fire Protection District under the California Fire Code. (Ord. 966 § 1, 2016)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.04 AUTOMATIC COMMUNICATION DEVICES
Chapter 9.12 AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION
Chapter 9.16 UNLAWFUL OUTDOOR ACTIVITIES
Chapter 9.32 NOISE REGULATIONS
Chapter 9.36 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Chapter 9.38 CANNED GOODS OR BOTTLED BEVERAGES AT PUBLIC EVENTS
Chapter 9.40 CITIZENS BAND RADIO
Chapter 9.50 MARIJUANA FACILITIES AND CULTIVATION
Chapter 9.68 CURFEW
Chapter 9.80 DEADLY WEAPONS
Chapter 9.90 GRAFFITI CONTROL

Chapter 9.04 AUTOMATIC COMMUNICATION DEVICES
9.04.010 Definitions.
     A.    “Public agency” includes the state, county and any city or district therein, and any departments or officer thereof.

     B.     “Telephone number” includes any additional numbers assigned by a public utility company engaged in the business of providing communications services and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or other system to connect with the subscriber to the primary number(s) when said number(s) are in use. (Ord. 232 §§ 3, 4, 1972)

 

9.04.020 Use for connection to public agency lines restricted.
     No person shall use or operate, cause to be used or operated, arrange, adjust, program or otherwise provide or install any device or combination of devices that will, upon activation either mechanically, electrically, automatically, or by any other means, initiate the intrastate calling, dialing or connection to any telephone number, line or instrument assigned to a public agency in the city of Brentwood without the agency’s prior written consent. (Ord. 232 § 1, 1972)

 

9.04.030 Withdrawal of public agency’s consent to connect.
     The public agency may withdraw its consent by written notice to the person to whom the consent was given and such person shall have the device(s) disconnected within seven days of receipt of the written notice of withdrawal. (Ord. 232 § 2, 1972)

 

9.04.040 Violation a misdemeanor—Penalty.
     Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 232 § 5, 1972)

Chapter 9.12 AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION
9.12.010 Purpose.
     The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect the safety and welfare of the general public and improve the quality of life and economic vitality of the city by imposing reasonable time, place and manner restrictions on aggressive and intrusive solicitation while respecting the constitutional rights of free speech for all citizens. The purpose of this chapter is to protect citizens from the fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of solicitation that have become an unwelcome presence in the city. (Ord. 953 § 2, 2015)

 

9.12.020 Findings.
     The city council finds that:

     A.    Aggressive and intrusive solicitation typically includes approaching or following pedestrians, the use of abusive language, repeated requests to the same person, unwanted physical contact, or the intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. An increase in aggressive solicitation in the city has become disturbing and disruptive to residents and businesses and has contributed not only to the loss of access to and enjoyment of places open to the public, but has also the potential to create an enhanced sense of fear, intimidation, coercion, and disorder.

     B.     Solicitation from people in places where they are a “captive audience” in which it is difficult or impossible for them to exercise their own right to decline or avoid solicitation from others is problematic and presents a risk to the health, safety and welfare of the public. Such places include: ATMs; vehicles in the public right-of-way; near driveways leading to a shopping center; gasoline stations; public transportation vehicles and their designated locations for stops; parking structures; parking lots after dark; outdoor restaurant seating; schools, parks, playgrounds and recreation centers; and public restrooms.

     C.     The presence of individuals who solicit money from persons at or near banks or ATMs is especially threatening and dangerous. Such activity often carries with it an implicit threat to both person and property.

     D.    Solicitation of drivers or vehicle occupants in the public roadway is unsafe and hazardous for solicitors, drivers, pedestrians, and the general public. Solicitation on roadway median strips, at traffic intersections, and in the public roadway increases the risk of drivers becoming distracted from their primary duty to watch traffic which may result in automobile accidents, congestion and blockage of streets, and delay and obstruction of the free flow of travel, all of which constitute substantial traffic safety problems.

     E.     The practice of solicitation near driveways accessing shopping centers, retail, and business establishments is unsafe and hazardous for solicitors, drivers, pedestrians and the general public. The location of the solicitor near the driveway compromises the solicitor’s safety, impedes visibility, and impairs a driver’s ability to safely enter and exit. Drivers also become distracted from their duty to watch traffic that may result in automobile accidents, congestion and blockage of streets, and delay and obstruction of the free flow of travel, all of which constitute substantial traffic safety problems.

     F.     Solicitation in isolated places can be particularly intimidating because the person being approached may feel vulnerable to undue coercion. Examples include parking structures, or parking lots after dark.

     G.    The city wishes to protect those who may be particularly vulnerable to intimidation, such as youth near schools, parks, playgrounds, and recreation centers.

 

     H.    This law is timely and appropriate because current laws and city regulations are insufficient to address the problems cited above. (Ord. 953 § 2, 2015)

 

9.12.030 Definitions.
     In this chapter:

     “Aggressive” means any of the following:

     1.     Conduct intended or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, to fear damage to or loss of property, or otherwise to be coerced or intimidated into giving money or something else of value;

     2.     Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with someone without that person’s consent, or intentionally blocking someone’s path;

     3.     Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with an occupied vehicle without the driver’s or owner’s consent, or interfering with the vehicle’s movement;

     4.     Hounding someone, repeated requests, or persisting in closely following or approaching a person, after the person has refused to give money;

     5.     Using profane, abusive or offensive language toward someone while attempting to solicit; or

     6.     Using threatening or violent gestures toward someone while attempting to solicit.

     “Automated teller machine (ATM)” means any electronic information processing device which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit, or convenience account.

     “Donation” means a gift of money or other item of value.

     “Financial institution” means any of the following: bank, savings and loan association, credit union, and/or check cashing business.

     “Intrusive” means to thrust or force oneself in without invitation, permission, or welcome and cause physical contact, block the path of travel, or behave in a threatening manner.

     “Public place” means a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to: a street, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, playground; and a doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby or other portion of a business establishment or apartment building.

     “Public transportation vehicle” means a bus, taxi or other vehicle used for public transportation.

     “Solicit” or “solicitation” means to ask, beg, request, and/or solicit using the spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily gestures, signs or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value. (Regarding soliciting payment for things or services, see municipal code Chapter 5.48.) (Ord. 953 § 2, 2015)

 

9.12.040 Prohibitions.
     A.    Aggressive Solicitation. No person shall solicit in an aggressive or intrusive manner in any public place.

     B.     Specific Locations. No person may solicit at the following locations:

     1.     Financial Institutions and ATMs. No person shall solicit within twenty-five feet of a financial institution or ATM. This restriction does not apply to an ATM in a supermarket when the solicitor is outside.

     2.     Motor Vehicles. No person shall solicit from a driver or occupant of a motor vehicle:

     a.     When the vehicle is being driven in the public right-of-way; or

     b.     While the vehicle is located within thirty-five feet of a driveway providing vehicular access to a shopping center, retail, or business establishment; or

     c.     While the vehicle is stopped in a gasoline station.

     3.     Public Transportation Vehicles or Stops. No person shall solicit in any public transportation vehicle or within thirty-five feet of a designated or posted public transportation vehicle stop.

     4.     Parking Lot or Structure. No person shall solicit:

     a.     In any parking structure at any time; or

     b.     In any public or private parking lot after dark. “After dark” means any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise.

     5.     Dining Area. No person shall solicit in an outdoor dining area when patrons are seated at an establishment.

     6.     School, Park, Playground, Recreation Center. No person shall solicit within three hundred feet of a school, park, playground or recreation center.

     7.     Public Restroom. No person shall solicit in a public restroom. (Ord. 953 § 2, 2015)

 

9.12.050 Exemptions.
     Nothing in this chapter prohibits:

     A.    The lawful vending of goods and services.

     B.     Peddling (a thing or service) in compliance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 5.48.

     C.     Selling related to business authorized by and/or conducted by the property owner, business owner, or employees on the business premises.

     D.    Services related to the lawful towing or emergency repairs of a vehicle.

     E.     Solicitation for a charity by city law enforcement or other public safety personnel, or East County Fire Protection District firefighters, in compliance with State Business and Professions Code Section 17510.25. To qualify, at least ten business days before a solicitation, the charity must file an application with the chief, to include: (1) date(s) and time(s) and location(s) of the solicitation; (2) the manner and conditions under which the solicitation will occur; and (3) proof of a valid liability insurance policy of at least one million dollars. The chief may impose reasonable conditions.

     F.     Activity permitted or authorized under any county, state or federal law. (Ord. 953 § 2, 2015)

 

9.12.060 Penalty—Other remedies.
     A.    Criminal Penalties. A person who violates Section 9.12.040 of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. A person who violates Section 9.12.040 of this chapter more than two times within a six-month period is guilty of a misdemeanor.

     B.     Other Remedies. The city may enforce this chapter by any other remedies available under the municipal code or by law. (Ord. 953 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 9.16 UNLAWFUL OUTDOOR ACTIVITIES
9.16.010 Purpose and intent.
     The city’s public parks, streets, sidewalks and other public areas within the city should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large for their intended purposes. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain public areas within the city in a clean, sanitary, safe, attractive and accessible condition and to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the community. The use of public areas for outdoor activities such as storage of personal property, sleeping in a vehicle, public urinating and defecating, and public nudity interfere with the rights of others to use and enjoy those areas as they are intended. Such activities may create fire hazards, cause pollution and environmental damage, and create unsanitary conditions. (Ord. 999 § 5, 2018)

 

9.16.020 Definitions.
     In this chapter:

     Private property means property owned by anyone other than the city, including property owned by another public agency.

     Public area means a place open to the public including but not limited to: a public street, public parking lot (whether publicly or privately owned), public sidewalk, public park, public playground, public landscaped area, trail, and other publicly-owned property.

     Public property means property owned by the city.

     Store means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place, or to leave in a location.

     Nude or nudity means exposure of the genitals, pubic area, anus, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; or exposure of a female breast below the horizontal line across the top of the areola’s highest point with less than a fully opaque covering. (Ord. 999 § 5, 2018)

 

9.16.030 Storage of personal property on public or private property.
     It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to store personal property in the following areas:

     A.    Any public property, except with a city permit; or

     B.     Any private property without the written consent of the owner. (Ord. 999 § 5, 2018)

 

9.16.040 Urinating and defecating in public.
     It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in a public area other than a restroom, or in a place open to public view, or upon the private property of another, without the consent of the owner or a person in lawful possession. (Ord. 999 § 5, 2018)

 

9.16.050 Public nudity.
     A.    Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to be nude on public property or on any portion of private property that is visible from public property, unless an exception applies under subsection B.

     B.     Exceptions. This section does not apply to:

     1.     Children under the age of ten years;

     2.     The exposure of a breast while breastfeeding a nursing child;

     3.     Theatrical performances in a theater, concert hall, or other similar establishment, or conducted at an adult business authorized under Chapter 17.690, Adult-oriented business regulations;

     4.     Nudity within a fully enclosed structure intended to allow brief nudity, such as a bathroom, locker room, dressing room, or changing room; and

     5.     Any act that is expressly permitted or prohibited by state law. (Ord. 999 § 5, 2018)

 

9.16.060 Enforcement.
     This chapter may be enforced by civil or criminal action as authorized under Chapters 1.16 through 1.24, General provisions. A violation is a misdemeanor under Chapter 1.20. (Ord. 999 § 5, 2018)

Chapter 9.32 NOISE REGULATIONS
9.32.010 Intent of provisions.
     Declaration of Policy.

     A.    The city council enacts this legislation for the sole purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety and welfare of its residents.

     B.     In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying noises in the city of Brentwood, it is declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit noise, which is detrimental to the health and welfare of its residents.

     C.     It shall be the policy of the city of Brentwood to maintain and preserve the quiet atmosphere of the city, and to implement programs and enact legislation consistent with the objectives and goals set forth in the noise element of the general plan and aimed at retaining noise levels throughout the city acceptable values established in the general plan. (Ord. 696 § 2, 2002)

 

9.32.020 Definitions.
     The following words, phrases and terms, as used in this article, shall have the meanings as indicated:

     A.    “Ambient noise” means the composite of all noise from sources near and far, excluding the alleged intrusive noise source. The ambient noise level (or ambient level) is the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location.

     B.     “A weighted sound level” means the sound level as measured on a sound level meter using the “A” weighting network. The level so read is designated in units of dBA.

     C.     “Construction” means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, for or of public or private right-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.

     D.    “Decibel” means a unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound. equal to twenty times the logarithm to the base of ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty microPascals.

     E.     “Designated noise zone” means a zone consisting of real property corresponding to the city of Brentwood’s official zoning map and the noise element of the city’s general plan, as it may be amended from time to time.

     F.     “Emergency work” means work made necessary to protect, provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.

     G.    “Fixed noise source” means a stationary device, which creates sounds while in a fixed or stationary position, including, but not limited to, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fan compressors, generators, air-conditioners and refrigeration equipment.

     H.    “Impulsive noise” means a sound of short duration, and lasting less than one second with an abrupt onset and rapid delay.

     I.      “Intrusive noise” means that alleged offensive noise, which intrudes over and above the ambient noise for the receiving property.

     J.      “Leq” is the energy equivalent level, defined as the average sound level on the basis of sound energy (or sound pressure squared). The Leq is a dosage type measured and the basis for the descriptors used in current standards, such as the twenty-four hour CNEL used by the state of California.

 

     K.    “Mobile noise source” means a noise source other than a fixed noise source. Noise level (sound level) means the “A” weighted sound level.

     L.     “Noise level (sound level)” means the “A” weighted sound level.

     M.    “Noise level limit” means the maximum noise level acceptable under this article for the stated time period.

     N.    “Noise sensitive property” means any property, regardless of zone, so designated in the noise element of the city’s general plan. Noise sensitive properties include schools, hospitals, convalescent care, boarding and rest homes.

     O.    “Person” means any individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture or corporation.

     P.     “Public right-of-way” means that area dedicated or subject to an easement for public use for vehicles and/or pedestrian travel including, but not limited to, streets, alleyways and sidewalks.

     Q.    “Pure tone” means any sound, which can be judged as audible as a single frequency or set of single frequencies. For the purpose of this chapter, a pure tone shall exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous one-third octave band as follows: by 5 dB for band frequencies between 160 and 400 Hz; or by 15 dB for band frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hz.

     R.     “Receiving property” means the property for which the intrusive noise is alleged to be offensive.

     S.     “Sound amplifying equipment” means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or other sound regardless of location. “Sound amplifying equipment” as used in this article, shall not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicle or horns or other warning devices on any vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.

     T.     “Sound level meter” means an instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for measurement of sound levels, which satisfies the requirements pertinent for sound level meters in American National Standard Institute specifications for sound level meters, Section 1.4-1971, or the most recent revision therefor, for type S-2A sound meters.

     U.    “Supplementary definition of technical terms.” Definitions of technical terms not defined herein shall be obtained from American Standard Acoustical Terminology, Section 1-1-1971 or the most recent revision thereof. (Ord. 696 § 2, 2002)

 

9.32.030 Designated noise zones.
     A.    Assignment of Noise Zones. Receiving properties are assigned to designated noise zones as follows:

     1.     Designated noise zone I—residential properties;

     2.     Designated noise zone II—commercial properties;

     3.     Designated noise zone III—industrial properties.

     B.     Exterior Noise Levels.

     1.     Noise zone exterior noise levels. The following exterior noise levels, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all receiving properties within a designated noise zone for the purpose of establishing noise level limits in subsection 9.32.030(B):

 

Zones #’s

Designated Zone

Time Interval

Exterior Noise Levels

Zone I

Residential

7 am-10 pm

60

 

 

10 pm-7 am

45

Zone II

Commercial

7 am - 10 pm

60

 

 

10 pm - 7 am

45

Zone III

Industrial

7 am - 10 pm

65

 

 

10 pm - 7 am

60

 

     2.     Noise level limits. Unless otherwise provided in this article, no person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound at any location within the city, or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person which causes the noise level when measured on any receiving property to exceed the following noise level limits:

     a.     The exterior noise levels for that land use, as specified in subsection 9.32.030(B)(1), for a total of more than thirty minutes in any consecutive sixty minutes;

     b.     The exterior noise levels plus 5 dB for a total period of more than fifteen minutes in any consecutive sixty minutes;

     c.     The exterior noise levels plus 10 dB for a total period of more than five minutes in any consecutive sixty minutes; or

     d.     The exterior noise levels plus 15 dB for a total period of more than one minute in any consecutive sixty minutes; or

     e.     The exterior noise levels plus 20 dB for any time.

     3.     Ambient noise level in excess of noise level limits. If the ambient noise level exceeds that permissible for any of the noise level limits in subsections 9.32.030(B)(2)(a), (b), (c) and (d), the noise level limit shall be increased in 5 dB increments as appropriate to encompass or reflect said ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the noise level limit in subsection 9.32.030(B)(2)(e) this limit shall be increased to the maximum ambient noise level.

     4.     Boundary between different zones. If the measurement location is on a boundary between two different designated noise zones, the lower noise level limit applicable to the two zones shall apply.

     5.     Content of intrusive noise. In the event the intrusive noise is judged by the enforcing officer to contain a steady, audible, pure tone such as a whine, screech or hum, or is an impulsive noise, or is a repetitive noise exceeding one second in duration or contains music or speech, the noise level limits set forth in subsection 9.32.030(B)(2), shall be reduced by 5 dB.

     C.     Interior Noise Levels.

     1.     Noise zone interior noise levels. The following interior noise levels, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply within all receiving multi-family residential units within noise zone I and II for the purpose of establishing noise level limits in subsection 9.32.030(C)(2):

 

 

Time Interval

Interior Noise

Multi-family residential

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

40

7:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.

45

 

     2.     Residential unit, interior noise level limits. No person shall operate or cause to be operated within a multi-family residential unit, any source of sound or allow the creation of any noise which causes the noise level when measured inside a neighboring receiving residential unit whether adjacent or not, to exceed the following noise level limits:

     a.     The interior noise levels as specified in subsection 9.32.030(C)(1) for a total period of more than five minutes in any consecutive sixty minutes;

     b.     The interior noise levels, plus 5 dB for a total period of more than one minute in any consecutive sixty minutes; or

     c.     The interior noise levels, plus 10 dB for any period of time.

     3.     Ambient noise level in excess of noise level limits. If the ambient noise level exceeds that permissible for noise level limits in subsection 9.32.030(C)(2)(a) or (b), the limit shall be increased in 5 dB increments as appropriate to reflect said ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the noise level limit in subsection 9.32.030(C)(2)(c), this limit shall be increased to the maximum ambient noise level.

     4.     Content of intrusive noise. In the event the intrusive noise is judged by the enforcing officer to contain a steady, audible, pure tone such as a whine, screech or hum, or is an impulsive noise or a repetitive noise exceeding one second in duration, or contains music or human voices, the noise level limits set forth in subsection 9.32.030(C)(2), shall be reduced by 5 dB. (Ord. 696 § 2, 2002)

 

9.32.040 Sound level measurement.
     A.    Use of “A” weighted sound level. Any sound levels measured pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be “A” weighted sound levels, measured with a sound level meter using the “A” weighting and slow response, except for impulsive noise, for which the fast response shall be used. The microphone should whenever possible be located four to five feet above the ground and ten feet or more from the nearest reflective surface.

     B.     Exterior Noise Measurement. The microphone shall not be less than five feet above ground, at least five feet distance from walls or other large reflecting surfaces, and shall be protected from the effects of wind noise by the appropriate windscreens. In cases when the microphone must be located within ten feet of walls or similar large reflecting surfaces, the actual measured distance and orientation of sources, microphone and reflecting surfaces shall be noted and recorded. In no case shall a noise measurement be taken at five feet of the noise source.

     C.     Interior Noise Measurement. Interior noise measurements shall be made within the affected residential unit. The measurements should whenever possible be made at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source with windows opened or closed at the discretion of the resident.

     D.    Calibration Prior to Measurement. Calibration of the measurement equipment, utilizing an acoustic calibrator, shall be performed prior to making any noise measurements.

     E.     Ambient Noise Level Measurement. When ambient noise levels are measured, these levels should be measured whenever possible at a location and time of day comparable to that used for measuring the intrusive noise.

     F.     Method for Sound Level Measurement. The director of community development may, from time to time, cause preparation of a noise control enforcement manual to assist in implementing the purpose of this article. (Ord. 696 § 2, 2002)

 

9.32.050 Prohibited special noise sources.
     A.    Grading, Site Improvement, Infrastructure Improvements and Outside Heavy Construction. All operation of power construction equipment or any other construction device that creates noise in excess of the noise level limits of this article, and all performance of any outside construction work, including, but not limited to, grading and trenching, that creates noise in excess of the noise level limits of this article shall be limited to the following hours: Monday through Friday from seven a.m. until three-thirty p.m., or until five-thirty p.m. with the express written approval of the city engineer or designee. No such work shall be performed on Saturday or Sunday or city holidays, except that such work may be performed on Saturday between eight a.m. and five p.m. with the express written approval of the city engineer or designee.

     1.     Home repairs and routine maintenance of personal property are not considered construction.

     2.     Construction activities within city right-of-way, such as road work or installation of drainage facilities, may be performed outside of the specified work hours of this subsection A, including overnight work, with the express written approval of the city engineer or designee.

     3.     The planning commission and city council may impose more restrictive hours of construction upon any projects involving construction activity by adding appropriate conditions to the city’s approval of subdivisions, planned development permits, conditional use permits, variances and other projects.

     4.     The performance of emergency work is exempt from the provisions of this subsection A. The city engineer may require the production of evidence after the fact that an emergency existed that would constitute a hazard to persons or property and may cite the responsible parties for a violation of this section if no such evidence is produced.

     B.     Outside Carpentry Construction. No person in a residential zone shall operate or permit the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder or similar tools, so as to create any noise which exceeds the noise level limits of this article, except during the following hours: Monday through Friday from seven a.m. until seven p.m. and Saturday from nine a.m. to five p.m.

     1.     No work described in this subsection B may performed on Sunday or any city holiday or on Monday through Saturday outside of the hours specified above unless all such work is conducted within a completely enclosed structure.

     2.     Home repairs, lawn mowing, gardening and routine maintenance of personal property is not considered construction.

     C.     Vehicles Off Public Right-of-Way. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle, off a right-of-way, in such a manner that the sound levels emitted there from exceed the noise level limits of this article.

     D.    Vehicle Repair and Testing. No person shall repair, rebuild, modify or test any motor vehicle in such a manner as to create any noise, which exceeds the noise level limits of this article. (Ord. 986 § 2, 2017)

 

9.32.060 General noise regulations.
     A.    Environmental Factors. The environmental factors which may be considered in determining whether a violation of provisions exists includes, but is not limited to, the following:

     1.     The sound level of the intrusive noise;

     2.     The sound level of the ambient noise;

     3.     The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;

     4.     The nature and zoning of the area from which the noise emanates;

     5.     The number of persons affected by the alleged intrusive noise;

     6.     The time of day or night the noise occurs;

     7.     The duration of the noise and its tonal content;

     8.     Whether the noise is continuous, recurrent, or intermittent. (Ord. 696 § 2, 2002)

 

9.32.070 Exemptions.
     A.    The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an actual emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work shall not be subject to the provisions of this article.

     B.     Warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety, as, for example, police and fire and ambulance sirens, including the testing of such devices, shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     Activities conducted on public playgrounds and public or private school grounds including, but not limited to, school athletic and school entertainment events, are exempt from the provisions of this article. Sounds emanating from regularly scheduled athletic events at city parks.

     D.    Sounds or noise from lawful fireworks.

     E.     City authorized parades, street fairs, festivals or celebrations.

     F.     Construction activity or garbage collection performed by an agency of government, provided that all equipment is operated in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications and is equipped with all noise reducing equipment in proper condition.

     G.    In-home private parties are exempt from obtaining a temporary use permit for activities, however they are not exempt from the noise standards within this chapter.

     H.    All agricultural and farming activities. (Ord. 696 § 2, 2002)

 

9.32.080 Temporary use permits required for certain activities.
     A.    The city of Brentwood community development department may grant a temporary use permit, which allows noncompliance with the limitations prescribed in this chapter for the purpose of sound activities of short duration.

     B.     Permits may be granted upon application and when said application is in compliance with the provisions of subsection C.

     C.     The following factors shall be considered in the initial investigation in order to determine whether granting of the permit in a condition injurious to health or safety:

     1.     Distance of proposed activities from any residential or noise sensitive zone;

     2.     Number of amplification devices, if any, to be used in the proposed activities;

     3.     Sound level capability of amplification devices and anticipated sound level;

     4.     Anticipated direction of amplification devices;

     5.     Anticipated duration of proposed activities;

     6.     Whether the activity will be held within or outside of structure;

     7.     Time of day and day of week of proposed activities;

     8.     Submit proposed activity plan to the police department for review and approval;

     9.     Any other consideration deemed necessary by the community development department.

     D.    The permit, if issued, shall specify the place, duration, and any restrictions appropriate to the proposed site of the activities.

     E.     Permits must be displayed and available for review by police or code enforcement officer upon request.

     F.     Issued permits will be surrendered to any police or code enforcement officer or other city official upon request when the restrictions of the permit have been violated.

     G.    Reapplication for a permit may be denied upon evidence of a complaint by a resident in the locality of the permitted activity or if an applicant has in the past been required to surrender a permit as described in subsection F.

     H.    A permit may be issued for more than one occasion of activity. However, the time of such activity must be indicated on the application and cannot be for more than four occasions or in excess of a six-week period.

     I.      If the city denies the temporary use permit the applicant may appeal the decision pursuant to Chapter 17.880 (Appeal) of the city of Brentwood’s Municipal Code. (Ord. 696 § 2, 2002)

 

9.32.090 Penalty.
     A.    Every person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction there-of shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail of Contra Costa County, state of California, for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     B.     Every person, firm, association or corporation is guilty of a separate offensive for each and every day the provisions of this chapter are violated, and for every day during which any violation of this chapter or its provisions continues, such person, firm, association or corporation shall be punishable therefor as provided in subsection A. (Ord. 696 § 2, 2002)

 

9.32.100 Enforcement.
     The code enforcement officer or duly authorized representative can monitor and enforce as appropriate the provisions of this chapter. No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person charged with the enforcement of the chapter while such person is engaged in the performance of her or his duty. Violators may be punished pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of the city of Brentwood’s Municipal Code. (Ord. 696 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 9.36 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
9.36.010 Drinking in public places unlawful.
     Except as otherwise provided in Section 9.36.030 of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to drink any malt, spirituous or vinous liquor containing any alcohol, upon any public street, alley, way, sidewalk, parkway or public parking area within the city of Brentwood. (Ord. 853 § 8, 2008)

 

9.36.020 Violation a misdemeanor—Penalty.
     Except as otherwise provided in Section 9.36.030 of this chapter, any person if the provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail of Contra Costa County for not more than six months, or by such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 853 § 8, 2008)

 

9.36.030 Exceptions.
     The provisions of Section 9.36.010 of this chapter shall not be applicable to the following:

     During regular business hours, those portions of a dining or eating establishment, open and accessible to the public, upon which alcoholic beverages may be sold or consumed in accordance with a valid on-sale license from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.900 of the Brentwood Municipal Code. (Ord. 853 § 8, 2008)

Chapter 9.38 CANNED GOODS OR BOTTLED BEVERAGES AT PUBLIC EVENTS
9.38.010 Prohibition of canned goods or bottled beverages at public events and at a public facility.
     Whenever general access to a public facility or public grounds is controlled by paid admission, invitation, or other similar restriction and posted signs warning of the prohibition are clearly visible at all entrances, no person shall possess or bring into the public facility or public grounds the following:

     A.    Any canned goods;

     B.     Glass containers; or

     C.     Beverages other than bottled water. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2000)

 

9.38.020 Permitted exceptions to prohibition of canned or bottled beverages.
     The prohibition of canned goods, glass containers, or beverages at a public facility or public grounds, as stated in Section 9.38.010 of this chapter, shall not apply when:

     A.    The prohibition would jeopardize the health of the person;

     B.     The item or beverage is related to on-site child or infant care; or

     C.     The item or beverage was acquired at or brought to the public facility or grounds pursuant to and consist with permitted vendor sales or distribution as allowed for that event, activity or exhibition. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2000)

 

9.38.030 Violation a misdemeanor—Penalty.
     Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in jail for not more than a period of six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 635 § 1, 2000)

Chapter 9.40 CITIZENS BAND RADIO
9.40.010 Prohibition of certain citizens band radio.
     It shall be a violation of the Brentwood Municipal Code to use citizens band radio equipment not authorized by the Federal Communications Commission or the unauthorized operation of citizens band radio equipment on a frequency between 24 MHz and 35 MHz and subject to a penalty pursuant to Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 1.08. (Ord. 667, 2001)

 

9.40.020 Exempt stations.
     A station that is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission pursuant to Section 301 of Communications Act of 1934 in any radio service for the operation at issue shall not be subject to this chapter. A citizens band radio equipment on board a “commercial motor vehicle,” as defined in Section 31101 of Title 49, United States Code, shall require probable cause to find that the commercial motor vehicle or the individual operating the vehicle is in violation of Federal Communications Commission citizens band radio regulations. (Ord. 667, 2001)

 

9.40.030 Appeal.
     Any person subject to this chapter may submit to the Federal Communications Commission an appeal of the decision on the grounds that the city enacted the ordinance codified in this chapter outside the authority provided by Section 302 of the Communications Act of 1934. A person shall submit his/her appeal on a city decision to Federal Communications Commission, if at all, not later than thirty days after the date on which the city’s decision becomes final, but prior to seeking judicial review of such decision. (Ord. 667, 2001)

Chapter 9.50 MARIJUANA FACILITIES AND CULTIVATION
9.50.010 Purpose.
     The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prohibit marijuana cultivation facilities, medical marijuana facilities, non-medical marijuana facilities, and marijuana deliveries, as defined below, within the city limits. It is recognized that it is a federal violation under the Controlled Substances Act to possess or distribute marijuana even if for medical purposes. Additionally, there is evidence of an increased incidence of crime-related secondary impacts in locations associated with marijuana facilities and in connection with marijuana deliveries, which is contrary to policies that are intended to promote and maintain the public’s health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 994 § 2, 2017)

 

9.50.020 Definitions.
     The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this chapter:

     “Commercial cannabis activity” shall have the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(k).

     “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana.

     “Establish” or “operate” a marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana dispensary, or non-medical marijuana facility means and includes any of the following:

     1.     The opening or commencement of the operation of a marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana facility, or non-medical marijuana facility;

     2.     The conversion of an existing business, facility, use, establishment, or location to a marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana facility, or non-medical marijuana facility;

     3.     The addition of a marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana facility, or non-medical marijuana facility to any other existing business, facility, use, establishment or location.

     “Marijuana” shall have the meaning set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11018 as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and as subsequently amended.

     “Medical marijuana” is marijuana used for medical purposes where that medical use is deemed appropriate and has been recommended by a physician who has determined that the person’s health would benefit from the use of marijuana in the treatment of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (“AIDS”), anorexia, arthritis, cancer, chronic pain, glaucoma, migraine, spasticity, or any other serious medical condition for which marijuana is deemed to provide relief as defined in subsection (h) of Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7.

     “Medical marijuana facility” means any business, facility, use, establishment, property, or location, whether fixed or mobile, where medical marijuana is sold, made available, delivered and/or distributed by or to three or more people. A “medical marijuana facility” includes any business, facility, use, establishment, property, or location, whether fixed or mobile, where a commercial cannabis activity, as defined by Business and Professions Code Section 26001(k), takes place. A “medical marijuana facility” does not include the following uses, as long as the location of such uses are otherwise regulated by this code or applicable law and as long as any use of marijuana complies strictly with applicable law including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq.:

     1.     A clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code;

     2.     A health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code;

     3.     A residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code;

     4.     A residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code;

     5.     A residential hospice, or a home health agency, licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code.

     “Non-medical marijuana facility” means any building, facility, use, establishment, property, or location where any person or entity establishes, commences, engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits another person or entity to establish, commence, engage in, conduct, or carry on, any activity that requires a state license or nonprofit license under Business and Professions Code Section 26000 et seq., including, but not limited to, marijuana cultivation, marijuana distribution, marijuana transportation, marijuana storage, manufacturing of marijuana products, marijuana processing, the sale of any marijuana or marijuana products, and the operation of a marijuana microbusiness. (Ord. 994 § 2, 2017)

 

9.50.030 Medical marijuana facilities prohibited.
     Medical marijuana facilities are prohibited in all zoning districts in the city and shall not be established or operated anywhere in the city. The city shall not issue, approve or grant any permit, license or other entitlement for the establishment or operation of a medical marijuana facility. No person may be the lessor of property where a medical marijuana facility is located. No person may participate as an employee, contractor, agent, volunteer, or in any manner or capacity in any medical marijuana facility in the city. (Ord. 994 § 2, 2017)

 

9.50.040 Marijuana cultivation prohibited.
     No person or entity may cultivate marijuana at any location in the city, except that a person may cultivate marijuana plants inside his or her private residence, or inside an accessory structure to his or her private residence located upon the grounds of that private residence that is fully enclosed and secured against unauthorized entry, provided that the owner of the property provides written consent expressly allowing the marijuana cultivation to occur, the person conducting the marijuana cultivation complies with all applicable Building Code requirements set forth in Title 8 of the Municipal Code, there is no use of gas products (including, but not limited to, CO2, butane, propane, and natural gas) on the property for purposes of marijuana cultivation, and the marijuana cultivation complies with Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2(a)(3). Not more than six living plants may be planted, cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private residence, or upon the grounds of that private residence, at one time. (Ord. 994 § 2, 2017)

 

9.50.050 Non-medical marijuana facilities prohibited.
     Non-medical marijuana facilities are prohibited in all zoning districts in the city and shall not be established or operated anywhere in the city. The city shall not issue, approve or grant any permit, license or other entitlement for the establishment or operation of a non-medical marijuana facility. No person may be the lessor of property where a non-medical marijuana facility is located. No person may participate as an employee, contractor, agent, volunteer, or in any manner or capacity in any non-medical marijuana facility in the city. (Ord. 994 § 2, 2017)

 

9.50.060 Marijuana delivery and transport prohibited.
     A.    Origination or acceptance of deliveries of marijuana for any purpose is prohibited in all zoning districts in the city.

     B.     No person and/or entity may deliver or transport marijuana, including medical marijuana, from any fixed or mobile location, either inside or outside the city, to any person in the city.

     C.     As an exception to subsections A and B above, a person may deliver or transport medical marijuana to a qualified patient or person with an identification card, as those terms are defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, for whom he or she is the primary caregiver within the meaning of Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7(d). (Ord. 994 § 2, 2017)

 

9.50.070 State and federal law prohibitions and restrictions.
     A.    The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit all marijuana activities for which a state license is required. Accordingly, the city shall not issue any permit, license or other entitlement for any commercial cannabis activity for which a state license is required.

     B.     Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to permit or authorize any use or activity which is otherwise prohibited by any state or federal law. (Ord. 994 § 2, 2017)

9.50.080 Enforcement.
     The city may enforce this chapter in any manner permitted by law. The violation of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. In addition, violators may be punished pursuant to Title 1 of this code. These remedies are deemed to be cumulative and in addition to all other remedies under this code and state and federal law. (Ord. 994 § 2, 2017)

Chapter 9.68 CURFEW
9.68.010 Curfew restrictions for minors.
     A.    Prohibition. It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen to remain in any community place or establishment within the city without the consent of the owner, operator or occupant thereof between the following hours:

 

Day

Before midnight

After midnight

Sunday

10:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m.

12:01 a.m. to 5:00 a.m.

Monday

10:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m.

12:01 a.m. to 5:00 a.m.

Tuesday

10:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m.

12:01 a.m. to 5:00 a.m.

Wednesday

10:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m.

12:01 a.m. to 5:00 a.m.

Thursday

10:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m.

12:01 a.m. to 5:00 a.m.

Friday

—

12:01 a.m. to 5:00 a.m.

Saturday

—

12:01 a.m. to 5:00 a.m.

 

     B.     Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply if the minor:

     1.     Is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian or by his or her spouse eighteen years of age or older.

     2.     Has permission from his or her parent or legal guardian (as evidenced by a written note and/or telephone or email confirmation from the parent).

     3.     Is involved in an emergency.

     4.     Is attending, going to or returning home without any detour or stop from:

     a.     An official school activity, civic organization, educational, religious, or recreational activity supervised by adults;

     b.     Lawful employment activity; or

     c.     An activity involving the exercise of his or her First Amendment rights under the U.S. or California Constitution.

     5.     Is in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel.

     6.     Is on the sidewalk adjacent to his or her residence or the residence of a next door neighbor and the neighbor does not complain to the police department about the minor’s presence.

     C.     Misdemeanor. Any minor who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 954 § 2, 2015; Ord. 626 § 2, 1999)

 

9.68.020 Definitions.
     As used herein, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set out:

     “Community place” means any place to which the general public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, trails, alleys, the common areas of buildings, facilities and parks.

     “Consent of the operator, owner or occupant” means consent specific to the minor.

     “Emergency” means one or more unforeseen circumstances or the resulting state requiring immediate action such as a fire, natural disaster, accident or situation requiring immediate action to prevent or to treat serious injury or loss to person or property.

     “Establishment” means any privately owned place of business to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, places of amusement and entertainment.

     “Guardian” means a person ordered to be such by a court or a public or private agency with whom the minor has been placed.

     “Minor” means any person under eighteen years of age.

     “Parent” means a person who is a natural, adoptive or stepparent or someone at least eighteen years old authorized by a parent or guardian to have care, custody or control of the minor.

     “Remain” means to stay or to fail to refuse to leave the premises after a request to do so by a person in control of the premises or by a police officer. (Ord. 626 § 2, 1999)


9.68.030 Parental responsibility.
     It is unlawful for the parent or guardian knowingly to allow or permit such a minor to violate this chapter, and such parent or guardian shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 626 § 2, 1999)

Chapter 9.80 DEADLY WEAPONS
9.80.010 Discharging of weapons prohibited.
     No person or persons, firm, company, corporation or association shall fire or discharge any firearm, air gun, air rifle or other gun or device capable of discharging by the use of powder, air or springs, any bullet, shot or other object, or a bow with metal-tipped arrows. (Ord. 96 § 2, 1957)

 

9.80.020 Exceptions from provisions.
     The provisions of this chapter regarding the use of firearms shall not apply to peace officers in the discharge of their official duties, using reasonable care, nor to persons using firearms in necessary self-defense, or in any careful manner for the purpose of destroying noxious animals from the land owned or occupied by them, nor to bona fide shooting galleries, or to persons using firearms in a careful manner in bona fide shooting galleries or places of supervised recreation such as rifle clubs. (Ord. 96 § 5, 1957)

 

9.80.030 Violation a misdemeanor—Penalty.
     Any person or persons, firm, company, corporation or association who or which violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the City Jail of the city of Brentwood or the County Jail of the county of Contra Costa for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 96 § 6, 1957)

 

9.80.040 Violation—Defense to prosecution—Effect on Penal Code.
     It shall be a defense to any prosecution for a violation of this chapter if at the time of the alleged violation the instrument or device described in Section 1 of Ordinance 96* was in good faith in the possession or control of the person using the same for use in his or her lawful occupation or employment, or for the purpose of supervised recreation. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to prohibit any act specifically authorized by the Penal Code of the state of California. (Ord. 96 § 4, 1957)

 

*      Editor’s Note: Section 1 of Ordinance 96 was repealed by Ordinance 268.

Chapter 9.90 GRAFFITI CONTROL
9.90.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide enforcement tools in addition to those already provided by state law for removal of graffiti and to prevent and control the further spread of graffiti on walls and structures on both public and private property in the city. The increase of graffiti on both public and private property is creating a condition of blight within the city which results in deterioration of property and business values for the property tagged by the graffiti as well as the surrounding properties. The city council finds and determines that graffiti is detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare and constitutes a public nuisance which must be abated. It is further the intent of the city council, through the adoption of this chapter, to give notice to all who disregard the property rights of others that the city will strictly enforce all laws prohibiting graffiti, including, but not limited to, Sections 594, 594.1, 640.5 and 640.6 of the California Penal Code, Section 13202.6 of the California Vehicle Code, and the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 553 § 1, 1995)

 

9.90.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively defined by this section:

     “Administrative hearing officer” means the city manager or designated representative.

     “Aerosol paint container” means any aerosol container regardless of the material from which it was made, which is adopted or made for the purpose of spraying paint, dye or other substance capable of defacing property.

     “Felt tip marker” means any marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth inch and contains an ink that is not water-soluble.

     “Graffiti” includes any unauthorized inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any structural component of any building, structure or other facility or surface, regardless of the nature of the material of that structural component.

     “Graffiti implement” means an aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, gum label, a paint stick or an etching tool capable of scarring glass, metal, concrete or wood.

     “Gum label” means any sheet of paper, fabric, plastic or other substance with an adhesive backing which, when placed on a surface, is not easily removable.

     “Paint stick” means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth inch in width, and not water-soluble. (Ord. 553 § 1, 1995)

 

9.90.030 Graffiti under state law.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to violate California Penal Code Section 640.6 which pro-vides that any person who writes, sprays, scratches, or otherwise affixes graffiti on any real or personal property not his or her own is guilty of an infraction.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person to violate California Penal Code Section 594 which provides that any person who maliciously: (1) defaces with paint or any other liquid; (2) damages; or (3) destroys any real or personal property not his or her own, in cases other than those specified by state law, is guilty of vandalism punishable by fine and/or imprisonment.

     C.     It is unlawful for any person to violate California Penal Code Section 640.5 which provides that any person who writes, sprays, scratches or otherwise affixes graffiti on or in the facilities or vehicles of a governmental entity, whether leased or owned by the governmental entity, is guilty of an infraction.

     D.    It is unlawful for any person to violate California Penal Code Section 594.1 which provides that it is a misdemeanor for: (1) any person to sell or furnish to any minor under the age of eighteen an aerosol paint container, other than the parent or legal guardian of such minor; (2) any minor to purchase an aerosol paint container; and (3) any minor to possess an aerosol paint container while upon any public highway, street or alley. (Ord. 553 § 1, 1995)

 

9.90.040 Purchase or possession of graffiti implements.
     A.    Purchase by or Furnishing to Minors. It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to purchase any graffiti implement unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. It is unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to any person under the age of eighteen years without the prior consent of the parent or other lawfully designated guardian of the person.

     B.     Possession. No person shall have in his or her possession and in plain view any graffiti implement for the purpose of inscribing graffiti while upon any public right-of-way or property in the city. Public property shall including any public park, playground, swimming pool, school or recreational facility if such are posted with signs stating that it is a misdemeanor to possess graffiti implements (as defined in this chapter). This section shall not apply to authorized employees or agents of the city of Brentwood or to any city-sponsored activities. (Ord. 553 § 1, 1995)

 

9.90.050 Penalties for violations.
     Unless otherwise provided by California State law, any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor offense punishable by either six months in jail, one thousand dollar fine, or both. Additional penalties may be recommended to the court on an ad hoc basis:

     A.    Vehicle Code Section 42001.7 permits a court to require a littering offender (Vehicle Code Sections 23111, 23112, 23113) to pick up litter or clean up graffiti;

     B.     Vehicle Code Section 13202.6 permits a court to suspend or delay issuance of a driver’s license for one year for each conviction of a graffiti offense;

     C.     Minors determined to be a ward of the court under Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 as a result of committing an offense in the city of Brentwood shall be required, at the city’s request of the court, to perform community service, which may include a graffiti removal service of not less than six hours nor more than eighty hours;

     D.    The city may request the court, pursuant to Civil Code Section 1714.1, to hold the parent or legal guardian of a minor who violates this chapter, or the state laws mentioned herein, personally responsible for any and all costs incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by said minor, including attorneys’ fees and court costs.

     If the court does not hold the parent or legal guardian of a minor who violates this chapter, or the state laws mentioned herein, responsible for the city’s removal costs, then the city may make such costs a special assessment against a parcel of land owned by the parent or legal guardian pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.6 so long as prior thirty days written notice is provided to the parent or legal guardian about the anticipated special assessment if such costs are not paid to the city. (Ord. 553 § 1, 1995)

 

9.90.060 Declaration of nuisance.
     The city council finds and declares that the existence of graffiti anywhere within the boundaries of the city of Brentwood is obnoxious and offensive, thereby constituting a public and private nuisance. Such graffiti shall be abated according to the provisions and procedures contained in this chapter. (Ord. 553 § 1, 1995)

 

9.90.070 Removal by person applying graffiti.
     Any person applying graffiti within the city shall have the duty to remove the same immediately, and in no event longer than seventy-two hours after notice by the city or the public or private owner of the property involved. Each instance of failure by any person to remove graffiti following notice shall constitute a separate violation. Every day that said graffiti is not removed after notice shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 553 § 1, 1995)

 

9.90.080 Abatement at owner’s expense.
     Graffiti located on privately or publicly owned property within the city of Brentwood so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way may be removed by the city at the owner’s expense as a public nuisance after service of a notice to abate as herein set forth. (Ord. 553 § 1, 1995)

 

9.90.090 Abatement at owner’s expense—Notice to abate.
     A.    Whenever the city is apprised of the presence of graffiti located on privately or publicly owned property within the city of Brentwood, the city shall serve a written notice to abate such graffiti upon the owner of the affected premises as such owner’s name and address appears on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current and to the tenant, where applicable and if known to the city.

     B.     Contents of Notice. The notice shall be substantially as set out in Form 9.90.090 at the end of this chapter and contain substantially the following information:

     1.     The street address, legal description, or other description sufficient to identify the premises affected by the described graffiti;

     2.     The length of time permitted for voluntary abatement of the graffiti;

     3.     A statement that the property owner may, during the abatement period, file a written request for hearing if the owner disagrees with the demand to abate the graffiti;

     4.     A statement that if the graffiti is not voluntarily abated within the stated period, the city will abate the graffiti, that the costs of such abatement shall be assessed against the premises and shall be collected in the same manner as city taxes.

     C.     Service of Notice.

     1.     The notice to abate the graffiti shall be served in the same manner as summons in a civil action in accordance with Section 415.10 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in Contra Costa County pursuant to Government Code Section 6062.

     2.     The failure to make or attempt such service on any person as required herein shall not invalidate any proceedings under this chapter as to any other person duly served. (Ord. 553 § 1, 1995)

 

9.90.100 Abatement of owner’s expense—Hearing.
     A.    A written request for hearing must be received by the city manager or his/her designated representative within seven days of service of the notice. The city manager, or designee, shall set a time and date for the hearing and notify the person requesting the hearing of the time, date and place. The hearing shall be before an administrative hearing officer. The hearing shall be an informal opportunity for the person requesting the hearing to present his/her arguments against the requirement to abate the graffiti at his/her expense.

     B.     At the hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall render a decision, in writing, upholding or denying the requirement of abatement. If the requirement is upheld, the decision shall contain an order to abate and a deadline for abatement, and shall be served on the person requesting the hearing by U.S. mail. The decision of the administrative hearing officer may be appealed to the city council if a written appeal is filed, and applicable appeal fees are paid, within seven days of the service of the decision of the administrative hearing officer. (Ord. 553 § 1, 1995)

 

9.90.110 Abatement at owner’s expense—Costs.
     A.    If the graffiti is not completely abated by the owner or occupier of the premises within the time prescribed in the: (1) notice to abate, (2) decision of the administrative hearing officer, or (3) decision of the city council, whichever is applicable, the city manager or his/her designated representative is authorized and directed to cause the graffiti to be abated by city personnel or private contract, and the city, or its private contractor, is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes.

     B.     The city manager or his/her designated representative shall keep an account of the costs and expenses, including all administrative and legal costs, in abating such graffiti and shall render a statement of such costs to the person or persons receiving the notice to abate. Such person or persons receiving the notice to abate shall be liable to the city for any and all costs and expenses to the city involved in abating the graffiti.

     C.     If all or any portion of the costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating the graffiti and accounted for by the city manager remain unpaid after thirty days, pursuant to authority created by law, including Government Code Sections 38773.5, 38773.6 and 38773.7, such portion thereof as remains unpaid shall constitute and is hereby declared to constitute an assessment on the real property which was served with the notice to abate and/or the subject property. The city manager or city clerk, prior to August 10th of each year, shall deliver to the county auditor of Contra Costa County a notice to levy the special assessment on the property for placement on the secured roll. Thereafter, the special assessment shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as municipal taxes. (Ord. 553 § 1, 1995)

 

9.90.120 Removal at city expense.
     Graffiti located on publicly or privately owned real property within the city of Brentwood so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way, may be removed solely at the city’s expense, without reimbursement from the property owner or assessment upon the property, upon all of the following conditions:

     A.    The administrative hearing officer, pursuant to a hearing under Section 9.90.010, determines that: (1) the owner of the affected property is unable to remove the graffiti due to extreme financial hardship; or (2) the same owner of the affected property has made no more than two requests for such city removal at the city’s sole expense within a calendar year; and

     B.     In removing the graffiti, the painting or repair of a more extensive area beyond the tagged area shall not be authorized;

     C.     When the work is to be performed by the city, or by contract at the direction of the city, the removal of the graffiti may not proceed until the written consent of the person or entity having jurisdiction over the structure is obtained along with a release of the city from liability. Such consent and release shall be substantially as set out in Form 9.90.120 attached to the end of this chapter.

     Nothing herein shall be construed as obligating the administrative hearing officer to require that any graffiti be abated at the sole expense of the city. (Ord. 553 § 1, 1995)

 

9.90.130 Alternative means of enforcement.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city council from authorizing the city attorney to commence any other available civil or criminal proceedings to enjoin or abate a public nuisance under applicable provisions of state law as an alternative to proceedings set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 553 § 1, 1995)

 

9.90.140 Severability.
     If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter, or application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid by a court of law, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or applications. Therefore, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 553 § 1, 1995)

 

Form 9.90.090

 

NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE

GRAFFITI

 

     Date:

 

     NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required at your expense to remove or paint over the Graffiti located on the property commonly known as ____________________, Brentwood, California, which is visible to public view, within seven (7) days after the date of this notice; or, if you fail to do so, then City employees or private City contractors will enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance by removal or painting over of the Graffiti. The cost of the abatement by the City employees or its private contractors, including any administrative and legal expenses incurred, will be assessed upon your property, and collected in the same manner as municipal taxes.

 

     All persons having any objection to or interest in said matters are hereby notified to submit any objections in writing to the City Manager for the City of Brentwood within seven (7) days from the date of this notice. If no such written objections are received by the City by the conclusion of this seven (7) day period, the City may proceed with the abatement of the Graffiti inscribed on your property at your expense without further notice.

 

_________________________________________

             (Signature of City Employee)                                        CITY OF BRENTWOOD

 

Form 9.90.120

 

CONSENT TO ENTER PROPERTY AND

HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT

GRAFFITI REMOVAL

 

     We grant permission to the City of Brentwood, or its authorized agents, to enter our property for Graffiti removal. We recognize that the City of Brentwood can only provide for the removal or painting of the area which is the subject of the Graffiti. We waive any claims which we may have against the City arising out of this work and agree to indemnify it, its City Council, its agents, officers and employees against any claims or demands whatsoever arising out of their performance of this work.

 

DATE:

 

NAME & ADDRESS:

 

TELEPHONE NO.:

 

SIGNATURE OF

PROPERTY OWNER

OR TENANT:

 

Return to:         City of Brentwood

                        708 Third Street

                        Brentwood, CA 94513

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.01 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 10.02 TRAFFIC DIVISION
Chapter 10.03 CITY ENGINEER
Chapter 10.04 ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Chapter 10.05 COLLISIONS
Chapter 10.06 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Chapter 10.07 TURNING MOVEMENTS
Chapter 10.08 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Chapter 10.09 SPECIAL STOPS
Chapter 10.10 DRIVING AND SAFETY RULES
Chapter 10.11 PEDESTRIANS
Chapter 10.12 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, MOTORCYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES
Chapter 10.13 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Chapter 10.14 STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY
Chapter 10.15 PARKING OF VEHICLES CARRYING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Chapter 10.16 TRUCK ROUTES
Chapter 10.17 GOLF CARTS
Chapter 10.18 SPECIAL SPEED ZONES
Chapter 10.19 REFUSE PLACED IN PUBLIC STREETS
Chapter 10.20 ABANDONED VEHICLES
Chapter 10.21 VIOLATION—PENALTY
Chapter 10.22 ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES
Chapter 10.23 VEHICLE REPAIR

Chapter 10.01 DEFINITIONS
10.01.010 Scope.
     For the purposes of Title 10, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this title are defined as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.020 Vehicle Code definitions.
     Whenever any words or phrases used in Title 10 are not defined in this chapter but are defined in the California Vehicle Code and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.030 Council.
     “Council,” means the city council of the city. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.040 Holidays.
     Holidays. The city council shall establish by resolution those holidays on which the public offices of the city shall be closed. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.050 Loading zone.
     “Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.060 Official standard time.
     Official Standard Time. Wherever certain hours are named in this title, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.070 Official traffic control devices.
     “Official traffic control devices” means all signs, signals, markings, and devices, not inconsistent with the provisions of this title, placed or erected by the authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.080 Parkway.
     “Parkway” means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.090 Passenger loading zone.
     “Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.100 Police officer.
     “Police officer” means every officer of the police department of the city. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.110 Bicycle.
     “Bicycle” means a device which any person may ride propelled exclusively by human power through a belt, chain or gears and having one or more wheels. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.120 Roller skate.
     “Roller skate” means any shoe, boot or other footwear to which one or more wheels are attached. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.130 Skateboard.
     “Skateboard” means a vehicle, device or conveyance with any number of wheels, with a riding surface of any design upon which a person may place one or more feet and which is designed to be or can be propelled by a human or a motor and which is not classified as a bicycle. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.140 Driver.
     “Driver” means a person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.150 Hazardous materials.
     “Hazardous materials” means any explosive, blasting agent, flammable liquid, flammable solid, oxidizing material, corrosive, compressed gas, poison, radioactive material, or other hazardous materials of such type and in such quantities as to require the display of placards or markings on the vehicle exterior by the United States Department of Transportation regulations (49 CFR Parts 172, 173 and 177) and any other substance, material or device posing an unreasonable risk to health, safety or property during transportation. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.160 Trailer.
     “Trailer” means a vehicle designed for carrying persons or property on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon any other vehicle. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.170 Truck route.
     “Truck route” means those streets designated by the city council by ordinance or resolution as truck traffic routes for use of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of six tons. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.180 Vehicle.
     “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.01.190 Commercial vehicle.
     “Commercial vehicle” means any vehicle, tank truck, trailer or semitrailer designed for or engaged in carrying merchandise, freight or other material whether such vehicle is laden or unladen. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.02 TRAFFIC DIVISION
10.02.010 Police administration.
     There is established in the police department of the city a traffic division to be under the control of a police officer appointed by the chief of police. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.02.020 Duty of traffic division.
     It shall be the duty of the traffic division, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department, to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the vehicle laws of the state applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic collisions, to cooperate with the city engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the traffic division by the provisions of this title. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.02.030 Traffic collision studies.
     Whenever the collisions at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the city engineer in conduction of studies of such collisions and determining remedial measures. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.02.040 Traffic collision reports.
     The traffic division shall forward copies of traffic collision reports to the city engineer. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.03 CITY ENGINEER
10.03.010 City engineer.
     The city engineer shall be a licensed professional engineer. Whenever the city engineer is required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic control devices or signals, he/she or one of his/her designees may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.03.020 Powers and duties of the city engineer—Delegation.
     It shall be the general duty of the city engineer to determine the installation, proper timing, and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic collisions and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions, to cooperate with other city officials, including, but not limited to, the chief of police, in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by the laws of the city. Whenever, by the provisions of this chapter, a power is granted to the city engineer or a duty is imposed upon him or her, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a person authorized in writing by him or her. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.04 ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
10.04.010 Authority of police department and fire district officials.
     Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible, or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department, or members of the fire district, may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this chapter or the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.04.020 Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.
     No person, other than officers of the police department, members of the fire district, persons authorized by the chief of police or the city engineer, or persons authorized by law, shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand, or other signal, except that persons may operate a mechanical push-button signal erected by the order of the city engineer. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.04.030 Obedience to police or authorized officers.
     No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal, or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the fire district, or a person authorized by the chief of police or by law. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.04.040 Obedience to barriers and signs.
     No person, public utility, contractor, or department in the city shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street, unless of a type approved by the city engineer, or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with, or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any authorized contractor or person, public utility, or by any department of the city. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.04.050 Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers.
     No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of the city in their enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration, or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of the city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.04.060 Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
     The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by, or used in the service of, the United States Government, the state, or any county or city, and it is unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted by this title or by the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.04.070 Persons riding bicycles or animals—Applicability.
     Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon any street or highway shall have all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle as set forth in this title, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.04.080 Exemption of certain vehicles.
     The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking, and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police department or fire district, any public ambulance, any public utility vehicle, or any private ambulance which has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the California Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.

     The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from his/her obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his/her willful disregard of the safety of others.

     The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department, authorized contractor, or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the collection, transportation, or delivery of the United States mail. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.04.090 Authority of police in crowds.
     At places where large numbers of people and vehicles are to gather or have gathered, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any police officer from prohibiting any person from parking any vehicle upon or using any street or sidewalk, or from prohibiting any pedestrian from using any street or sidewalk, and such police officer shall have the authority to direct the parking of vehicles in any reasonable manner, way or direction, and it is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to fail to promptly obey such police officer’s order, signal, or command, regardless of any other provision of this title. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.04.100 Removal of vehicles from streets.
     Any regular employed and salaried officer of the police department may remove, or cause to be removed:

     A.    Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two consecutive hours; and

     B.     Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway, or a portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair, or construction of the street or highway, or for the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles, or structures. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.04.110 Enforcement on private parking lots and roads.
     The council finds that certain facilities listed by ordinance or resolution are privately owned and maintained, off-street parking lots and roads which are subject to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code and this title so long as the city complies with the applicable provisions of Vehicle Code Sections 21107.5, 21107.6 or 21107.8. The enforcement officers of the city are authorized to enforce the provisions of the California Vehicle Code and of this title upon such designated facilities. Upon the designated facilities, such officers are also authorized to enforce the parking provisions of this code and the California Vehicle Code Sections 22507.8, 22350, 23103, and 23109 and Division 16.5.

     Enforcement shall not be effective unless the applicable provisions of Vehicle Code Sections 21107.5, 21107.6 or 21107.8 are complied with and each of such designated parking lots and roads has posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance of the parking lot or road a notice or sign not less than seventeen inches by twenty-two inches in size, with lettering not less than one inch in height, to the effect that such parking lot or road is subject to public traffic regulations and controls. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.04.120 Temporary street closings.
     The chief of police is granted the authority to approve the temporary closing of portions of streets for block parties, parades, or similar events when, in his/her opinion, the closing is necessary to protect the safety of persons who are to use such portion of the street during the event. Any such temporary closing shall abide by rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager. The city engineer is granted the authority to approve the temporary lane closures, including one-way traffic control. The city council, by resolution, may approve full street closures for construction. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.05 COLLISIONS
10.05.010 Notification required.
     The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any collision resulting in damages to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including, but not limited to, any fire hydrant, lighting post, telephone pole, or electric light or power pole, or resulting in damages to any tree, traffic control device, or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, within twenty-four hours after such collision, shall notify the public services department of the city. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.05.020 Contents of notification.
     Notification shall include the time when and the place where the collision took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, and the license number of every such vehicle and shall briefly describe the property damaged in such collision. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.05.030 Operators of vehicles physically incapable of making notification.
     The operator of any vehicle involved in a collision shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a notification, but in such event he shall notify the public services department of the city as required in Section 10.05.010 within twenty-four hours after regaining his or her ability to make such notification. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.06 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
10.06.010 Authority to install traffic control devices.
     A.    The city engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, official traffic control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this chapter in compliance with Section 10.03.020.

     B.     Whenever the California Vehicle Code requires, for the effectiveness of any provision thereof, that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the city engineer is authorized to install, or cause to be installed, the necessary devices, subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.

     C.     The city engineer may also place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic. But he/she shall make such determinations only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations, and rules as may be set forth in this chapter or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the council. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.06.020 Traffic control signs required for enforcement purposes.
     No provision of the California Vehicle Code or of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.06.030 Obedience to traffic control devices.
     The operator of any vehicle, train, or bike, or the person in control of any animal or animal-drawn conveyance, shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person, subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.06.040 Installation of traffic signals.
     A.    The city engineer is directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.

     B.     The city engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigations, traffic counts, consultation with other departments, and other traffic information as may be pertinent, and his/her determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the traffic manual issued by the State Department of Transportation or as approved by the city council.

     C.     Whenever the city engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, street name signs shall likewise be erected and maintained at such intersection clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions, unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any such intersection. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.06.050 Lane markings.
     The city engineer is authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the street or highway. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.06.060 Distinctive roadway markings.
     The city engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings, as described in the California Vehicle Code, on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic of the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such markings or signs and markings. Such markings or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Transportation pursuant to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.06.070 Authority to remove, relocate, and discontinue traffic control devices.
     The city engineer is authorized to remove, relocate, or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the California Vehicle Code or this title whenever he/she shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or apply. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.06.080 Unauthorized devices prohibited—Removal procedure.
     It is unlawful for any person to place, maintain or display any sign or device upon or in view of a street which purports to be, is an imitation of, or resembles an official warning or direction sign or signal, or which in any other manner attempts to direct the movement of traffic or the actions of operators without authority. Any such unauthorized sign or device is a public nuisance and the chief of police or city engineer shall remove it or cause it to be removed without notice. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.06.090 Utility signs and barriers—Approval required—Authority.
     No public utility shall erect or place in any street any barrier or sign except of a type approved by the city engineer. It is unlawful for any operator or pedestrian to disobey the instructions of any such approved barrier or sign. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.06.100 Vandalism prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to willfully deface, injure, move or interfere with any official warning or direction sign or signal. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.06.110 Traffic control devices—Hours of operation.
     The city engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this chapter. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.06.120 Unauthorized painting of curbs.
     No person, unless authorized by the city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has received authorization in writing from the city engineer. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.06.130 Approval of state for state highway regulations—Effect on authority of city officers.
     Whenever any provision of this title delegates authority to a city officer, or authorizes action by the city council to regulate traffic upon a state highway in any way which by law requires the prior approval of the state, no such officer shall exercise such authority nor shall such action by the city council be effective with respect to any state highway without the prior approval in writing of the state when and to the extent required by Division 9 and Division 11 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.06.140 Approval of state for state highway regulations—Notification of withdrawal.
     Any provision of this title which regulates traffic or delegates the regulation of traffic upon state highways in any way for which the approval of the state is required by law, shall cease to be operative six months after receipt by the city council of written notice of withdrawal of approval by the state. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.07 TURNING MOVEMENTS
10.07.010 Authority to place turning markers—Intersections—Multiple lanes.
     The city engineer is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.07.020 Authority to place restricted turn signs.
     The city engineer is authorized to determine those intersections and other locations at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event such hours shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.07.030 Signal-controlled intersections—Right turns.
     A.    No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is posted with a sign or signs giving notice of such restriction as set forth in subsection B of this section.

     B.     The city engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to the provisions of this section where he determines that the making of right turns against traffic signal stop indications would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.08 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
10.08.010 Signs designating one-way streets and alleys.
     Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the city engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where the movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.08.020 Streets and alleys made one-way by city.
     The council may, by ordinance or resolution, at any time when traffic conditions warrant, close any public street, or portion thereof, in the city to traffic in one direction and provide and direct by such ordinance or resolution that any automobile or other vehicle shall travel only in one direction over and along any such street. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.09 SPECIAL STOPS
10.09.010 City engineer to erect stop signs.
     Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates and describes any street, or portion thereof, as a through street, or any intersection that the city engineer, after appropriate study and surveys, finds that placement of stop signs is necessary for the safe and orderly flow of traffic, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows: a stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street, or portion thereof, so designated, at those entrances to other intersections where a stop is required, and at any railroad grade crossing so designated; provided, however, stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such entrance is controlled by an official traffic control signal. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.09.020 Emerging from alleys, driveways, or buildings.
     The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.09.030 Yield right-of-way signs.
     When deemed necessary for the orderly and safe movement of traffic by the city engineer, yield right-of-way signs may be erected at the approaches to intersections of streets and highways under his or her jurisdiction which are not through highways, but such yield right-of-way signs shall not be erected upon the approaches to more than one of the intersecting streets. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.10 DRIVING AND SAFETY RULES
10.10.010 Driving through funeral processions.
     No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.10.020 Clinging to moving vehicles.
     No person shall attach him or herself with his or her hands, or catch on or hold onto with his or her hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.10.030 Driving on sidewalks prohibited.
     The operator of a vehicle shall not drive over any sidewalk area except at a permanent driveway, an authorized temporary driveway, or as expressly permitted in Chapter 10.17 regarding golf carts. (Ord. 1008 § 1, 2019; Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.10.040 Spilling substances from vehicles onto street prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to transport, haul or carry, or cause to be transported, hauled or carried over, along, across or upon any street any substance in any car, vehicle or receptacle, in such a manner than any of such substance, with the exception of clear water or feathers, is spilled, distributed, scattered or allowed to fall upon any part of the street. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.10.050 New pavement and markings.
     No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly-made pavement or freshly-painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker, or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street, or any portion thereof, is closed. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.10.060 Limited access.
     No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway, except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.10.070 Bicycle and pedestrian lane.
     Bicycle and pedestrian lanes are established. The bicycle and pedestrian lanes shall be appropriately signed, and it is unlawful for any person to operate or park any motor vehicle (including, without limitation, an automobile, motorcycle, motor scooter, motorized skateboard, or motorized two or three wheel vehicle) upon the bicycle and pedestrian lanes, except maintenance and emergency vehicles. It is unlawful for any person to ride or walk any horse upon the bicycle and pedestrian lanes. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.10.080 Cruising.
     A.    Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

     “Cruise” or “cruising” means the repetitive driving of a motor vehicle past a traffic control point in traffic which is congested at or near the traffic control point, as determined by a peace officer, within a specified period and after the vehicle operator has been given adequate written notice that further repetitive driving will be a violation of this section.

     Highway and Motor Vehicle. These terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them by California Vehicle Code Sections 360 and 415, respectively.

     B.     Cruising Prohibited.

     1.     Cruising shall be prohibited in the areas where designated by signs and a traffic control point.

     2.     No person shall be guilty of cruising unless such person has driven a motor vehicle past the same traffic control point twice within a two hour period, and, upon driving past the traffic control point the first time, has been given written notice that further driving past the traffic control point shall be a violation of this code, and unless signs have been posted on the subject street as set forth in this section.

     C.     Signs. Signs shall be erected at the beginning and end of that portion of any street subject to cruising controls and enforcement. The signs shall state briefly and clearly that cruising is prohibited by subsection B of this section.

     D.    Exclusions. This section shall not apply to emergency vehicles, buses traveling along a fixed route, or commercial vehicles during the course of conducting business. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.11 PEDESTRIANS
10.11.010 Marked crosswalks established by city engineer.
     A.    The city engineer shall establish, designate, and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway.

     B.     Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred feet in length, and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at midblock. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.11.020 Crossing at right angles.
     No pedestrian shall cross a roadway, at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a marked crosswalk. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.11.030 Standing in roadways.
     No person shall stand in any roadway, other than in a safety zone or a crosswalk, if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any public officer or employee, or employee of a public utility, or employee of a company authorized by the city, when necessarily upon a street in the line of duty. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.11.040 Pedestrians to obey special pedestrian traffic signals.
     Pedestrians shall obey the indication of special traffic signals installed for pedestrians only and shall disregard the indication of a vehicular traffic signal at any location where special pedestrian traffic signals are in place. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.11.050 Crossing prohibited.
     No pedestrian shall cross a street at any location determined to be unsafe for pedestrian movement. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.12 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, MOTORCYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES
10.12.010 Bicycling, skateboarding and roller skating prohibited on certain public and private property.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle, skateboard or roller skate upon any sidewalk named as follows:

     1.     First Street from Chestnut Street to Maple Street on both sides;

     2.     Second Street from Oak Street to Pine Street on the west side;

     3.     Chestnut Street from Brentwood Boulevard to First Street on both sides;

     4.     Oak Street from Brentwood Boulevard to Second Street on both sides;

     5.     Maple Street from Brentwood Boulevard to the west side of Second Street;

     6.     Oak Street from Second Street to the end on the south side.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle, skateboard, or to roller skate upon any public or private property without the consent of the owner or operator when a sign or signs indicating that such skateboarding, bicycling, or roller skating is prohibited pursuant to the provisions of this section is posted on the property in a conspicuous manner. Posting of private property will be in compliance with city specifications and at the expense of the private property owner.

     C.     The city engineer is authorized to post or cause to be posted signs prohibiting bicycling, skateboarding or roller skating in the areas noted in this section or on other public property.

     D.    It is unlawful for anyone to skateboard or roller skate on any public street in a manner that would create a hazard to themselves, any pedestrian, bicyclist, motorist or to impede motor vehicle traffic. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.12.020 Bicycles, skateboards, roller skates and toy vehicles—Clinging to moving vehicles prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle or any toy vehicle or riding a skateboard or roller-skating, to attach him or herself or his or her vehicle to any other moving vehicle or streetcar upon any roadway. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.13 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
10.13.010 Application of regulations.
     A.    The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid a conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.

     B.     The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the California Vehicle Code or the laws of the city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.020 City engineer to maintain no stopping zones and no parking areas.
     A.    The city engineer is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas as defined and described in this chapter.

     B.     When such curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle, except maintenance and emergency vehicles, shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.030 Parking on private property prohibited.
     No person shall park a vehicle in a private driveway or on private property without the direct or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway or property. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.040 Parking on city property.
     A.    Whenever the city engineer shall determine that the orderly, efficient conduct of the city’s business requires that the parking or standing of vehicles on city property be prohibited, limited, or restricted, the city engineer shall have the power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted indicating that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited, or restricted.

     B.     When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.050 Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited.
     No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within any parkway. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.060 Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited.
     A.    No person who owns or has the possession, custody, or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours.

     B.     In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in excess of a consecutive period of seventy-two hours, any member of the police department authorized by the chief of police may remove such vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of the California Vehicle Code or Section 10.04.100.

     C.     No person who owns or has the possession, custody, or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley between the hours of two a.m. and four a.m. when such street or alley has been so posted with official signs or markings. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.070 Parking vehicles for sale and vehicles under repair.
     No person shall park a vehicle upon any public roadway for the principal purpose of:

     A.    Displaying such vehicle for sale; or

     B.     Greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.080 Cleaning or repairing vehicles in streets prohibited—Exceptions.
     It is unlawful for any person engaged in the business of repairing or cleaning automobiles or other vehicles to repair or clean any automobile or other vehicles on any street. This section shall not apply to temporary repairs necessary to be made in case of emergency, nor to changing of tires and batteries. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.090 Parking of disabled vehicles prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to park upon any part of any public street or place in the city any motor vehicle which at the time is unable to move under its own power, or to park or deposit on any public street or place in the city for any period of time any part of such vehicle or any junked vehicle. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.100 Parking within stall lines.
     Whenever parallel parking is designated upon the surface of any paved street by lines at right angles to the curb with crossbars or bars parallel with the curb, the space between such right-angle lines shall designate and represent an individual parking space or stall, and any person stopping, standing, or parking a vehicle upon the area of any street so marked shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle with the two right-hand wheels thereof not more than eighteen inches from the regularly established curb line and in the center of such designated parking space or stall. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.110 Parking parallel with curbs.
     A.    Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street, unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.

     B.     In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway, unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.

     C.     The city engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking is prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street, or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways, and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.

     D.    The requirements of such parallel parking shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb, provided such vehicle does not extend beyond the center line of the street and does not block traffic thereby. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.120 Signs or markings indicating angle parking.
     A.    Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates and describes any street, or portion thereof, upon which angle parking shall be permitted, the city engineer shall mark or sign such street indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked.

     B.     When signs or markings are in place indicating angle parking as set forth in this section, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings and within the space between such markings.

     C.     When signs or markings are in place indicating angle parking as set forth in this section, the vehicle shall conform with the angle of the parking lines and the right front wheel thereof shall be within one foot of the regularly established curbline. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.130 Parking adjacent to schools.
     A.    The city engineer is authorized to erect signs or markings on the street or red curbing indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property where such parking would, in the engineer’s opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

     B.     When official signs or markings on the street and red curb are erected indicating no parking upon that side of the street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.140 Parking prohibited on narrow streets.
     A.    The city engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet, or upon one side of a street, as indicated by such signs or markings, when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet.

     B.     No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle within five feet of the center line of the paved portion of any street, lane, or road within the city.

     C.     When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized by this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of such sign or marking. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.150 Parking on grades.
     No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent without blocking the wheels of such vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.160 Parking for handicapped.
     A.    The city engineer is authorized to place signs or markings on the street or blue curbing indicating parking is reserved for the exclusive use of the physically handicapped.

     B.     When official signs or markings reserving parking for the physically handicapped are erected, no persons, other than a physically handicapped person whose vehicle displays a distinguishing license plate issued by the State Department of Motor Vehicles, shall park a vehicle in any such designated place, unless accompanied by a physically handicapped person. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.170 No parking areas.
     No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer, or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal, or for the purpose of maintenance or construction as authorized by the city:

     A.    Within or adjacent to any divisional island, unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings;

     B.     On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating at such street when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

     C.     In any area where the city engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

     D.    In any area established by resolution of the council as a no parking area when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

     E.     Upon, along, or across any railway track or railroad right-of-way in such a manner as to hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track;

     F.     In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;

     G.    On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway, or a portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair, or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, however, signs giving notice of such no parking areas shall be erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the effective time of such prohibited parking;

     H.    At any place where the city engineer determines that the city will require emergency access to a sewage lift station or other public utility when such place is indicated by red paint upon the curb surface or signs;

     I.      No truck or motor vehicle used for commercial, industrial, or agricultural purposes and rated more than one ton capacity, and no trailer used for such purposes, shall be parked or left standing on any street or highway where any part thereof has been designated by the city engineer as a truck no parking zone and when such part thereof has been posted with official signs or marking. This section shall not apply to any truck in the actual process of loading or unloading. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.180 Reserved.
 

10.13.190 Emergency parking signs.
     A.    Whenever the city engineer or chief of police shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the city engineer or chief of police shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking, or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency, and the city engineer or chief of police shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

     B.     When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park, or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. Penalties for the violation of this section shall be the same as penalties for the violation of nonemergency parking signs. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.200 Twenty-minute parking.
     A.    Green curb markings shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty minutes at any time between eight-thirty a.m. and four-thirty p.m. on any day, except Sundays and holidays, except that the city engineer may indicate that a different time or excepted day shall be effective and shall indicate the same by placing the appropriate sign.

     B.     When authorized signs, curb markings, or parking meters have been determined by the city engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking, sign, or parking meter in violation thereof. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.210 Forty-five minute and one-hour parking areas.
     When authorized signs, notices, or curb markings have been determined by the city engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle during the hours and days designated, except by permit in accordance with Section 10.13.280, for a period of time longer than forty-five minutes or one hour as the adjacent signs, notice, or curb markings indicate. (Ord. 718 § 2, 2002; Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.220 Authorized parking.
     When authorized signs, written notices, or curb markings have been determined by the city engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle during the hours and days for the time limit designated by such notice, except by permit in accordance with Section 10.13.280, for a period of time longer than the signs, written notices, or curb markings state. (Ord. 718 § 3, 2002; Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.230 Nighttime parking.
     When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle during the hours so specified on the curb markings or signs. For the purpose of this section, “nighttime” shall mean the hours of nine p.m. until four a.m., although the prohibition may apply to a shorter period of time, so long as specified on the curb markings or signs. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.240 Municipal parking lots.
     A.    Parking Regulations.

     1.     Vehicles shall be parked in and upon parking lots only in parking stalls as indicated and marked by appropriate signs and painted lines. A vehicle shall be parked in a stall so that the forward end of the vehicle is at the rear of the stall and the rear end of the vehicle is at the entrance to the stall and in such fashion that all parts of the vehicle lie within the exterior markings of the stall.

     2.     No vehicle shall be parked anywhere in or upon a parking lot other than in and upon an appropriately indicated and marked stall. No vehicle shall be parked backed into the stall.

     3.     When appropriate signs are installed giving notice thereof, any vehicle parked in excess of seventy-two consecutive hours may be towed away and stored at the owner’s expense.

     B.     Traffic Regulations.

     1.     Vehicles shall enter a parking lot only at a place appropriately indicated as a point of ingress by signs or markings.

     2.     Vehicles leaving a parking lot shall do so only at a place appropriately indicated by signs or markings as a point of egress.

     3.     Vehicles leaving a parking lot shall come to a full stop at a point of egress prior to crossing the sidewalk area and proceeding onto a public street.

     4.     A parking lot shall not be used by any vehicle as an immediate means of proceeding from one public street to another.

     5.     Vehicles moving in and upon a parking lot shall proceed only along appropriately signed or marked traffic lanes and only in a direction indicated by signs or markings in any such lanes.

     C.     Speed Regulations. Vehicles moving in and upon a parking lot shall not move at a rate of speed in excess of ten miles per hour.

     D.    General Regulations.

     1.     Littering. It is unlawful to discard any bottle, can, paper, or other material of any kind in or upon a parking lot.

     2.     Application of State and City Traffic Laws. All of the laws of the state and of the city pertaining to vehicles and their use and operation shall apply in and upon parking lots with the same full force and effect as upon the public streets, except where the context of any such law clearly indicates to the contrary. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.250 Parking commercial vehicles in residential districts.
     A.    No person shall park any motor vehicle used for commercial, industrial, or agricultural purposes and rated more than three ton capacity, and no trailer used for the same, in any residential district or on any public street not designated as a truck route.

     B.     The following exceptions shall apply:

     1.     Such vehicle or trailer is loading, unloading, or rendering service; and/or

     2.     Trucks used for agricultural purposes may be parked or stored in the buildable area of a residentially-zoned parcel or lot on which there is a minimum of five acres devoted to agricultural uses. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.260 No stopping and parking regulations—Curb markings.
     A.    The city engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title, to place, and when required by this section shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations.

     B.     Such curb markings shall have the meanings set forth as follows:

     1.     Red shall indicate no stopping, standing, or parking, whether the vehicle is attended or unattended, except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signposted as a bus loading zone.

     2.     Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking at any time between eight-thirty a.m. and four-thirty p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of materials or passengers more than twenty minutes.

     3.     White shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between eight-thirty a.m. and four-thirty p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, and except as follows:

     a.     When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times; and

     b.     When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times, except when such theater is closed.

     4.     Green shall mean no standing or parking for longer than twenty minutes, or as designated by the city engineer at any time between nine a.m. and six p.m. on any day, except Sundays and holidays.

     5.     Blue shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking at any time of any day by any vehicle other than those vehicles displaying a distinguishing license plate issued for the physically handicapped.

     6.     When the city engineer, as authorized under this chapter, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.270 Private parking facilities.
     The provisions of Section 10.04.110 are incorporated into this section. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.13.280 Permit parking.
     A.    Unlawful. It is unlawful to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle during hours when such parking is prohibited by signs indicating that a specified parking permit is required during such hours in the area. It is unlawful to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle for a period of time longer than designated by signs indicating that a specified parking permit is required for extended parking during such hours in the area.

     B.     Establishment. Parking permit areas may be established by the city engineer in accordance with the applicable provisions of the California Vehicle Code in areas where there is a large influx of parking and where it has become difficult for residents, owners, employees and guests to park. Signs shall be posted at the entrance or beginning of a specified permit parking area, and at intervals which are frequent enough to provide fair notice to motorist that the area is subject to the parking permit regulations.

     C.     Parking permits shall be issued by the chief of police or his/her designee in accordance with the applicable provisions of the California Vehicle Code. A variety of permits may be issued to distinguish specified areas where the permit is valid or a particular length of time for which the permit is valid. Permits shall be issued with instruction to their proper use.

     D.    Necessity for Display. Persons who park in a permit parking area during prohibited hours or for an extended length of time in an area designated with time limit parking without properly displaying the specified permit shall be deemed to be in violation of subsection A of this section, notwithstanding that they may be residents, owners, employees, or authorized guests, or that they possess a permit which is not displayed in the required manner.

     E.     Permits are for the use of residents, owners, employees, and authorized guests. It is unlawful to display an unauthorized permit for the purpose of parking in an area prohibiting parking without a permit or for parking for an extended length of time in an area designated with time limit parking during designated hours without a permit. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.14 STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY
10.14.010 Authority to establish loading zones.
     A.    The city engineer shall determine loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:

     1.     In front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purposes of public assembly.

     B.     In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.

     C.     Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones.

     D.    Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white or yellow paint upon the top of all curbs in such zones.

     E.     The city engineer shall mark, or cause to be marked, all loading zones and passenger loading zones so established. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.14.020 Permission to load or unload.
     A.    Permission granted by this chapter to stop or stand a vehicle for the purposes of loading or unloading materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than twenty minutes.

     B.     The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries and to the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail.

     C.     Permission granted by this chapter to stop or park for the purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage. At no time shall the vehicle be left unattended.

     D.    Within the total time limits specified in this section, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting the abuse of the privileges hereby granted. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.14.030 Permits for loading or unloading at angle to the curb.
     The city engineer is authorized to issue special permits to allow the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein, and it is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.14.040 Standing for loading or unloading only.
     No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or materials for such time as is permitted in Section 10.13.250. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.14.050 Standing in passenger loading zones.
     No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 10.13.250. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.14.060 Standing in alleys.
     No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading of persons or materials in any alley. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.14.070 Coach zones established.
     A.    The city engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus zones adjacent to the curb for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the locations thereof.

     B.     Coach zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.15 PARKING OF VEHICLES CARRYING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
10.15.010 Purpose and intent.
     The city council finds that there are an increasing number of vehicles traveling within and through the city which contain hazardous materials, and finds that if the parking of these vehicles is not regulated and controlled by reasonable procedures, a danger to persons and property in the city will exist. The city council determines that the public health, safety and welfare require the establishment of regulations to control the parking of vehicles carrying hazardous materials within the city. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.15.020 Prohibitions.
     It is prohibited for any driver of a vehicle carrying hazardous materials to do any of the following:

     A.    To park anywhere in the city except on a designated truck route;

     B.     To park on a designated truck route unattended for more than a total of ninety minutes during any twenty-four hour period;

     C.     To leave any trailer, not connected to a vehicle and containing hazardous materials, parked within the city. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.16 TRUCK ROUTES
10.16.010 Application of regulations.
     A.    Whenever the city council, by resolution or ordinance, designates any street, or portion thereof, as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the city engineer is authorized to designate such street by appropriate signs as “truck routes” for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons.

     B.     When any truck routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on such routes and none other, except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons coming from a truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained.

     C.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to:

     1.     Passenger buses engaged in picking up or delivering passengers; and

     2.     Any vehicle owned by a public utility, city vehicle, or contractor doing work for the city or under an encroachment permit while necessarily in use in the construction, installations or repair of any public utility. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.16.020 Truck traffic routes designated.
     The city council, by ordinance or resolution shall designate truck routes in the city. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.16.030 Use of routes required—Exception.
     When any such truck traffic route or routes are designated by appropriate signs, the operator of a vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of six tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other except when necessary to traverse another street or streets to a destination for the purpose of loading or unloading, but then only by such deviation from the nearest truck route as is reasonably necessary. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.16.040 Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets.
     A.    Whenever any resolution of the city or determination of the city engineer designates and describes any street, or portion thereof, as a street the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the city engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such resolution.

     B.     Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be streets the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the state.

     C.     Whenever it is determined by the city engineer that any street, or portion thereof, is unsafe, either by virtue of grade, width, or terrain, for the passage of vehicles with a gross weight of three tons or more, the city engineer is authorized to erect appropriate signs, and all such vehicles shall be prohibited. The city engineer is also authorized to erect such signs when the structural section of any street, or portion thereof, is unsuitable for the passage of vehicles with a gross weight of three tons or more. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.16.050 Movement of heavy vehicles and equipment—Permits required.
     A.    No person shall move or operate upon any of the city streets any vehicle with a load or loads in excess of those permitted by the California Vehicle Code without a written permit from the city engineer.

     B.     The city engineer, by written permissions, may authorize a load or loads in excess of those allowed for in the California Vehicle Code, if in his/her judgment, the streets upon which such vehicle is to be operated can safely withstand the additional weight, or if the applicant will guarantee to the city that all costs of repairs to the streets or to the public property of the city damaged by the movement of such load or loads will be paid in full. Such permits shall be granted upon such conditions and upon depositing such bonds as required at the discretion of the city engineer. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.16.060 Combinations of vehicles—Width and length restrictions.
     A.    Width of Vehicles. No person shall move or operate upon any of the city streets any combination of vehicles of a total width in excess of ninety-six inches.

     B.     Length of Vehicles. No person shall move or operate upon any of the city streets any combination of vehicles of a total length in excess of sixty-five feet.

     C.     Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable if a vehicle is being operated on the National System of Interstate and Defense Highways or when using those portions of federal-aid primary highways which have been qualified by the United States Secretary of Transportation for such use.

     D.    Signs Required. This section shall not become effective until appropriate signs are erected indicating either the streets so affected or the streets not affected in a manner the city engineer determines will best serve to give notice of this section.

     E.     Variances. The city engineer may issue permits to allow vehicles of extra width and/or length to travel on city streets. Such permits shall be issued using the procedures established in Section 10.16.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.16.070 Permits for variances.
     A.    The city engineer, upon an application in writing and if good cause appears, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant:

     1.     To operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles or special mobile equipment of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in the California Vehicle Code or this title;

     2.     To use corrugations on the periphery of the movable tracks on a traction engine or tractor the propulsive power of which is not exerted through wheels resting on the roadway but by means of a flexible band or chain; or

     3.     Under emergency conditions, to operate or move a type of vehicle otherwise prohibited by this title upon any highway under the jurisdiction of the city.

     B.     The application for a permit shall specifically describe the vehicle and load to be operated or moved, the particular highways over which the permit to operate is requested, and whether the permit is requested for a single trip or for continuous operation.

     C.     The city engineer is authorized discretion to issue or withhold the permit, or, if the permit is issued, to limit the number of trips, or to establish seasonal or other time limitations within which the vehicle or vehicles described may be operated on the highways indicated, or otherwise to limit or prescribe the conditions of the operation of the vehicle when necessary to assure against undue damages to the road foundations, surfaces, or structures, and may require an undertaking or other security as may be deemed necessary to protect the highways and bridges from injuries or to provide indemnity for injuries resulting from the operation of the vehicle.

     D.    Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which the permit refers and shall be open to inspection by any peace officer, traffic officer, or other authorized agent of the city.

     E.     It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the terms or conditions of any such special permit.

     F.     The city engineer shall notify the chief of police of each special permit issued. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.16.080 Truck operations in residential areas—Time limitations.
     No truck which exceeds a maximum gross weight of three tons shall be operated on a residential, local or collector street before the hour of eight a.m. or after the hour of five p.m. This section shall not apply to trucks providing service to an occupied residential dwelling, such as garbage collection trucks, moving vans, and swimming pool contractor trucks. This section shall also not apply to governmental or utility trucks. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.16.090 Erection of signs authorized.
     The city engineer is authorized and directed to have appropriate signs erected indicating that such streets, avenues and ways as described in Section 10.16.020 and lying within the corporate limits of the city of Brentwood are truck traffic routes designated for the purposes set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.16.100 Exceptions from provisions.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission nor to any vehicle owned and operated by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility, nor to any emergency vehicle while such vehicle is actually engaged in the performance of such emergency duties as are necessary to be performed by the emergency vehicle. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.17 GOLF CARTS
10.17.010 Definitions.
     “Darkness” means any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise and any other time when visibility is not sufficient to render clearly discernible any person or vehicle on a city street or roadway at a distance of one thousand feet.

     “Golf cart” means a motor vehicle having not less than three wheels in contact with the ground, having an unladen weight less than one thousand three hundred pounds, which is designed to be and is operated at not more than fifteen miles per hour and designed to carry golf equipment and not more than two persons, including the driver.

     “Real estate development offering golf facilities” means an area of single-family or multiple-family residences, the owners or occupants of which are eligible for membership in, or the use of, one or more golf courses within the development by virtue of their ownership or occupancy of a residential dwelling unit in the development. (Ord. 1008 § 2, 2019)

 

10.17.020 Golf cart routes—Designation and establishment.
     A.    Streets or portions of street may be designated as streets upon which persons may operate golf carts by resolution of the city council.

     1.     Whenever any resolution of the city designates any street or portion thereof as a street upon which the city permits persons to operate golf carts, the city engineer shall designate such street as a golf cart route by erecting and maintaining appropriate signs thereon. No person shall operate a golf cart on any street or portion thereof not designated by the city as a golf cart route, except for designated crossing zones.

     2.     Only those streets with a speed zone of twenty-five miles per hour or less located adjacent to, or providing access to, a golf course or located within or bounded by a real estate development offering golf facilities shall be eligible for designation as a golf cart route. No street shall be so designated for a distance of more than one mile from the golf course unless such street is located within a real estate development.

     B.     Sidewalks or portions of sidewalks may be designated as sidewalks upon which persons may operate golf carts by resolution of the city council.

     1.     Whenever any resolution of the city designates any sidewalk or portion thereof as a sidewalk upon which the city permits persons to operate golf carts, the city engineer shall designate such sidewalk as a golf cart route by erecting and maintaining appropriate signs thereon. No person shall operate a golf cart on any sidewalk or portion thereof not designated by the city as a golf cart route.

     2.     Only those sidewalks: (a) constructed to city standards for use by golf carts; and (b) located adjacent to, or providing access to, a golf course or located within or bounded by a real estate development offering golf facilities, shall be eligible for designation as a golf cart route. (Ord. 1008 § 2, 2019)

 

10.17.030 Golf cart crossing zones—Designation and establishment.
     Golf cart crossing zones may be designated as needed by resolution of the city council. Whenever a resolution of this city designates any area of a street as a golf cart crossing zone, the city engineer is authorized to establish such crossing zone by placing and maintaining appropriate markings upon the surface of the street and installing and maintaining appropriate signs and traffic control devices near the crossing zone. (Ord. 1008 § 2, 2019)

 

10.17.040 Golf cart operating regulations.
     A.    Any person operating a golf cart on designated city streets or crossing zones shall abide by all applicable traffic laws of the city and state.

     B.     No person shall operate a golf cart on a designated city street, crossing zone or sidewalk after darkness unless the golf cart conforms with the equipment requirements of the California Vehicle Code.

     C.     No person while operating a golf cart shall cross a street or roadway other than in a designated crossing zone unless such street or roadway is an authorized golf cart route as designated in Section 10.17.020. (Ord. 1008 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 10.18 SPECIAL SPEED ZONES
10.18.010 Speed limits established.
     The council, on the basis of engineering and traffic investigations and surveys, has determined that the speeds permitted by state laws, as applicable to certain city streets, are different than those necessary for safe operation thereon under the conditions found to exist on such streets. It is declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be as set forth by resolution on those streets, or parts of streets, within the city when signs giving notice thereof have been erected upon such streets. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.18.020 Signs erected to designate speed limits.
     The city engineer is directed to have signs erected upon the streets at appropriate locations giving notice of the limits established by resolution in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

 

10.18.030 Regulation of speed by traffic signals.
     The city engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from speeds otherwise applicable within the district or intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.19 REFUSE PLACED IN PUBLIC STREETS
10.19.010 Refuse placed in public streets.
     Whenever the city council, by resolution or ordinance, establishes the manner and location in which refuse and/or material to be recycled shall be placed in the public street for collection, refuse and/or material to be recycled shall not be placed on the public street or right-of-way in any other manner nor at any other location except that prescribed. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.20 ABANDONED VEHICLES
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ord. 592.

 

10.20.010 Findings and declarations.
     In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings, declarations and adopts the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.020 Declaration of nuisance—Abatement authorization.
     The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, are a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.030 Provisions not exclusive regulation.
     This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.040 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth herein:

     “Abandoned vehicle” means any vehicle which has been left on private property or public property other than highways in such inoperable or neglected condition that the owner’s intention to relinquish all further rights or interests in it may be reasonably concluded.

     “Dismantled vehicle” means a vehicle which has been partially or wholly disassembled.

     “Enforcement officer” means the chief building official or the chief of police and shall include any official or officials in the city duly appointed by the chief building official or chief of police, including, but not limited to, code enforcement officers, to administer the provisions hereof.

     “Hearing officer” means the designated management level employee designated by the city manager to hear all of the facts and testimony pertaining to the case and make an order at the conclusion of the hearing. The hearing officer shall not be a police or code enforcement management level employee.

     “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street.

     “Inoperative vehicle” means a vehicle which cannot be moved under its own power. The vehicle must be able to start with a key, idle, move forward and reverse and stop under its own power.

     “Owner of the land” means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

     “Owner of the vehicle” means the registered owner of record.

     “Private property” means property that belongs absolutely to an individual and that person has the exclusive right of disposition. Property of a specific, fixed, and tangible nature, capable of being possessed and transmitted to another.

     “Public property” is a designation of those things which are considered owned by the public, the state or community, and not restricted to dominion of a private person. It may apply to any property owned by a state, nation, or municipality.

     “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. The term “vehicle” as used in this chapter shall include any passenger vehicle or truck, recreational vehicle, trailer, boat mounted on trailer, motorcycle, motor scooter, golf cart, or other similar self-propelled vehicle, special interest vehicle, or other vehicle referenced in California Vehicle Code 5051, and other vehicles of similar kind and use.

     “Wrecked vehicle” means a vehicle which is damaged to such an extent that it cannot be operated upon the highway. A vehicle which has been wrecked in a traffic accident and it is an inoperative vehicle and/or cannot be legally driven on the street due to the damage and/or missing parts. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.050 Administration and enforcement.
     Except as otherwise provided, this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the enforcement officer. In enforcing these provisions the enforcement officer and his/her deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.060 Administration—Authorization for removal.
     When the city has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.070 Administration—Cost assessment.
     The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof) under this chapter. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.080 Authority to abate.
     Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private or public property within the city, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.090 Procedure—Notices of intention to abate.
     A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified mail and regular mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:

 

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

 

(Name and address of owner of the land)

 

As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Section 10.20.060 of the City of Brentwood Municipal Code has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle(s) registered to ____________, license number _________, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.20 of the City of Brentwood Municipal Code.

 

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle( s) (or said parts of a vehicle) within ten (10) days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle( s) (or said parts of a vehicle) is located.

 

As owner of the land on which said vehicle(s) (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten (10) days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Clerk of the City of Brentwood within such ten (10) day period, the Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the cost as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such ten (10) day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle(s) (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.

 

Notice Mailed _____________s/__________

  (date)                    (Enforcement Officer)

 

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED. WRECKED. DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

 

(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle-notice should be given to both if different)

 

As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle - make, model, license, etc.) you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Section 10.20.060 of the City of Brentwood Municipal Code has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.20 of the City of Brentwood Municipal Code.

 

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice.

 

As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing, and if such a request is not received by the City Clerk of the City of Brentwood within such 10-day period, the Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.

 

Notice Mailed _____________s/__________

  (date)                    (Enforcement Officer)

(Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.100 Request for hearing.
     A.    Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the city clerk within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the city on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located.

     B.     If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land within such ten-day period, such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his/her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed by registered or certified mail and regular mail, at least ten days before the hearing, to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.

     C.     If a request for a hearing is not received within ten days after mailing the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.110 Hearing procedure.
     A.    All hearings under this chapter shall be held before a city hearing officer who shall hear all facts and testimony he/she deems pertinent. Facts and testimony may include testimony on the conditions of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private or public property. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his/her reasons for such denial.

     B.     The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as he/she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. The hearing officer may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his/her opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the hearing officer may find that a vehicle, or parts thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property, order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided, and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.

     C.     If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he/she has not subsequently acquiesced to its presence, the hearing officer shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land.

     D.    If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the hearing officer but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision.

     E.     After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision as to whether or not the vehicle shall be removed from the property; and whether or not to assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the owner of the land upon which the vehicle is located. For the purposes of administrative remedies, the decision of the hearing officer shall be final, with no right of appeal to any city employee, official, or legislative body. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.120 Procedure—Removal of vehicle.
     Ten days after mailing the notice of intention to abate and remove, if a hearing is not requested; or five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing the notice of the decision if such notice is required by Section 10.20.110, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 5004, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.130 Procedure—Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles.
     Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.140 Procedure—Payment or assessment of costs.
     If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 10.20.110 are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order or the final disposition of an appeal there from, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other taxes. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.150 Exceptions.
     A.    This chapter shall not apply to:

     1.     A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

     2.     A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

     B.     Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.160 Abandonment unlawful—Exceptions.
     It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store or leave, or permit the abandonment, parking, storing, or leaving, of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle, or parts thereof, which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private or public property not including highways within the city for a period in excess of ten days unless such vehicle, or parts thereof, is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

 

10.20.170 Failure to remove after notice unlawful.
     It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove any abandoned, wrecked, or dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, or to refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or of state law where such state law is applicable. (Ord. 828 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 10.21 VIOLATION—PENALTY
10.21.010 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this Title 10 shall be guilty of an infraction, a misdemeanor or a civil penalty in accordance with the definitions and procedures set forth in California Vehicle Code Division 17 of Chapter I of Article 1 (commencing with Section 40000) and AB-408. Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be punished in accordance with the penalties and procedures set forth in California Vehicle Code Division 17 of Chapter I of Article 1 (commencing with Section 42001) or as set forth by resolution. (Ord. 592 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.22 ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES
10.22.010 Generally.
     A.    It is unlawful to operate an “electrical personal assistive mobility device,” as defined in Section 313 of the Vehicle Code, on any sidewalk, walkway, pathway, trail, multi-purpose shoulder lane, in or about a mall or parking lot open to the public, multi-storied parking structure, an airport or other pedestrian/transportation facility which is under the jurisdiction of the city of Brentwood, except that an electrical personal assistive mobility device, as defined by Section 313 of the Vehicle Code, may use a sidewalk, walkway, pathway, trail, or multi-purpose shoulder lane which is approved and appropriately signed by the city of Brentwood.

     B.     The term “pedestrian” shall not, for any purposes, be deemed to include an “electric personal assistive mobility device,” as defined in Section 313 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 740 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 10.23 VEHICLE REPAIR
10.23.010 Purpose and intent.
     The city council finds that the repair and/or dismantling of vehicles in public view in residential zones has a negative impact on the livability and appearance of the city, on the availability of driveways for parking, on property values, and can pose safety and/or health hazards to children and adults. The city council determines that the public health, safety, and welfare require the prohibition of the repairing or dismantling of vehicles in public view in residential zones, except under certain circumstances. (Ord. 834 § 1, 2006)

 

10.23.020 Definitions.
     In this chapter:

     Boat means a vessel used for the transportation of merchandise and persons.

     Dismantling means to partially or wholly disassemble a vehicle.

     Major repairs includes pulling an engine block, repair or replacement of transmissions, radiators, and front and rear axles, dismantling, body and fender work, vehicle upholstery, and/or similar work.

     Registered/registration means a current, valid California registration for a vehicle conforming to Vehicle Code Section 4000 or Vehicle Code Section 9840 et seq., for boats.

     Residential zones means those areas of the city zoned for residential use, whether for single-family or multiple-family dwellings.

     Routine maintenance includes changing oil and tires, replacement of water pump, alternator, battery, brakes, shocks, oil and air filters, and spark plugs; and similar work.

     Vehicle means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively by human power upon stationary rails or tracks. “Vehicle” includes a passenger vehicle or truck (exceeding truck tractor or any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of six thousand pounds of base curb weight), recreational vehicle, trailer, boat mounted on trailer, motorcycle, motor scooter, golf cart, or other similar self-propelled vehicle, special interest vehicle, or other vehicle referenced in California Vehicle Code Section 5051, and other vehicles of similar kind and use. “Vehicle” does not mean a motorized wheelchair, bicycle, tricycle or quadricycle. (Ord. 999 § 6, 2018; Ord. 834 § 1, 2006)

 

10.23.030 Routine maintenance permitted.
     An occupant of any property located in a residential zone may perform routine maintenance on a vehicle or boat registered to him or her in public view in the driveway of his or her premises. The routine maintenance may be performed where the elapsed time between the beginning and the end of the maintenance does not exceed seventy-two hours. Proof of registration of any vehicle or boat on which routine maintenance is occurring shall be provided to any city police officer or code enforcement officer upon request of that officer. Routine maintenance shall not be conducted on more than two vehicles registered to an occupant of the property at any one time. (Ord. 834 § 1, 2006)

 

10.23.040 Major repairs prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person in any residential zone to perform major repairs or dismantling in public view on any vehicle, boat, or part thereof, except for major repairs or dismantling which takes place in a fully enclosed garage. If such work takes place in a fully enclosed garage, the garage door shall be closed when the work is not in progress. (Ord. 834 § 1, 2006)

 

10.23.050 Vehicle painting.
     Vehicle painting, other than spot painting within a fully enclosed garage, shall not be permitted in residential zones. (Ord. 834 § 1, 2006)

 

10.23.060 Tools and equipment.
     All tools and equipment, including, but not limited to, jacks, engine hoists and vehicle lifts must be stored in a fully enclosed garage or shed. (Ord. 834 § 1, 2006)

 

10.23.070 Clean up.
     Upon completion of any work allowed by this chapter to be performed in public view, the property shall be cleaned of all debris, oil, grease, gasoline, cloths, rags, tools and equipment, or material used in the work, and shall be left in such a condition that no hazard to persons or property shall remain. Cleanup of the property shall be done in compliance with all local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 834 § 1, 2006)

Title 11 (RESERVED)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.04 STREET WIDTHS
Chapter 12.08 STREET ENCROACHMENTS
Chapter 12.12 MAINTENANCE
Chapter 12.20 STREET NAMES AND HOUSE NUMBERS
Chapter 12.24 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Chapter 12.30 NEWSRACKS IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY

Chapter 12.04 STREET WIDTHS
Note
*      The thoroughfare map is on file in the clerk’s office.

 

12.04.010 Purpose of provisions.
     The city council declares that:

     A.    The city of Brentwood, through the planning commission and the city council, has adopted a general plan which includes a circulation element. A stated policy of the circulation element specifies that the city should “develop a thoroughfare plan and mechanisms for assuring the protection of rights-of-way and development thereof in areas between the corporate limit and planned service area”;

     B.     The magnitude of developing precise alignments and sections for the entire thoroughfare system precludes such plans being completed in their entirety in time to fully guide the development occurring within the planning area;

     C.     The surveys, hearings, map preparation and requirements of law, governing such matters necessitate such detailed plans being developed progressively and often in response to specific development proposals and issues;

     D.    To conserve the public safety and welfare, it is imperative that necessary rights-of-way for streets and thoroughfares within the city be protected against encroachment by permanent physical improvements, the existence of which would make unnecessarily difficult or impractical the retention or creation of streets and thoroughfares, adequate in alignment, dimensions and vision clearance to serve the public needs, safety and welfare;

     E.     To deal effectively with the practical problem thus presented, it is necessary to establish future width lines and standard street sections on a city-wide basis. (Ord. 297, 1980)

 

12.04.020 Future width lines established for thoroughfares and certain collector streets.
     A.    The following roadways are designated as thoroughfares and their general alignment is indicated on the thoroughfare map designated Exhibit “A,” attached to and made a part of the ordinance codified in this chapter:

     1.     Lone Tree Way, extending west from Highway 4 to the extent of the planning area, with a one hundred-foot right-of-way;

     2.     Sand Creek Thoroughfare, a new roadway extending west from Road “A” Thoroughfare to the new Highway 4 bypass, with a one hundred-foot right-of-way;

     3.     Central-Dainty Thoroughfare, a new roadway extending west from the O’Hara Avenue Thoroughfare to Marsh Creek and then transitioning south to align with Dainty Avenue in the vicinity of Minnesota Avenue and then following the Dainty Avenue alignment west to Fairview Avenue. The Central-Dainty Avenue Thoroughfare will have a one hundred-foot right-of-way;

     4.     Dainty Avenue, as a collector, from Walnut Boulevard west to the vicinity of Marsh Creek Channel, with a sixty-foot right-of-way;

     5.     Oak Street, extending northeasterly from the eastern extent of Oak Street to the Road “A” Thoroughfare, with an eighty-four-foot right-of-way;

     6.     Balfour Road, from Deer Valley Road easterly to Sellers Avenue shall be consistent with the currently adopted general plan except for that portion from the easterly edge of Subdivision 5260 easterly to Highway 4 which shall comply with attached Exhibit “C” and made a part of this section;

     7.     Fairview Avenue, from Lone Tree Way south to a  point where it will intersect the proposed Highway 4 Bypass, with a one hundred-foot right-of-way;

     8.     Minnesota Avenue, from Sand Creek Thoroughfare out to Balfour Road, with an eighty-four-foot right-of-way;

     9.     Griffith Avenue, from the Central-Dainty Thoroughfare south to Subdivision Road “B” approximately one thousand three hundred feet south of Balfour Road with an eighty-four-foot right-of-way;

     10.   O’Hara Avenue, from the northerly boundary of the planning area south to Highway 4 in the vicinity of Spruce Street, with a one hundred-foot right-of-way;

     11.   Highway 4, from the northerly boundary of the planning area south to a point approximately seven hundred fifty feet north of Village Drive the right-of-way shall be one hundred feet. From said point south to Spruce Street the right-of-way shall transition and reduce to eighty-eight feet;

     12.   Highway 4, at Spruce Street will turn west onto Spruce Street and/or an alignment parallel to Spruce Street and then turn south onto Railroad Avenue. The right-of-way in this area shall be eighty-eight feet;

     13.   Highway 4, from Spruce Street south to Fir Street, the right-of-way shall be eighty feet. From Fir Street south to the southeasterly limits of the planning area the right-of-way shall be one hundred feet;

     14.   Road “A” Thoroughfare, a new roadway located between Sellers Avenue and Highway 4 and extending south from Sand Creek Thoroughfare to Balfour Road with a one hundred-foot right-of-way;

     15.   Highway 4 Bypass, extending west from the easterly boundary of the planning area along the general alignment of Marsh Creek Road to a point approximately one and a half miles west of Walnut Boulevard where the bypass will transition north and extend northerly approximately one mile west of Fairview Avenue to the northerly boundary of the planning area. The proposed bypass will have a one hundred twenty-six-foot right-of-way plus any necessary slope easements;

     16.   Walnut Boulevard extending southerly from Indiana Avenue to the southerly boundary of the planning area with a one-hundred-foot right-of-way.

     B.     The following roadways are designated as collector streets with a right-of-way of sixty feet. It is not the intent of this section to identify all collector streets within the city, but only to identify those existing collector streets which due to existing alignment or right-of-way, need clarification. The general alignment of these collectors is designated on the thoroughfare map, designated as Exhibit

“A”:

     1.     Minnesota Avenue, extending north of the Sand Creek Thoroughfare and intersecting Fairview Avenue, and Minnesota Avenue extending south of Balfour Road;

     2.     Griffith Lane, extending north of the Central-Dainty Thoroughfare;

     3.     Walnut Boulevard, extending north from Indiana Avenue;

     4.     Sycamore Avenue, extending east from Highway 4;

     5.     Spruce Street, extending east from Highway 4;

     6.     Dainty Avenue, between Griffith Lane and the intersection of the Central-Dainty Thoroughfare at Marsh Creek;

     7.     McClarren Road, extending west from Pippo Avenue;

     8.     Brentwood Road, extending east from Fourth Street to the eastern boundary of the planning area;

     9.     Subdivision Road “B,” extending west from Walnut Boulevard. (Ord. 542 § 2, 1994; Ord. 416, 1988; Ord. 330, 1982; Ord. 297, 1980)

 



 

12.04.030 Future width lines—Precise section drawings or maps required.
     Whenever future width lines have been adopted by the city council, precise section drawings, maps prepared by photogrammetry or a city base map, shall be prepared sufficient to indicate the location of the street, highway or thoroughfare on parcels of land to be traversed or otherwise occupied by the street, highway or thoroughfare when constructed. A copy of the section drawings or maps, when adopted, shall be certified to the public works director of the city of Brentwood. The alignments shown on the thoroughfare map, of new roadways, are flexible to a certain degree to allow efficient development of the land by the owners.

     The city of Brentwood typical street cross-section for various rights-of-way is attached as Exhibit “B” and made a part of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 297, 1980)

 

12.04.040 Responsibility for installation of street improvements.
     The land development policy established in Chapter 16.08 of the municipal code shall be adhered to when development of property adjoining a thoroughfare or identified collector is proposed. At the time of development, the thoroughfare and/or collector adjoining the proposed development shall be improved as required by the public works director. If it is determined that there are deficiencies in the thoroughfare or collector system that is not adjoining the proposed development but will be affected by the proposed development creating a health or safety problem, then the development shall also be responsible for the full or portion of the improvement of such deficiency. All costs shall be the sole responsibility of the developer. Where off-site thoroughfare or collector development is required beyond what is necessary for the proposed development, a reimbursement’s agreement in conformance with Section 16.08.050 of the municipal code may be considered. (Ord. 297, 1980)

 

12.04.050 City review and approval of subdivisions, conditional use permits, design review, building permits, etc.
     When an application for a subdivision, conditional use permit, design review, or other such discretionary action is reviewed by the city, it shall be a condition of approval of such discretionary action that the developer shall dedicate and improve any thoroughfares and/or collector streets identified in this chapter in accordance with Section 12.04.040 of this chapter. When an application for a non-discretionary action such as a building permit is submitted to the city, the permit shall be refused if the request results in a permanent or semipermanent obstruction within the boundaries of a future thoroughfare or collector street. (Ord. 297, 1980)

 

12.04.060 Denial of request for subdivision, conditional use permit, design review, building permit, etc.— Appeal procedures.
     If a subdivision, conditional use permit, design review, or other such discretionary action is denied because the developer is not providing the necessary right-of-way or improvements in accordance with this chapter, the applicant may appeal the decision in accordance with the appeal procedures outlined in Chapter 16 of the municipal code for subdivisions or Chapter 17 for zoning actions. Any person aggrieved by the refusal of a building permit or other such nondiscretionary action, may appeal to the planning commission, stating his or her reasons for the appeal. A determination of the planning commission shall become effective five days after the date of decision unless appealed to the city council in writing. The council shall uphold or reverse the commission’s decision, and its decision shall be final. (Ord. 297, 1980)

 

12.04.070 Appeal procedure—Mandatory findings required for granting.
     This chapter adopting the thoroughfare plan is in conformance with the 1978 city of Brentwood general plan. Therefore, if an application for a discretionary action is denied because of noncompliance with this chapter, with respect to right-of-way width or alignment, it will be necessary for the body considering the appeal to either deny the appeal or initiate the process for a general plan amendment to allow such development. California Government Code Section 66473.5 (Subdivision Map Act) and Section 65860 (Planning and Zoning Law) mandates that all local agencies shall not approve such discretionary actions unless the request complies with all elements of the adopted general plan.

     If a building permit or other such nondiscretionary action is denied, an appeal of such denial shall be granted only if all of the following are determined:

     A.    That the proposed structure is an accessory structure to the primary use of the property and its value can be depreciated in a relative short period of time;

     B.     That at such time as the thoroughfare is developed, the structure will be removed or can be removed without adversely affecting the primary use or fraction of the property;

     C.     That strict compliance with the policy of this chapter would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship inconsistent with the purpose of this thoroughfare plan, due to unique physical or topographic circumstances or conditions of design. (Ord. 297, 1980)

 

12.04.080 Exceptions from provisions.
     A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed a condition precedent to the acquisition of rights-of-way by purchase or by proceedings in eminent domain.

     B.     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict the right of any person to seek declaratory relief, pursuant to Section 1060 of the Code of Civil Procedure, or to avail him or herself of any other legal or equitable remedy applicable to his or her particular case.

     C.     No zoning ordinance is to be construed as permitting a building line setback or any building within the bed of a proposed highway, except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 297, 1980)

 

12.04.090 Violation—Penalty—Continuing offenses.
     A.    Any person, firm or corporation who erects, locates or installs or who shall cause to be erected, located or installed any building, structure, sign, excavation, well or subsurface structure contrary to the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     B.     Each such person, firm or corporation is guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is permitted or continued by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable therefor as provided in subsection A of this section, but any building, structure, sign, well, excavation or subsurface structure existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 297, 1981)

Chapter 12.08 STREET ENCROACHMENTS
12.08.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows:

     “City” means the city of Brentwood.

     “City clerk” means the city clerk of the city of Brentwood, Contra Costa County, California, or duly authorized representative.

     “City council” means the city council of the city of Brentwood, Contra Costa County, California.

     “City engineer” means the city engineer of the city of Brentwood, Contra Costa County, California, or duly authorized representative.

     “Code” means the Brentwood Municipal Code, as may be amended from time to time.

     “Encroach” or “encroachment” means going over, upon or under or using any public right-of-way in any manner other than its intended use.

     “Permit” means an encroachment permit granted by the city engineer pursuant to this chapter.

     “Permittee” means any person, firm, corporation or public agency which proposes to encroach upon a public right-of-way and has been issued a permit for such encroachment by the city engineer.

     “Public agency” means any city, county, state or other public entity.

     “Public street” means any street right-of-way which has been accepted by the city for public purposes.

     “Public utility” means private corporations authorized by law to establish and/or maintain any works or facilities in, under or over any public street. This chapter shall not limit the powers and duties vested by law in the Public Utilities Commission of the state.

     “Right-of-way” means land or airspace which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for and dedicated to the city or the general public for street, walkway, utility or other public purposes. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.020 Permit required.
     An encroachment permit is required for all encroachments except encroachments exempted pursuant to this chapter. The granting of a permit pursuant to this chapter may not constitute the only city or administrative approval required for the encroachment. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.030 Prohibited encroachments.
     The following encroachments are hereby specifically prohibited and no applications may be accepted or permit issued for such encroachments:

     A.    Construction or maintenance of a loading dock on or in a public right-of-way; or

     B.     Installation or maintenance of underground tanks, vaults or elevators, except underground vaults that are a part of facilities owned by public utilities and public agencies; or

     C.     Installation, placement or maintenance of any sign, except in accordance with the sign regulations set forth in Title 17 of the code; or

     D.    Construction or placement of any fill, wall, pipe, column, pole, fence, tree, shrub or other object which would obstruct or reduce the capacity of any water course to carry storm water, except for encroachments by public agencies or utilities as authorized by an encroachment permit issued pursuant to this chapter; or

     E.     Construction or placement of objects, including, but not limited to, objects for sale or display and dining furniture and appurtenances, except in accordance with valid approval or permit under this code or city policy. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.040 Exemptions.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to officers or employees of the city acting in the discharge of their official duties. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.050 Restrictions of use.
     All encroachment permits granted subject to this chapter are subject to the right of the city and any person entitled to use any part of a public right-of-way for any purpose for which it may be lawfully used, and no part of a right-of-way may be unduly obstructed at any time. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.060 Emergency work.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not prevent any public agency from maintaining any pipe or conduit lawfully on or under any public street, or from making excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property. If an urgent necessity arises during the hours the offices of the city are closed, the person making an emergency use or encroachment on a public street must notify the city police department immediately and must apply for a permit within one calendar day after the offices of the city are again opened. This requirement shall also apply to any public agency requiring an emergency use or encroachment. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.070 Issuing authority.
     The encroachment permit required by this chapter shall be issued by the city engineer subject to the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws, in addition to conditions as may be deemed necessary by the city engineer. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.080 Encroachment permit.
     The city engineer shall prescribe the submittal requirements and form for the encroachment permit required by this chapter. The form shall require the name, address and principal place of business of the applicant. The city engineer may require such information and detail as deemed necessary to establish the exact location, nature, dimensions, duration and purpose of the proposed encroachment.

     When required by the city engineer, the applicant shall provide maps, sketches, diagrams or similar exhibits sufficient to clearly illustrate the locations, dimensions, nature and purpose of the proposed encroachment and its relation to existing and proposed facilities in the right-of-way. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.090 Consent of public agencies.
     The applicant shall be responsible for securing the consent of any other public agency which may be required by law prior to requesting a permit from the city. The applicant shall be responsible for coordinating the work with the city and other public agencies as required, including keeping themselves informed of and complying with all jurisdictional laws which may affect the permit. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.100 Action on application.
     When the city engineer finds that the requested permit is in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, the city engineer shall issue a permit for the encroachment, attaching such conditions as the city engineer may deem necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public and for the protection of the city. If the city engineer, in his or her sole discretion, finds the requested permit is in conflict with the provisions of this chapter or may adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare, the city engineer shall deny the permit, giving in writing the reasons for such denial. No permit shall be valid unless signed by the city engineer. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.110 Permit term—Commencement of work.
     The permittee shall begin the work or use authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter within thirty days from the date of issuance unless a different period is stated in the permit or an extension of time is granted by the city engineer. Permittee shall notify the city inspection staff a minimum of forty-eight hours prior to commencing work. If the work or use is not begun accordingly, the permit shall become void. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.120 Permit term—Continuing use.
     A permit for an encroachment of a continued use, or maintaining an encroachment previously authorized, may be authorized for a term up to one year from the date of issuance. If the city engineer determines that such a continuing encroachment represents a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the city engineer may order the permittee to correct the threatening condition or may suspend the encroachment permit. If the city engineer determines that the continuation of an encroachment is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare, the city engineer may terminate a continuing permit. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.130 Permit term—Suspension or cancellation.
     If the city engineer, in his or her sole discretion, determines that an encroachment is conducted in violation of this chapter or permit conditions, or represents a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the city engineer may order the permittee to correct the threatening condition or may suspend or cancel the encroachment permit and it is the permit tee’s responsibility to restore the right-of-way to its former condition. If necessary, the permittee shall reimburse the city for all expenses in restoring the right-of-way. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.140 Permit term—Completion of work.
     The permittee must complete the work or use authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter within the time specified in the permit. If at any time the city engineer finds that the delay in the prosecution or completion of the work or use authorized is due to lack of diligence on the part of the permittee, the permit may be cancelled and it is the permit tee’s responsibility to restore the right-of-way to its former condition. If necessary, the permittee shall reimburse the city for all expenses in restoring the right-of-way.

     The permittee shall, upon completion of work, authorized in the permit, notify the city engineer. No work shall be deemed completed until notification is given pursuant to this section and the work is accepted by the city. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.150 Display of permit.
     The permittee shall keep any permit issued pursuant to this chapter at the site of the work. The permit shall be shown to any authorized representative of the city or a law enforcement officer on demand.

     A permit issued for continued use or maintenance of an encroachment may be kept at the place of business of the permittee, or otherwise safeguarded during the term of validity, but shall be made available to an authorized representative of the city or a law enforcement officer within a reasonable time after demand is made. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.160 Nonassignment of permit.
     Permits shall be issued only to the person making application and may not be assigned to another person by the permittee without written consent of the city. If any permittee assigns the permit to another, absent written city consent, the permit shall become void. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.170 Changes in permit and work.
     No changes may be made in the location, dimension, character or duration of the encroachment as granted by the permit except upon written authorization of the city engineer. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.180 Fees.
     The city council shall adopt and update fees for permits by resolution. Before a permit may be issued, the applicant shall deposit with the city payment in a sufficient sum to cover costs for processing the permit, field investigation, inspections and all other related costs pursuant to the city’s cost allocation plan. The required fees shall be doubled if work is started prior to obtaining a permit.

     Public utilities and public agencies may, at the option of the city engineer, make payment for the charges billed by the city instead of by advance deposit as required by this section. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.190 Fee waivers.
     Consideration for waiver of applicable permit fees may be requested by permittee pursuant to adopted city council policy. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.200 Effect of permit acceptance by permittee.
     Acceptance by the permittee of the permit granted shall be conclusive evidence of the reasonableness of the terms imposed and shall constitute a waiver of any right to appeal conditions pursuant to the appeal provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.210 Security.
     Prior to issuance of a permit, the permittee shall deposit with the city security of a form approved by the city in a sum equal to the cost of the work required to be done in order to comply with all terms and conditions of the permit as estimated by the city engineer, including a contingency of up to twenty percent. The permittee shall also file with the city, a security, of a form approved by the city and in a sum estimated by the city engineer, as sufficient to cover the permit tee’s activities during any twelve-month period. This requirement may be waived by the city engineer if the work is adequately covered by existing security deposits or other enforcement procedures or permits. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.220 Surety bonds as security.
     Should surety bonds be submitted as compliance with Section 12.08.210, the bonds shall be submitted in a form approved by the city and issued by a surety company authorized and in good standing to do work within the state of California. The bonds shall name the city as an obligee and shall be conditioned to ensure that each and all terms and conditions of the permit, this chapter and any agreements regarding the work shall be fully performed and complied with to the satisfaction of the city engineer. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.230 Additional security.
     The city engineer may require additional security, of a form approved by the city, at any time when, in the city engineer’s opinion, the amount of the security previously deposited is insufficient. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.240 Release of security.
     Security shall be released upon satisfactory completion, to the discretion of the city engineer, of all work authorized and conditions of the permit. In the event of noncompliance, the city may deduct from the security, the actual cost to the city to complete the work required by and in compliance with the permit before returning any remaining security. In the event a surety bond was posted as security, the city may proceed against the surety and principal. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.250 Liability.
     The permittee shall be responsible for all liability for personal injury or property damage which may result from work permitted and done by the permittee or the failure of permittee to perform its obligations under the permit. If any claim of such liability is made against the city, its officers or employees, the permittee shall defend, indemnify and hold them, and each of them, harmless from such claim insofar as permitted by law. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.260 Insurance.
     Permittee is required to maintain insurance in accordance with city policies and procedures. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.270 Standards and specifications.
     The city engineer shall establish such standards necessary for the proper construction, safety requirements, use and maintenance of encroachments, including, but not limited to, such standards that may be set forth in the application of terms of a permit. Any work or use done under a permit shall conform to city of Brentwood approved plans, standard plans and specifications and/or engineering procedures manual currently in effect, or in the absence of established plans, specifications or procedures, to recognized standards of construction and approval practices, as determined by the city engineer, in connection with the work to be done. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.280 Specific standards.
     A.    Public Safety and Access. All work or use shall be planned and executed in a manner that will least interfere with public safety and the convenient travel and access of the general public at the place where the work or use is authorized. Free and unobstructed access shall be provided to all public-service structures and property as may be required. Such public-service structures or property shall not be removed or relocated without proper approval by the properly constituted authorities charged with their control and maintenance.

     B.     Future Relocation. If any future construction, reconstruction or maintenance work by the city on a public right-of-way requires the relocation, removal or abandonment of installations or encroachments in, on or under the public right-of-way, the permittee, owning, controlling or maintaining such installations or encroachments shall relocate, remove or abandon the same at his or her sole expense. When removal, relocation or abandonment is required, the city engineer shall give the permittee a written demand specifying the place or relocation, or that the installations or encroachment must be removed, relocated or abandoned. If the permittee fails to comply with the instructions, the city may cause the removal, relocation or abandonment of the encroachment at the expense of the permittee. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.290 Supervision and inspections.
     The city engineer shall provide for the inspection of all encroachment permits. All work done or uses under such permits shall be performed to the satisfaction of the city engineer. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.300 Temporary street closure.
     The city engineer may temporarily close public streets in conjunction with an encroachment permit. The city engineer, in his or her discretion, may forward a street closure request to the city council for consideration. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.310 Limited operations areas.
     The city engineer may designate certain streets to be limited operations areas in order to provide for the proper flow of traffic during critical periods of the day. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.320 Appeals.
     An applicant may appeal the decision of the city engineer concerning the denial, terms and conditions of an encroachment permit to the city council. Notice of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after final action of the city engineer concerning the permit application. In reviewing the appeal, the city council may deny, support, or support the appeal with terms and conditions necessary to protect the city and the public. Action on the appeal by the city council shall be final. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.330 Violation.
     Any encroachment which is not exempted by the provisions of this chapter and for which no encroachment permit has been issued, or any encroachment maintained in violation of this chapter or the provisions of any encroachment permit, is subject to enforcement provisions pursuant to this chapter, as well as other applicable chapters of city code and city procedures. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.340 Enforcement.
     The city engineer is designated as the enforcement authority for purposes of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and violations shall be determined at his or her sole discretion. Enforcement actions shall be as outlined in city policies and procedures. Notwithstanding any city procedures that may be in effect, violations deemed an issue of public health or safety may be subject to an immediate work stoppage. (Ord. 885 § 2, 2010)

Chapter 12.12 MAINTENANCE
12.12.010 Sidewalk maintenance, repair and liability.
     A.    The city council finds that the purpose of this section is to impose upon property owners the affirmative duty to repair and maintain the sidewalk that fronts their property, as the term “sidewalk” is defined in Streets and Highways Code Section 5600 to include without limitation the parking strip and curb, retaining walls and driveway approaches. This duty runs to and is in favor of members of the public and the city to whom the property owners shall be liable for failure to maintain or repair the sidewalk. This section affirms the duty of care owed under state law, Streets and Highways Code Section 5610.

     B.     The owner of a parcel of real property which is adjacent to the sidewalk between the property line of the parcel and the streetline is responsible for the repair and maintenance of the sidewalk and shall pay the cost and expense for the repair and maintenance, except where repair and maintenance is occasioned solely due to the encroachment of trees planted by, or at the direction of the city.

     C.     The owner of a parcel of real property is under a duty to members of the public and the city to keep the portion of any sidewalk described in subsection B of this section in a safe condition.

     D.    The failure of an owner to fulfill the duties imposed by subsection B or subsection C of this section is negligence and the owner is liable to members of the public injured as a result of the negligence as well as to the city.

     E.     If the owner of the parcel of real property is not the person in possession, then the duties imposed by subsections B, C and D of this section are also imposed on the person in possession of the property.

     F.     The city shall not be liable for injury caused by the negligence of the owner or the person in possession. (Ord. 885 § 3, 2010)

 

12.12.020 Painting and marking of paved surfaces, streets and curbs.
     It shall be unlawful for any person to apply paint or other permanent marking substance to any paved surface or curbs, except for official traffic markings made by the city or its agents and marking of underground facilities in connection with construction or maintenance work; provided, however, that a permit for placing or maintaining numbers, figures or letters under this chapter may be issued, pursuant to this chapter, only to property owners and individuals affiliated with nonprofit organizations which have their principal and permitted place within city limits and have been organized and established within the city. (Ord. 885 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 12.20 STREET NAMES AND HOUSE NUMBERS
Note
*      The plan for numbering streets and blocks is on file in the clerk’s office.

 

12.20.010 Definition.
     “Street” as used in this chapter includes avenue, court, way, drive or other principal public means of access to buildings or enclosures, but does not include alleys, except as otherwise specifically stated or shown on the plan for numbering streets and blocks. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1949)

 

12.20.020 Adoption of plan for numbering streets and blocks—Description.
     There is adopted and established an official plan of the city of Brentwood entitled “Plan for Numbering Streets—Blocks, etc.,” designated as Exhibit “A” to this chapter and made a part hereof and referred to in this chapter as the plan. The plan and the ordinance codified in this chapter are adopted for the general purposes set forth in the preamble of Ordinance 29. This plan, together with notations incorporated thereon, sets forth for each block or tentative future block in the city of Brentwood the general block number assigned to the block beginning with 100 or 00 as shown thereon, with the starting axes located adjacent to the easterly and southerly city limits. From the axes, the numbers shall run consecutively upwards block by block with certain exceptions as shown on the plan and caused by the existing street pattern. For example, any number of typically north-south streets shall be known and designated as No. ___ First Street, and any number on typically east-west streets shall be designated and known as No. ___ Chestnut Street. (Ord. 29 § 2, 1949)

 

12.20.030 Street names—Changes designated.
     A.    No change is made in the plan for numbering streets and blocks in the existing names of streets, except:

     1.     Maple Street is changed to Dainty Avenue, being an easterly extension thereof;

     2.     Brentwood Road is changed to Chestnut Street between Third Street and the city limits on the east;

     3.     Certain streets in the subdivision east of Griffith Lane and south of Dainty Avenue are given official names as shown on the plan.

     B.     For certain streets east and/or south of the axes the prefix “E.” or “S.,” as the case may be, shall be added to the names of such streets. (Ord. 29 § 3, 1949)

 

12.20.040 Block numbers—Assignment procedure—Exceptions.
     Except as otherwise shown on the plan for numbering streets and blocks, one hundred numbers are assigned typically to each block (including the two sides of the street), a number to each twelve and one-half feet of frontage typically, or to each twenty-five feet of frontage for blocks exceeding approximately six hundred feet in length. The even numbers shall be on the southerly and easterly sides of the streets and the odd numbers on the northerly and westerly sides of the streets. Certain exceptions to these general rules may be shown on the plan for cases where there is lack of uniformity of block lengths on opposite sides of the streets or elsewhere, and where one hundred numbers may be assigned to two short blocks or to a portion of a block, as the case may be. Where one hundred numbers are assigned to two short blocks, fifty may be assigned to each block. (Ord. 29 § 4, 1949)

 

12.20.050 Entrance numbers—Assignment by plan—Duty of owner or occupant.
     A.    All main entrance numbers to buildings and/or enclosures from the public streets of the city shall be numbered in accordance with the plan for numbering streets and blocks and as hereinafter set forth. All required changes from any existing entrance numbers to a new entrance number provided by the plan shall be made at the earliest possible date, and at any event within a period of three months from the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, unless such date is extended by resolution of the city council.

     B.     The duty of obtaining an assignment or reassignment of the appropriate entrance number is imposed upon the owner and/or the occupant of the building or enclosure to which any such entrance belongs or pertains. All such numbers or revised numbers shall be assigned by an official or department of the city of Brentwood designated for this duty, and the city shall cause to be prepared such block books or other documents as may be necessary and adequate for the purpose of keeping an accurate record of entrance numbers. After assignment, the entrance numbers shall be placed in figures not less than two inches high immediately above or adjacent to the doorway, gateway or other type of entrance to the building or enclosure. (Ord. 29 § 5, 1949)

 

12.20.060 Procedure for change or extension.
     Any adjustments or extensions of the block numbering system delineated on the plan for numbering streets and blocks, which may be deemed advisable to meet changing block layouts or future conditions, are administrative acts and may be made by a resolution of the city council upon recommendation of the official or department charged with the duty of administering the provisions of this chapter. The adjustments and/or extensions shall be made so as to most nearly conform to the true purpose and intent of the plan. (Ord. 29 § 6, 1949)

Chapter 12.24 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
12.24.010 Definitions.
     Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the following meanings:

     A.    “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California.

     B.     “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees.

     C.     “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

     D.    “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.24.030.

     E.     “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 180 § 1, 1968)

 

12.24.020 Public hearing by council—Notice to affected property owners.
     The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city, and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify by mail all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned, of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each hearing all persons interested shall be given the opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 180 § 2, 1968)

 

12.24.030 Procedure for designation of underground utility districts— Resolution of council.
     If, after any such public hearing as described in Section 12.24.020 the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal of overhead facilities and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area as an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation is to be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 180 § 3, 1968)

 

12.24.040 Resolution—Notices— Responsibility for facility changes.
     A.    Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.24.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desires to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

     B.     Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.24.030 to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 180 § 7, 1968)

 

12.24.050 Resolution—Responsibility of utility companies.
     If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.24.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Ord. 180 § 8, 1968)

 

12.24.060 Resolution—Responsibility of property owner—Effect of failure to comply.
     A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 12.24.050 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

     B.     In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting such property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.24.030, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. (Ord. 180 § 9, 1968)

 

12.24.070 Failure to comply—Lien procedure.
     The city engineer may elect to proceed either under Section 12.24.060 or by invoking the lien procedure set forth hereunder:

     A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 12.24.050 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.24.030, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice.

     B.     The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises. The notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, or when no address appears, to “General Delivery, city of               .” If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a paper, card or sheet not less than eight inches by ten inches, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.

     C.     The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if such work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of the notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property.

     D.    If upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work. However, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.

     E.     The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

     F.     Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there are any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

     G.    If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made, by the city engineer, and the city clerk is directed to turn over to the county assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the county assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which such assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. (Ord. 180 § 10, 1968)

 

12.24.080 Responsibility of city.
     The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove them within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.24.030. (Ord. 180 § 11, 1968)

 

12.24.090 Time extensions for compliance.
     In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.24.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act is to be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 180 § 12, 1968)

 

12.24.100 Installation of overhead facilities for emergency service.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten days without authority of the city clerk in order to provide emergency service. The city clerk may grant special permission on such terms as he may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 180 § 5, 1968)

 

12.24.110 Exceptions.
     This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.24.030 shall not apply to the following types of facilities:

     A.    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

     B.     Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street-lighting;

     C.     Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

     D.    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts, as measured from phase conductor to ground;

     E.     Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture, and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

     F.     Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility or person for furnishing or receiving communication services;

     G.    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. Such facilities shall be so located as to harmonize with the area, or shall be screened or landscaped. The council may, by resolution, require that all or part of such appurtenant equipment be flush with or below the official sidewalk and/or curb grade;

     H.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 180 § 6, 1968)

 

12.24.120 Prohibited acts.
     Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 12.24.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 12.24.060, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 180 § 4, 1968)

Chapter 12.30 NEWSRACKS IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
12.30.010 Purpose and findings.
     The Brentwood city council finds that the uncontrolled placement and maintenance of newsracks on the public right-of-way can cause an obstruction of the free use of public property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of its right-of-way, interferes with property rights of adjacent owners and tenants, causes visual blight, and detracts from the aesthetics of adjacent uses, and exposes the city to undue claims liability. The Brentwood city council also finds that the use of its public right-of-way is so historically associated with the sale and distribution of newspaper and publications that access to these areas for such purposes should not be absolutely denied. The council finds that these strong but competing interests require a reasonable accommodation which can be achieved through the means of this chapter designed to accommodate such competing interests by regulating the time, place and manner of newsracks, including the using and placement of such newsracks, but provides the least intrusive and burdensome means to implement the purpose of this chapter while still providing ample opportunities for newspaper and publication distribution.

     Brentwood city council further finds that and declares that the uncontrolled placement and maintenance of newsracks on the public right-of-way and the proliferation of such devices to display words and pictorial material describing and depicting explicit sexual conduct and nudity, which is thrust indiscriminately on children and unwilling adults, unreasonably interferes with and obstructs the public’s use of the public right-of-way, constitutes an unwarranted invasion of individual privacy, is injurious to health, interferes with adjacent property owners’ rights, causes visual blight, and such obstructs the free use of public right-of-way so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property by the public, and is indecent and offensive. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.020 Definitions.
     In this chapter unless the context otherwise requires:

     “City” means the city of Brentwood.

     “Engineer” means the city engineer or his/her designated agent.

     “Downtown area” means the area of the city shown on the downtown insert of the general plan map.

     “Explicit sexual acts” as used in this chapter, means depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism, or excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation or lewd exhibition of genitals, whether any of the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed among or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or other acts of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person’s genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region.

     “Newspaper” means any publication which qualifies for second class newspaper mailing status under federal law, pursuant to 39 U.S.C. Section 4352[C]. As of the enactment of this chapter, a publication fails to qualify for second class mailing if it has more than seventy-five percent advertising in more than one-half of its issues during any twelve-month period.

     “Newsrack” means any self-service or coin operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser used for the display and sale or other distribution of a newspaper or nonnewspaper publication.

     “Newsrack encasement” means a city owned and maintained, permanently installed, modular receptacle inside which a privately owned newsrack is placed. The newsrack encasement shall be large enough to accommodate a newsrack which complies with the standards of this chapter, be permanently affixed to the ground or the side of a wall or other structure and be of a design which is architecturally compatible with the surrounding area.

     “Nonnewspaper publication” means any publication which is not a newspaper as defined herein.

     “Permanent newsrack” means any newsrack maintained in the public right-of-way for more than ninety days.

     “Planter strip” means the area, whether planted or not, between the sidewalk and the curb of a street. Where the sidewalk is adjacent to the curb it means the area between the sidewalk and the property line. Where there is no sidewalk it means the area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent to it, whether planted or not.

     “Public right-of-way” means land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage, or process of law, is reserved and dedicated to the general public for street, highway, alley, public utility, or pedestrian walkway purposes, whether or not the land has been improved or accepted for maintenance by the city. Public right-of-way includes but is not limited to street, roadway, planter strip and sidewalk.

     “Temporary newsrack” means any newsrack maintained in the public right-of-way for a trial period of up to ninety days. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.030 Encroachment permit required.
     No person may place, install, or maintain a newsrack either within a newsrack receptacle, projecting into, or place within a public right-of-way without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the engineer. An existing newsrack placed in the public right-of-way prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be permitted to remain in that same location for a period of five years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter provided that the applicant shall comply with Sections 12.30.040, 12.30.050, 12.30.060 and 12.30.110 of this chapter. After the expiration of this five-year period, all newsracks shall comply with this chapter’s provisions. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.040 Application for encroachment permit.
     The application for an encroachment permit for a newsrack shall be made to the engineer or designee on a form provided by the city. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.050 Liability insurance required.
     Before the city may grant an encroachment permit, an applicant shall furnish to the city a certificate showing that the applicant has then in force naming the city as an additional insured and in an amount not less than one million dollars per person and per occurrence, combined single limit. The permittee shall keep the insurance in force during all times it continues to maintain a newsrack under the terms of the permit. The certificate of insurance filed with the city shall include a statement by the insurance carrier that thirty days’ notice will be given to the city before cancellation. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.060 Indemnification required.
     Every person operating or maintaining a newsrack upon or within the public right-of-way shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers and employees from any loss, liability, damage or cost sustained by any person or property, to the extent any such loss, liability, damage or cost provided, however, that such obligation to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, and employees shall not extend to any loss, liability, damage or cost resulting from the acts, failure to act, or property of another, or from the sole or active negligence of the city. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.070 Issuance of permit.
     The engineer shall issue a permit as soon as possible after the receipt of a complete application but in no event more than thirty days after he finds that the application and the applicant have met the requirements of this chapter. A permit issued under this chapter is nontransferable. It shall be considered to incorporate as a condition to the placement, installation, maintenance, and use of a newsrack or newsracks, the requirement that the permittee comply with this chapter. If an application is rejected, the engineer shall send a notice within five days of the rejection to the applicant and the rejection notice shall also contain the reasons for the rejection. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.080 Newsrack identification.
     The permittee shall permanently display the permit tee’s name, street address, telephone number and instructions on how to receive a refund in the event of coin return malfunction upon each newsrack. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.090 Permissible types of newsracks.
     Except as otherwise provided in subsection E of this section, newsracks shall conform to the standards contained in this section as follows:

     A.    No newsrack unit may exceed sixty inches in height including the stand, twenty-four inches in depth or thirty inches in each compartment width. Every newsrack shall have an individual case with a display window and shall be designed in a manner to prevent accidents involving persons with sight disabilities, which result from unskirted newsracks. It is intended that the provisions of this chapter shall be consistent with accessibility standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, P.L. 101-336, as amended.

     B.     Every newsrack located at a place where there are less than five other newsracks located within one hundred fifty feet on the same side of the street shall be a similar rack of standard type and size in trade use.

     C.     Every newsrack other than a standard, stand-alone, permanent newsrack, or a temporary newsrack, shall be of a multi-unit configurations, except at a location where there are less than five permanent newsracks and no other newsrack is located within one hundred fifty feet on the same side of the street. Each multi-unit newsrack shall be arranged in such a manner as to utilize no more than two horizontal rows of four compartments per row, except that at the two locations specified in Section 12.30.100(D) of this chapter, a maximum of two horizontal rows of eight compartments per row shall be allowed. Installation shall be in accordance with Section 12.30.100 of this chapter.

     D.    Any single unit newsrack of standard design commonly in trade use may be permitted in any single locations for a period of ninety days in order to determine the suitability of long-term newsrack locations, provided that the placement of such newsrack conforms with the standards set forth in this chapter. Temporary newsracks shall not be required to be replaced by a modular newsrack, as required in subsection C of this section, unless six or more temporary newsracks are placed at the same location. At least fifteen business days prior to locating a temporary newsrack, a completed encroachment permit application shall be submitted, including written notice of the particular location and date upon which the ninety day trial period will begin. Within ten business days after expiration of the ninety day trial period, the person maintaining the newsrack shall either cause it to be removed or submit a written request to the engineer for an encroachment permit for a newsrack for a permanent newsrack location. An applicant shall be limited to a total of five temporary newsrack locations during each calendar year.

     E.     In order to maintain the appearance of the downtown area, the city may establish newsrack encasements in the downtown area. The city will consult with and consider the comments of newspaper vendors and distributors regarding the location and size of the newsrack encasements located in the downtown area. Newsracks in the downtown area shall conform to the requirements of this chapter pending the construction and availability of one or more newsrack encasements.

     F.     Every newsrack shall have a fully functional automatic coin return if it dispenses newspapers for sale. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.100 Newsrack placement standards.
     A newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon, in or over a public right-of-way or sidewalk, shall comply with the following standards:

     A.    Within the downtown area newsracks shall be placed within a newsrack encasement in an encasement with design approval by the planning commission when such an encasement has been constructed. Within ten days of the construction of a newsrack encasement the engineer shall survey the existing, permitted newsracks within a radius of one hundred fifty feet of the newsrack encasement. Within fifteen days of the completion of the newsrack enclosure all newsracks within one hundred fifty feet of the newsrack encasement shall be removed. Newsracks may be permitted in a downtown area outside of a newsrack encasement upon receipt of an application meeting the requirements of Section 12.30.040 of this chapter and provided the engineer makes the following findings:

     1.     There is a need for additional newspaper or nonnewspaper publications within the downtown area;

     2.     There are no available spaces in an existing newsrack encasement;

     3.     No additional newsrack encasements are expected to be constructed within three months of the date of the application for a newsrack location;

     4.     The request is for a temporary newsrack in order to determine if there is a need for a permanent newsrack.

     B.     A newsrack may be placed only near a curb or adjacent to the wall of a building. A newsrack placed near a curb shall be placed not less than twelve inches nor more than twenty-four inches from the edge of the curb. A newsrack placed adjacent to a wall of a building shall be placed parallel to the wall and not more than six inches from the wall. In no event may a newsrack be located upon a landscaped area or planter strip. A newsrack may be chained, bolted or attached to private property if the owner of the property has filed written consent with the city. A newsrack may not be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to a permanently fixed object within the public right-of-way. A newsrack may be bolted or otherwise attached to the public sidewalk only if specific approval is set forth in the permit. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.110 Display of material harmful to minors unlawful.
     No person may display or exhibit in a public newsrack or other display device any material which is defined by Penal Code Section 313 as harmful to minors unless such material is displayed in an area from which minors are excluded or is completely covered. Publications offered for sale from newsracks placed or maintained on or in the public right-of-way shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner which exposes to the public view any of the following:

     A.    Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs, or excrement, where such statements or words have as their purpose or effect sexual-arousal, gratification, or affront;

     B.     Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineums, anuses, or anal regions of any person where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification, or affront. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.120 Unlawful obstruction.
     No person may place, install or maintain a newsrack:

     A.    Within a portion of a roadway, alley, or projecting into a portion of a roadway or alley;

     B.     Within four feet of any marked crosswalk;

     C.     Within fifteen feet of the curb return of an unmarked crosswalk;

     D.    Within four feet of a fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility;

     E.     Within four feet of a driveway, building entrance, or sidewalk leading to the entrance of the building;

     F.     Within four feet ahead of, and fifteen feet to the rear of, a sign or pavement markings designating a bus stop;

     G.    Within four feet of a bench, seat or chair placed for public use within a public right-of-way;      H.    Within four feet of an above-ground utility cover or street furniture;

     I.      At any location where the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than four feet;

     J.      Attached to any parking meter, traffic signal, street light, fire hydrant, power pole, sign post, refuse container or tree;

     K.    In violation of local and state handicapped accessibility regulations;

     L.     Within one hundred fifty feet of any other newsrack which is located on the same side of the street in the same block and which contains the same issue or edition of the same publication.

     Notwithstanding any of the above obstruction requirements, the engineer may require a newsrack owner to move a newsrack if the engineer determines that the placement of the newsrack does not meet the criteria of this section and is in such a place or manner as to create a traffic hazard. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.130 Modification of placement standards.
     The engineer may waive or modify the standards for newsrack placement contained in this chapter upon a showing of good use and upon his or her determination that placing a newsrack at the location requiring the modification would not endanger the public health or safety or unreasonably interfere with use of the public right-of-way. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.140 Newsrack maintenance.
     A.    Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat, graffiti free, clean condition and in good repair at all times and shall be painted on a regular basis.

     B.     A newsrack that is damaged or defective shall be replaced or repaired as soon as is practical or upon notice from the engineer. If the owner wishes to abandon the location, the owner shall promptly remove the newsrack. The owner shall repair all damage to sidewalks, newsrack enclosure or modular newsrack resulting from placement and removal of a newsrack. When use of a newsrack is abandoned, it shall be removed and the location restored to its previous condition, normal wear and tear excepted. A newsrack shall be considered abandoned when it meets the criteria of Section 12.30.200 of this chapter.

     C.     No newsrack abandoned or removed for violation of this chapter and impounded shall be restored to the owner thereof, or to another person entitled to possession, unless and until the city’s reasonable cost of removal and storage of the newsrack, has been paid to the city; provided, however, that if after hearing before the engineer, it is determined that the newsrack was improperly removed by the city, there shall be no charge for restoration of such newsrack to the person entitled to possession thereof.

     D.    No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than the one concerned with display, sale or distribution of the newspaper or nonnewspaper publication distributed from it. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.150 Nonconforming newsracks.
     The owner of a newsrack which does not conform to this chapter but which lawfully existed and was maintained before the effective date of this chapter, shall remove it or conform it to this chapter by October 1, 2000. A newsrack not brought into compliance as provided in this subsection is in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.160 Removal by city.
     The city may remove and retain a newsrack installed, maintained or abandoned in violation of this chapter in accordance with Sections 12.30.170 and 12.30.180 of this chapter. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.170 Notice before removal.
     A.    Before the city may remove a newsrack, it shall give the permittee notice to remedy the violation or request a hearing before the engineer. Written notice shall be sent to the address stated on the newsrack permit or on the newsrack. The city may attach an additional copy of the notice to the newsrack. Notice attached to the newsrack is sufficient when no identification is shown on the newsrack and no permit has been issued.

     The notice shall give the permittee ten days from the date of mailing or the date of attachment to remedy the violation or request a hearing before the engineer.

     B.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, prior notice of removal is not required where the newsrack poses an immediate danger to pedestrians or vehicles. However, the city shall mail notice of the removal and an opportunity to request a hearing to contest the removal to the permittee within five days after the removal. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.180 Hearing procedure.
     A person notified under Section 12.30.170 of this chapter may request a hearing before the engineer by making a written request within ten days after notice was mailed. The hearing shall be informal, but oral and written evidence may be given by both sides. Action by the city with respect to the alleged violation shall be stayed pending the engineer’s decision following the hearing. The engineer shall give written notice of the decision within five business days of the conclusion of the hearing. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.190 Appeal.
     A permittee or applicant for an encroachment permit aggrieved by a decision of the engineer may appeal that decision to the city manager by filing written notice within seven days of such decision. On appeal, the city manager may reverse, affirm, or modify the engineer’s decision. The written decision of the city manager shall be rendered within ten working days of the conclusion of the appeal hearing and its decision shall be final. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.200 Disposition of abandoned newsracks.
     A.    A newsrack remaining empty for thirty consecutive days or retains daily newspapers over thirty  days old or sixty days from publication date of monthly newspapers or not claimed within thirty days of seizure is considered abandoned. A newsrack remaining empty due to labor strike or a temporary interruption of distribution or publication by the newspaper sold from the newsrack is not considered abandoned.

     B.     An abandoned newsrack may be removed and disposed of if the responsible party does not, within thirty days, claim the newsrack and pay a fee established by the city council for the cost of removal.

     C.     The city shall hold money it finds in a newsrack destroyed or otherwise disposed of under this section for a period of one year and then dispose of it under the law governing found or abandoned property. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

 

12.30.210 Costs of removal.
     The cost to the city for removal of a newsrack is a debt to the city and is the obligation of the permittee and the owner of the newsrack. The amount due accrues interest at the rate of ten percent annually from the date the city incurs the cost. (Ord. 637 § 1, 2000)

Title 13 SEWERS
Chapter 13.04 SEWER SYSTEM—RULES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 13.06 RECYCLED WATER REGULATIONS

Chapter 13.04 SEWER SYSTEM—RULES AND REGULATIONS
13.04.022 Prohibited activities.
     A.    No Damage to Property. No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment that is part of the sewerage works or any sampling device.

     B.     No Brine Discharging Self-Regenerating Water Softener. No person may install a brine discharging self-regenerating water softener system. (This prohibition is authorized by Order No. R5-2015-0043 of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region, adopted April 17, 2015.) (Ord. 956 § 2, 2015)

 

Article 1. Purpose
13.04.100 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to:

     A.    Provide for and regulate the disposal of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes into the city sanitary sewer system in such a manner and to such an extent as is reasonably necessary to maintain and increase the ability of such system to handle and dispose of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes;

 

     B.     Improve opportunities to recycle and reclaim treated effluent and wastewater sludge;

     C.     Protect the physical structures of the city sanitary sewer system and the efficient functioning of its component parts;

     D.    Protect the city and its personnel, and preserve and protect the health, safety and comfort of the public;

     E.     Comply with all applicable and compatible laws, rules, regulations and orders of the state of California and the United States. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

Article 2. Definitions
13.04.200 Definitions.
     Words, phrases or terms not specifically defined herein, and having a technical or specialized meaning shall be defined as set forth in 40 CFR Parts 136 and 403.

     In addition, when not in conflict, terms defined herein shall have the same meaning as those terms are defined by the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Act and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended in 1972.

     Unless the context indicates otherwise, the following words and terms all have the meaning defined herein.

     Act or the Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251, et seq.

     Authorized Representative of Industrial User: Any one of the following:

     A.    A responsible corporate officer as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(6)  and (I);

     B.     A general partner of a partnership or proprietorship, respectively;

     C.     A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge originates.

     Backflow Prevention Device (BPD): A backwater valve, ejector or pump system, relief valve or combination of two or more of these devices that is approved by the director and intended to prevent sewage from backflowing into a building or structure.

     Baseline Monitoring Report (BMR): A report required by industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard and as part of baseline sampling.

     Beneficial Uses: The uses of the waters of the state that may be protected against quality degradation including, but not necessarily limited to, domestic, municipal, agricultural and industrial supply, power generation, recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, navigation and the preservation and enhancement of fish, wildlife and other aquatic resources or reserves, and other uses, both tangible or intangible as specified by federal or state law.

     Best Management Practices (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance or operating procedures, and other management practices to prevent pass through and interference, and to prevent or reduce the pollution of “waters of the United States.” BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. Best management practices may be proposed by an individual user and accepted by the director or, as set forth in this chapter, mandated and set by the director.

     Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen demanded in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at twenty degrees centigrade expressed in terms of concentration of milligrams per liter (mg/L).

     Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning two feet outside the building wall.

     Building Sewer: The part of the generally horizontal piping of a drainage system which extends from the end of the building drain and which receives the wastewater discharge from the building drain and conveys it to the sewerage system. The building sewer begins at the building drain and extends to and includes the wye or connection to the sewerage system.

     Categorical Pretreatment Standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307 of the Act (33 USC Section 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.

     City: The city of Brentwood.

     City Manager: The person holding this position in the city or their designee.

     Commercial User: Any nonresidential user that the director determines will introduce primarily domestic sewage to the sewerage system.

     Conventional Pollutant: Biochemical oxygen demand, organic carbon, suspended solids, ammonia, nitrogen, pH, and total coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the POTW’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit.

     Conservative Pollutant: A pollutant that is not metabolized by the treatment processes in a conventional wastewater treatment plant. A conservative pollutant may be removed by the treatment processes and retained in the biosolids, may be volatilized and lost in fugitive air emissions or may be discharged with the plant’s effluent. Although the pollutant may be chemically changed in the treatment process, it can still be detected and may still be detrimental to the environment.

     Contamination: An impairment of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. Contamination shall include any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of wastewater, whether or not waters of the state are affected.

     Cooling Water: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.

     Cost Allocation Plan: A report that presents the analysis of computing overhead charges for citywide and department specific programs, as well as specific user fees and charges. It includes the schedule of all such fees. The cost allocation plan is approved by resolution of the city council.

     Day or Days: Unless otherwise specified, refers to calendar days.

     Diluting Waters: Cooling water, domestic sewage, ground water, surface drainage or potable waters which are not part of an industrial process and which do not contain constituents for which EPA pretreatment limitations apply but which are combined with industrial process wastewater prior to the monitoring.

     Director of Public Works or Director: The person holding this position in the city or their designee.

     Domestic Sewage: Any liquid and waterborne wastes derived from the ordinary living processes, free from industrial wastes, and of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the city’s sewerage system.

     Domestic User: Any user that discharges only domestic sewage, free from any industrial waste(s), into the city’s sewerage system.

     Drainage System: Includes all the piping within public or private premises that conveys sewage or other liquid wastes to a legal point of disposal, but does not include the mains of the city sewerage system or wastewater treatment plant.

     Enforcement Compliance Schedule Agreement (ECSA): An agreement entered into between the user and the city to bring a user into compliance with this chapter when a sampling and evaluation program indicates noncompliance.

     EPA: The United States Environmental Protection Agency.

     Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards: The limit on the pollutant discharges to POTWs from specific process wastewaters of particular industrial categories.

     Federal Pretreatment Standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307 of the Act (33 USC Section 1317) which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR Part 403.5.

     Flood Level Rim: The top edge of a receptor from which water or wastewater overflows.

     Garbage: The putrescible solid waste from the domestic and partially prepared cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.

     Industrial User(s): All establishments engaged in producing, manufacturing, or processing operations, which result in the production and/or discharge into city sewers of industrial wastes; and all other establishments engaged in any activity resulting in the production and discharge to city sewers of industrial wastes.

     Industrial Waste(s): The waste and wastewater from any production, manufacturing or processing operations of any nature, including institutional and commercial operations if the wastewater is used for the removal of significant quantities of waste other than domestic sewage from premises connected to the POTW.

     Interference: The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city’s NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 503 and Section 405 of the Act (33 USC Section 1345), or any criteria, guideline, or regulation developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 USC Section 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained on any State Sludge Management Plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the wastewater treatment plant.

     Lateral: The piping connecting the sanitary sewer main consisting of the upper lateral and the lower lateral. Lateral is synonymous with building sewer.

     Lower Lateral: The portion of the lateral between the property line and the sanitary sewer main.

     Mass Emission Rate: The weight of material discharged to the sewer system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or combination of constituents.

     National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES Permit: A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 USC Section 1342).

     Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, bay, ocean, or other body of surface water, or outlet into the groundwater.

     New Source: A facility meeting the definition of a “new source” set forth in 40 CFR Part 403.3(m).

     Nuisance: Any condition which is injurious to health or offensive to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfort or enjoyment of life or property or which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.

     Pass Through: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).

     Permit: The authorization required by the director to discharge wastewater to the wastewater treatment plant.

     Person: An individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, municipality, public utility, or other public body or institution.

     pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of wastewater. pH is measured on a scale of 0 to 14, 0 being extremely acidic, 7 neutral, and 14 extremely alkaline. The pH corresponds to the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in gram-ions per liter of solution.

     Pollutant(s): Any dredge spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water.

     Pollution: An alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects such waters for beneficial use or facilities which serve such beneficial uses. Pollution may include contamination.

     Publicly Owned Treatment Works or POTW: A sewage treatment plant or “treatment works” as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 USC Section 1292) which is owned by the city including any sanitary sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW, including pipes, lift stations, sewers or other conveyances.

     Premises: A lot or parcel of real property under one ownership, except where there are well-defined boundaries such as walls, fences or hedges, which prevent the common use of the property by all occupants, in which case each portion will be deemed separate premises. Apartment houses and office buildings and structures of like nature may be classified as single premises.

     Pretreatment or Treatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sanitary sewer system. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means except dilution.

     Pretreatment Facility: Any facility or device for treatment, control or flow limitations of sewage or industrial waste, prior to discharge into a city sanitary sewer.

     Pretreatment Requirements: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user.

     Private Sewer Lateral: Any sewer lateral not maintained as part of the public system by the city.

     Process Wastewater: Any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste product.

     Regional Water Quality Control Board: The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region.

     Sampling and Evaluation Program (SEP): The sampling program conducted by the city to establish user compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

     Sanitary Sewer: Any pipe or conduit, including pump stations, manholes, and other similar facilities which accept, collect, and convey domestic sewage and/or industrial wastes and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.

     Sanitary Sewer Overflow (SSO): An overflow from the sanitary sewer system as defined in State Water Resources Control Board Order No. 2006-0003-DWQ.

     Sewer Lateral: The piping or conduits used to convey sewer wastewater within a building or structure and connecting the building or structure to a public or private sewerage collection, disposal and treatment system.

     Sewerage System: All sewers, facilities and appurtenances owned or operated by the city for carrying, collecting, pumping, treatment and disposal of waste and wastewater.

     Slug: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration that could cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit.

     Standard Industrial Classification (SIC): A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget.

     Standard Plans and Specifications: City standard specifications, on file with the city public works department, required for all public and private improvements within the city.

     Standard Specifications for Wastewater Discharge: City standard specifications, on file with the city public works department, which provide the wastewater discharge limitations for discharges to the wastewater treatment plant.

     Storm Sewer: A sewer which carries storm water and surface waters and drainage, but which excludes sewage and industrial waste.

     Storm Water: Any flow resulting from and occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation.

     Total Suspended Solids (TSS): The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering (EPA testing method 160.2).

     Toxic Pollutant: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of Section 307(a) of the Act (33 USC Section 1317) or other applicable law.

     Upper Lateral: The portion of the lateral between the structure or dwelling and the property line.

     User: Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city sewerage system.

     Waste: Domestic sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive associated with human habitation, or human or animal origin, or from or related to any producing, manufacturing, or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for the purpose of, disposal.

     Wastewater: Waste and water, whether treated or untreated.

     Wastewater Constituents and Characteristics: The individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological parameters, including volume and flow rate and such other parameters that serve to define, classify or measure the contents, quality, quantity and strength of wastewater.

     Wastewater Discharge Permit Contract or “Permit Contract”: A contract entered between the city and Class A industrial users required for connecting to or contributing wastewater to the sewerage system.

     Wastewater Treatment Plant: The city of Brentwood wastewater treatment plant.

     Water Quality Requirements: Requirements for the city’s treatment plant effluent established by the NPDES permit, or by state or federal regulatory agencies. Water quality requirements include effluent limitations and waste discharge standards, limitations, or prohibitions which may be established or adopted by state or federal laws or regulatory agencies.

     Waters of the State: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.

     Waters of the United States: All waters which are currently used, or were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce as defined in 40 CFR 230.3(s). (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

Article 3. Sewer Use Regulations
13.04.300 General discharge prohibitions.
     A user may not introduce into the POTW any pollutant(s) which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in Sections 13.04.305 through 13.04.315 apply to each user introducing pollutants into the POTW whether or not the user is subject to other Federal Pretreatment Standards or any other federal, state or local pretreatment requirements. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.305 Limitations on wastewater strength.
     No person shall discharge wastewater that does not meet the limitations specified in the standard specifications for wastewater discharge limitations. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.310 Specific prohibitions on discharge effects.
     A user may not discharge, or cause to be discharged, wastewater into the sanitary sewer system if it contains substances or has characteristics which, either alone or by interaction with other wastewater, cause or threaten to cause:

     A.    Damage to the sewerage system.

     B.     Interference or impairment of operation or maintenance of the sewerage system.

     C.     Obstruction of flow in the sewerage system.

     D.    Hazard to human life.

     E.     Interference with wastewater treatment plant or disposal processes, including recycling or any reclamation processes.

     F.     The wastewater treatment plant’s effluent or any other product of the wastewater treatment plant such as residues, sludge, or scum to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse. In no case shall substances discharged to the sewerage system cause the plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines, or regulations.

     G.    The city to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality requirements.

     H.    A flammable or explosive condition.

     I.      A noxious or malodorous condition, a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or conditions sufficient to prevent normal entry into the sewerage system or other city facilities or maintenance and repair.

     J.      Objectionable coloration or other condition in the quality of the city’s wastewater treatment plant influent which interferes with or passes through the treatment plant.

     K.    Conditions which violate any statute, rule, regulation, or ordinance of any public agency, relating to releases of hazardous wastes, hazardous substances, or other pollutants to the environment when such release is to the city sanitary sewer.

     L.     Any alteration or change to the city’s NPDES permit or any additional regulatory supervision, intervention, or oversight of the city’s operations.

     M.    Any alteration of the city’s wastewater treatment plant processes.

     N.    Any significant alteration of city operations, including, but not limited to, affecting the ability of the city to procure adequate insurance and/or subjecting the city operations to significantly increased potential liability. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.315 Specific prohibitions on discharge of substances or characteristics.
     A user shall not discharge, or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly to the city sanitary sewer any of the following:

     A.    Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or damage to the sewerage system or to be injurious to human health and safety or to the operation of the sewerage system. At no time shall a waste stream exceed a closed cup flash point of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit or sixty degrees Centigrade using the test method specified in 40 CFR Part 261.21. Also, at no time shall two consecutive readings on a combustible gas meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.

     1.     The combustible gas meter shall be properly calibrated in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions using pentane as the calibration standard.

     2.     The materials which may be prohibited if they cause explosive or fire dangers as defined herein include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides, or any other substance which is a fire or explosion hazard.

     B.     Any solid or viscous substance in amounts or concentrations which may cause or threaten to cause obstruction to the flow in the sanitary sewer or pass through of, or interference with, the operations of the sewerage system such as, but not limited to, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting or machine oils, products of mineral origin, mud, cement grout, glass grinding or polishing wastes, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails or whole blood.

     C.     Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or equal to or greater than 11.5, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, humans, or animals.

     D.    Any wastewater containing hazardous pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to human or animal health or safety, create an adverse effect on the waters of the state, or to exceed the limitations set forth in a Federal Pretreatment Standard.

     E.     Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater treatment plant resulting in interference or pass through, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the wastewater treatment plant to exceed eighty-five degrees Fahrenheit or with a temperature at the point of discharge to the sewerage system which exceeds one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit.

     F.     Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (e.g., BOD, chemical oxygen demand), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that alone or in combination with others, may cause interference or pass through. Regardless of whether a slug load causes or will cause interference or pass through, in no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentrations or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen minutes, more than five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation.

     G.    Any discharge which results in toxic pollutants in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems within any sewerage system.

     H.    Any storm water, ground water, rainwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage, yard drainage, diatomaceous earth filter backwash, or swimming pool drainage, unless a specific permit is issued by the director.

     I.      Any unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, cooling water, process water or blow-down from cooling towers or evaporative coolers, or any other unpolluted water unless a permit for such has been obtained from the director prior to the discharge. The director may approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available or such alternative, in the determination of the director, is unacceptable.

     J.      Any septic tank waste, holding tank waste, portable toilet waste, grease interceptor waste, or oil and sand interceptor waste, unless a permit is issued by the director.

     K.    Any waste defined as hazardous, by any definition set forth in federal and/or state statutes or regulations. (See Section 13.04.365 of this chapter.)

     L.     Any substance, waste, wastewater, or constituent thereof which may by itself or in combination with other discharges cause the city to violate any permit conditions related to toxicity of the effluent or otherwise cause or contribute to the potential for toxic pollutants being released from the sewerage system into the environment.

     M.    The following constituents are subject to a discharge prohibition standard in lieu of setting numeric discharge limits. The presence of these constituents documented through approved analytical methods shall be a violation of this section and be subject to corrective actions by the user to control the discharge of the constituent present. Wastewater permits may establish discharge prohibition(s) for constituents not included in this section for specific industrial users.

     1.     Cyanide for unpermitted users;

     2.     Dioxin compounds;

     3.     Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs);

     4.     Tributyltin (TBT);

     5.     Dieldrin;

     6.     4,4’-DDE;

     7.     Perchloroethylene wastes and wastewaters from dry cleaner operations. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.320 Discharge into storm drain prohibited.
     It is unlawful to discharge any waste or wastewater into any storm sewer, storm drain or natural outlet unless the user has obtained an NPDES permit and the user is in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of all agencies having jurisdiction over such discharge. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.325 Prohibition on use of diluting waters.
     No user shall ever increase the use of process wastewater or, in any other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards (see Section 13.04.360 of this chapter), or in any other limitation developed by the city or state. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.330 Prohibitions on radioactive wastes.
     No user shall, and it is unlawful to, discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit to be discharged, any radioactive waste into the sanitary sewer; provided, however, that:

     A.    Users authorized to use radioactive materials by the State Department of Health or other governmental agency empowered to regulate the use of radioactive materials may discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit to be discharged such wastes, provided that such wastes are discharged in strict conformance with the then current State of California Code of Regulations Title 17, 10 CFR 20.2003, any federal laws and regulations pertaining to radioactive materials, and any recommendations for safe disposal of such wastes as they now exist or may hereafter be amended; and

     B.     The user so acting does so in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of all other regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over such discharges. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.335 Limitations on point of discharge.
     No user shall discharge any substance directly into a manhole or other opening in a sanitary sewer other than through an approved building sewer, unless upon written application by the user and payment of the applicable user charges and fees, the director issues a permit for such discharges. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.340 Limitations on use of garbage grinders.
     Waste from garbage grinders shall not be discharged into the sanitary sewer except where:

     A.    Wastes are generated in preparation of food normally consumed in a residence; or

     B.     The user has an existing garbage grinder and has approval for that specific use from the director. Such grinders must be repaired or replaced as necessary in order to at all times ensure that the waste is shredded to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under normal flow conditions prevailing in the city sanitary sewer. Garbage grinders shall not be used for grinding plastic, paper products, inert materials, garden refuse, and waste products resulting from the handling, storage and sale of equipment; and

     C.     At any time the premises or business changes ownership, excluding residential property, the existing garbage grinders on the premises must be removed and no new garbage grinders may be installed as a condition of continued city sanitary sewer service to the premises. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.345 Prohibitions on hospital wastes.
     Hospitals, clinics, offices of medical doctors, and convalescent homes shall not discharge to the sanitary sewer:

     A.    Equipment, instruments, utensils, hypodermic needles, syringes and associated articles.

     B.     Any article that may harbor or transmit pathogenic organisms and that are used in the rooms of patients having a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease which by the nature of the disease is required to be isolated.

     C.     Recognizable portions of the human anatomy.

     D.    Wastes excluded by other provisions of these regulations. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of appropriate health agencies to define wastes as being infectious and to prohibit discharge to the sanitary sewer. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.350 Application of most stringent limitations.
     The most stringent discharge limitation or prohibition, whether state, federal, or local, shall apply. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.355 Supplemental limitations.
     The limitations on wastewater strength and prohibitions in these regulations may be supplemented with more stringent limitation if:

     A.    The director determines that the limitations may not be sufficient to protect the operation of the POTW; or

     B.     The director determines that the limitations may not be sufficient to enable the POTW to comply with water quality requirements, or effluent limitations specified in the POTW’s NPDES permit; or

     C.     The discharge is of such a nature that it reduces or impairs the POTW’s recycle, reclamation or disposal options; or

     D.    In the director’s evaluation, the discharge, alone or in combination with any other discharge, poses a threat or unreasonable risk to the POTW or personnel. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.360 Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
     Upon promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the new Federal Standard shall immediately supersede, unless there is a more stringent state or local limitation. The applicable reporting requirements are provided in Section 13.04.605(F). Regardless of notification, industrial users are required to comply with all applicable pretreatment requirements. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.365 Proper disposal of sludge and spent chemicals.
     The disposal of sludge, spent chemicals and hazardous materials generated shall comply with all applicable state, federal and local laws, regulations and ordinances including: Section 405 of the Act (33 USC Section 1345); Subtitles C and D of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act; and Title 22, Division 4.5, of the California Code of Regulations. A record of disposal shall be maintained and available for review by city staff. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.370 Authority to require pretreatment or corrective measures and authority to deny or condition new, increased or changed discharges.
     Users shall make wastewater acceptable under the limitations established in these regulations before discharging to the sanitary sewer. Any pretreatment facility required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the director shall be provided and maintained at the user’s expense. In the event pretreatment or special facilities are required to make the industrial wastes acceptable, the user shall be required to furnish a compliance schedule and plans, approved prior to construction, showing the schedule of activities, time frame and method of pretreatment proposed. The pretreatment facility or measures shall be installed in conformity with the approved plans and other city codes or regulations. The approval of the pretreatment method will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the director under the provisions of these regulations. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facility or method of operation shall be reported to the director and is subject to a permit or permit modifications. The effectiveness of the pretreatment unit discharging to the sanitary sewer will be monitored by the director at the user’s expense. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.375 Notice to employees—Discharge regulations.
     In order that employees of users be informed of city requirements, users shall make available to their employees copies of these regulations together with such other wastewater and effective water pollution control information and notices which may be furnished by the city from time to time. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.380 Best management practices (BMPs) to control discharges.
     Industrial users can employ BMPs to effectively control the discharge of pollutants to the city’s facilities. The director may establish BMPs for specific industrial users through condition(s) in the permit or permit contract. The director may establish BMPs for a business activity that would apply to entire groups of businesses such as vehicle service facilities or food service facilities. BMPs for business activities will be communicated to the affected industrial users through informational materials distributed during inspections, direct mailing, or the city’s website. Industrial users shall comply with the business activity BMPs after being informed by the director of their applicability to the industrial users operations. Industrial users subject to BMPs as a means of complying with the standards of this chapter shall maintain documentation to demonstrate compliance with the applicable BMP standards. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

Article 4. Grease, Oil, and Sand Interceptor Program
13.04.400 Interceptor required.
     Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be installed by the user when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease, flammable waste, sand or other harmful ingredients.

     A.    Toilets, urinals, wash basins and other fixtures containing fecal material shall not flow through the interceptor.

     B.     No wastewater having excessive temperatures which will cause pass through of grease, shall be discharged to the grease interceptor for any duration.

     C.     No chemicals shall be added to the interceptor that will cause pass through of grease.

     D.    Abandoned grease interceptors shall be emptied and filled as required for abandoned septic tanks (Section 722.0 et seq., of the California Plumbing Code; 24 CCR Section 722.0 et seq.). (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.405 Administration of interceptor program.
     The director shall administer an interceptor program which is intended to prevent grease, sand, flammable liquids, and other substances which are likely to block or create a hazard within the sewerage system from entering the system through use of interceptors or traps. The director may require any nondomestic user to install an interceptor or trap according to the guidelines set forth in the city’s Standard Plans and Specifications or other program prior to connection to the city or at any time after connection to the city sanitary sewer if the director discovers or determines subsequent to the connection that the building, facility, or operation of that user produces a waste with characteristics that would require installation of a trap or interceptor pursuant to this chapter. The premises owner and the entity which applies for the connection or industrial user permit (e.g., the owner/proprietor of the business) shall install a proper interceptor or trap device. The director shall determine whether a grease trap, grease interceptor, or other interceptor is required on a case-by-case basis based on an evaluation of objective criteria including, but not limited to, factors such as those listed hereunder:

     A.    The type of facility (e.g., a restaurant, bakery, cheese factory, yogurt shop, gas station, lube facility).

     B.     The volume of the user’s business or operation (such as number of meals served, number of seats, hours of operation).

     C.     Size and nature of facilities (including kitchen facilities) based on size, type, number of fixtures, and type of processing or cooking equipment used.

     D.    The type of service provided or operation undertaken (such as dine-in meal service versus carry-out meal service).

     E.     The type of foods or other materials used in the cooking, processing, or manufacturing operations carried on within the user’s facility.

     F.     The overall potential for grease-laden, flammable, or sand-laden discharges.

     G.    The existence of devices, procedures, or processes which are designed to minimize the amount of grease, sand, oil, or other flammable liquids from entering the sewer system.

     The design, location, and procedures for operation of a required interceptor or trap shall be approved by the director. Such approval shall be obtained prior to the user’s connection of the facility to the city’s sewerage system, in the event of new construction or remodeling. In instances where a user has already connected and the director determines that an interceptor or trap must be installed, the user shall promptly provide for the installation of the interceptor or trap within a reasonable time frame (as may be set by the director), including providing such design plans and operational plans as may be required. The installation of an interceptor or trap as required by this chapter on an existing user facility shall occur within reasonable time not to exceed one hundred twenty days after the user has been provided notice of the requirement that an interceptor or trap be installed. This one hundred twenty-day limit may only be extended by written agreement of the director.  (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.410 Interceptor maintenance standards.
     Maintenance shall be conducted by user in order to ensure the proper operation of interceptors and traps. If the operations of a specific user modify the need to follow the specified standards, the user can request a variance from the director in writing on a form provided by the director. Unless the director issues a written variance to a user, the user shall meet the specified minimum maintenance standards of this section:

     A.    Access to interceptors and traps shall be maintained to allow inspection and maintenance to be performed. Inspections shall be performed at appropriate frequency to ensure adequate operation of the interceptor or trap and to evaluate effectiveness of best management practices to control sources of pollutants.

     B.     Interceptors shall be operated so that the accumulated grease and solid waste does not meet or exceed twenty-five percent of the unit’s capacity. Determinations shall normally be made by measuring the depth of the layers within a unit.

     C.     Interceptors shall be cleaned at least once every ninety days. Interceptor cleaning shall be conducted to pump all the liquid and solid contents of the unit, and the sides will be cleaned of any substantial build-up of grease and solid wastes.

     D.    Traps shall be cleaned according to the manufacturer’s recommended frequency (e.g., daily, weekly) when conducted by user’s employees, and shall be pumped of all the liquid and solid contents using a licensed and permitted waste hauler at least once every ninety days.

     1.     The user may clean smaller traps in lieu of using a licensed and permitted waste hauler at least once every ninety days provided that all the standards for cleaning traps are met, including, but not limited to, removal of all liquids and solids and not decanting wastes. The user shall document the proper disposal of the wastes removed from the trap as well as the frequency of pumping.

 

     E.     Decanting of wastes removed from an interceptor or trap is prohibited when a licensed and permitted waste hauler is used to clean a unit. Wastes removed from the interceptor or trap shall not be reintroduced into the unit cleaned or any other connection to the sewerage system unless the location is specifically authorized in a current waste hauler permit.

     F.     The user shall maintain records documenting proper maintenance of the interceptor or trap. The disposal location (name, address, phone number for off-site facilities) for wastes removed from an interceptor or trap shall be recorded and made available for inspection upon request. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.415 Enforcement.
     Failure of any user who is required to maintain an interceptor or trap pursuant to this chapter and/or pursuant to lawful director direction, shall be subject to each of the enforcement provisions set forth in this chapter. The enforcement provisions of this chapter shall apply to the failure to instruct personnel, or to maintain, pump, and/or institute a proper grease or flammable substance reduction program. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

Article 5. Wastewater Volume Determination
13.04.500 Metered water supply.
     User charges and fees shall be based on the total amount of water used from all sources unless, in the opinion of the director, significant portions of water received are not discharged to a sanitary sewer. The total amount of water used from public sources will be determined by means of public water meters, installed at the expense of the user and approved by the director. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.505 Metered wastewater volume and metered diversions.
     Where, in the opinion of the director, a significant portion of the water received from any metered source does not flow into the sanitary sewer because of the principal activity of the user or removal by other means, the user charges and fees will be applied against the volume of water discharged from such premises into the sanitary sewer. Written notification and proof of the diversion of water must be provided by the user if the user is to avoid the application of the user charges and fees against the total amount of water used from all sources. The user must install a meter of a type and at a location approved by the director and at the user’s expense. At the discretion of the city, such meters may measure either the amount of sewage discharged or the amount of water diverted. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

Article 6. Reports and Permits
13.04.600 Classes of users.
     The director will classify all users in accordance with the principal activity conducted on the premises where the discharge occurs. The purpose of the classification is to facilitate regulation of discharges to the sewerage system on the basis of each user’s waste quality, quantity, and flow. The classification shall further provide a means of imposing an appropriate level of oversight, control, and enforcement according to the source of the discharge. The classification system will also allow equitable recovery of city capital and operating costs for the pretreatment program.

     Domestic users under normal circumstances will not be required to apply for or receive a wastewater permit as defined in this chapter, providing that said domestic user discharges only domestic sewage.

     Industrial users may be subject to wastewater permit requirements depending on the volume, characteristics, and origin of their wastewater discharge. Industrial users may be required to supply such information and data concerning their processes, including discharge samples and wastes generated, as may be necessary for the director to determine whether such user should be designated as Class A, B, C, or D.

     A.    Class A users are industrial users that are regulated by Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Industrial users may be classified as Class A based on the unusual wastewater constituents and characteristics due to its volume, strength, composition, or its derivation from a hazardous waste or substance, or the potential variability in wastewater constituents and characteristics, or on the potential for increased administrative cost to the city.

     B.     Class B users are industrial users that discharge more than twenty-five thousand gallons of wastewater to the city sanitary sewer as a daily average, or have the potential to discharge toxic pollutants and must meet the pollutant limitations set by the standard specifications for wastewater discharge limitations. The determination of a Class B user may be based on whether the waste discharge has hazardous pollutants, or whether the discharge is subject to Federal Pretreatment Standards, or whether it has in its untreated wastewater pollutants which are in excess of any pretreatment requirement, or whether it may, in the opinion of the director, have a significant impact, either singularly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the city’s ability to meet the objectives of this chapter.

     C.     Class C users are industrial users that discharge conventional pollutant loads but could by themselves or combined with flow from another industry overload the wastewater treatment plant, causing the plant to violate NPDES permit limits. The determination of a Class C user may be based on the issue of whether the user stores and/or uses hazardous substances in such quantities in its industrial or commercial processes as may, in the determination of the director, have the potential to be discharged to the sewerage system by accident or through a slug discharge, causing a measurable increase in the amount of hazardous substances entering the city’s facilities.

     D.    Class D users are users that discharge wastewater from projects not associated with normal industrial or manufacturing processes. Projects may include, but are not limited to, groundwater cleanup, site remediation, trenching, excavation and leachate extraction. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.605 Reporting requirements.
     A.    The director may require any user to file a periodic report. The report may include, but need not be limited to, the nature of the process, volume, rates of flow, hours of operation, number and classification of employees, or other information which relates to the generation of waste including wastewater constituents and characteristics in the wastewater discharge or alternate means of disposal. Such report may also include the chemical constituents of liquid or gaseous materials stored on site even though they may not normally be discharged. In addition to reports, the director may require information in the form of permit applications, self-monitoring reports, status reports, technical reports, hazardous waste disposal records, operation and maintenance records, compliance reports and compliance schedule progress reports.

     B.     Class A and Class B users shall submit an annual report to the director. This annual report shall, at a minimum, contain the following:

     1.     The nature and concentration of pollutants which are limited by pretreatment requirements or which are specified in the permit or permit contract for each regulated waste stream.

     2.     A record of average daily flow for the reporting period for each regulated waste stream.

     3.     Methods utilized by the user in collecting the wastewater sample for analysis, including, but not limited to, the sampling device(s) used, the sampling period, the amount of each sample collected, sample handling and preservation techniques used, and date of sample delivery to the laboratory for analysis.

     C.     The director may impose mass limitations on users where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases the annual reports shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment requirements in the effluent of the user. These reports shall include the flow, concentration, and mass of pollutants regulated by the applicable pretreatment requirement.

     D.    All industrial users shall promptly notify the director by any standard means of communication in advance of any change in character or significant volume of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under local, federal or state notification requirements. Proposed discharge shall not commence without prior director approval. A written request must be submitted not less than thirty days prior to commencement of any proposed discharge.

     E.     All industrial users shall notify the director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification shall include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous number and the type of discharge (e.g., continuous, batch or other).

     1.     If the discharge exceeds one hundred kilograms of hazardous waste or any amount of acute hazardous waste in any calendar month the notification shall also contain the following information: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month and the mass of the constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve months.

     2.     In the case of any notification made under this paragraph, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated.

     F.     Within one hundred eighty days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or one hundred eighty days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under 40 CFR Part 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards (including Class A and B users) and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW are required to submit to the director a baseline monitoring report. At least ninety days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, are required to submit to the director a BMR. The BMR shall contain the information as required in 40 CFR Part 403.12(b). (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.610 Permit application.
     Industrial users may be required to obtain a permit if their discharge is regulated by any provisions of these regulations, state or federal regulations, or at the discretion of the director. All industrial users proposing to discharge into the city sanitary sewer shall complete and file with the director, a permit application accompanied by the applicable permit fee within sixty days of the commencement of operation causing discharge. The applicant may be required to submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information, including, but not limited to:

     A.    Name, address and the SIC of applicant;

     B.     Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in these regulations or state or Federal Pretreatment Standard or otherwise requested by the director, as determined by a state certified laboratory;

     C.     Time and duration of discharge;

     D.    Average daily and peak maximum wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any;

     E.     Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation;

     F.     Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials, processes and types of materials which are or could be discharged;

     G.    Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of production;

     H.    Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);

     I.      Number and type of employees, and hours of work;

     J.      Spill prevention and emergency response plans;

     K.    Pollution prevention plan;

     L.     Storm water pollution prevention plan and monitoring plan;

     M.    Number, type, and volume/amount of hazardous substances stored on the premises and a description of the variety of the method of storage and/or the containment device for such substances;

     N.    Any other information as may be deemed by the director to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.

     The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of all the data required, the director may determine that no wastewater permit is required, and the director may determine that the user is a Class A, B, C, or D user. If the director determines that a discharge permit is required, the director will issue a permit, subject to specific terms or conditions provided therein. The holder of all permits issued hereunder shall be subject at all times to all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.615 New or amended permit.
     Under the following circumstances a new or amended permit application and applicable permit fee must be filed with the director:

     A.    Upon change of ownership of the premises served; or

     B.     Upon change of occupancy; or

     C.     Upon change of any activity resulting in a change in the type of industrial/hazardous wastewater generated.

     The holders of all permits issued shall be subject at all times to all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. At no time and in no way, shall the holder of any permit acquire, or be regarded as having acquired, a vested or continuing right to maintain, or to have continued, any connection to the city sanitary sewer. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.620 Permit conditions.
     Permits shall be subject to all provisions of these regulations and all other regulations, user charges and fees established by the city council. The conditions of permits shall be uniformly enforced by the director in accordance with these regulations, and applicable state and federal regulations. Permits may contain restrictions and requirements including, but not limited to, the following:

     A.    Separation of industrial wastewater from domestic sewage prior to discharge to the city sanitary sewer.

     B.     Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics, flow rate and limits on the time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation/equalization;

     C.     Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities;

     D.    Pretreatment requirements;

     E.     Compliance schedules;

     F.     Specifications for self-monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency, and method of sampling, number, types and standards for tests, and reporting schedules;

     G.    Requirements for submission of technical reports, progress reports or discharge reports;

     H.    Requirements to pay applicable wastewater charges or fees pursuant to Section 13.04.1100 within thirty days of invoice;

     I.      Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the director, and allowing access to those records;

     J.      Establish mean and maximum mass emission rates, or other appropriate limits when conventional pollutants or toxic pollutants are proposed or present in the user’s wastewater discharge;

     K.    Requirements for providing the director with design and construction plans and specifications of the wastewater pretreatment facility whether proposed or in existence;

     L.     Requirements for providing the director with plans and specifications of the user’s industrial or commercial operation and/or processes, including such other information as the director may reasonably request that pertains to the industrial user’s operation;

     M.    Requirements for notification of any planned alteration of the proposed or existing wastewater pretreatment system;

     N.    Requirements for providing access to city personnel at all reasonable times to conduct sampling and/or inspection of any and all processes which can contribute to the waste stream, including the actual wastewater discharge;

     O.    The prohibition of dilution as partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with permit conditions;

     P.     Identification of applicable BMPs to be employed to control discharge quality from the processes used at the facility; and

     Q.    Other conditions or requirements as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with these regulations. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.625 Wastewater discharge permit contract.
     The director shall require Class A industrial users to enter into a wastewater discharge permit contract for connecting to or contributing wastewater to the sewerage system. The wastewater discharge permit contract shall incorporate the provisions of this chapter by reference including all requirements and standards as may be set forth herein or promulgated by the city council by resolution. The wastewater discharge permit contract may contain all of the permit provisions set forth in Section 13.04.620. In addition, the permit contract may contain additional provisions, including, but not limited to, the following:

     A.    Requirements for providing proof of insurance, indemnification of the city, and bonding in order to adequately protect the city, in its judgment, from the potential of the increased exposure to liability due to the user’s discharge.

     B.     Provisions for termination of the permit contract and wastewater sewer service for violation of this chapter or other wastewater permit contract conditions.

     C.     Any and all other conditions as may be deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter and the objectives set forth herein. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.630 Wastewater permit or permit contract modifications.
     The director may modify a wastewater permit or permit contract anytime for any reason, including, but not limited to:

     A.    When a new Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard is promulgated.

     B.     If the director determines it is necessary in order to comply with the objectives of the chapter to impose more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the city sanitary sewer than are set forth in an existing permit.

     C.     When sampling and evaluation program indicates noncompliance and the permit is modified through an ECSA.

     In the event such permit or permit contract modification is required, the user may be provided with reasonable time to make such modifications to its processes or procedures as may be required. After consultation with the user, an ECSA shall be issued which would set forth a reasonable schedule for the user to comply with the more stringent standards. If the permit or permit contract modification will require construction or acquisition of equipment related to pretreatment, the compliance schedule agreement will provide for up to one hundred eighty days to comply. This period may be extended for up to an additional one hundred eighty days upon determination by the director that good cause exists for an additional period. To the extent the user remains in compliance with the permit or permit contract conditions in effect prior to amendment during the compliance period, the user shall not be liable pursuant to the terms of this chapter for noncompliance with the more stringent standards or requirements during the period of the compliance schedule agreement; provided the user is also complying with the terms of the compliance schedule agreement. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.635 Duration of permits or permit contract.
     Permits or permit contract shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. If the user is not notified by the city thirty days prior to the expiration of the permit, the permit shall be extended one additional year. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.640 Transfer of a permit or permit contract.
     Permits or permit contract are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A permit or permit contract shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.645 Refusal to issue a permit or permit contract.
     The director may refuse to issue a permit or permit contract if any one or more of the following conditions exist:

     A.    Appropriate charges and fees are not paid within thirty days of permit or permit contract issuance.

     B.     The application for a permit or permit contract contains false or misleading information.

     C.     The issuance of the permit or permit contract would result in the discharge of industrial wastes of such quantity or strength that the public health or safety, or public or private property are endangered.

     D.    The issuance of the permit or permit contract would cause the POTW to violate any NPDES permit conditions, laws, or regulations of the state and/or federal government.

     E.     The applicant has not provided plans for sufficient protection from accidental discharges to the sanitary sewer system or the environment. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.650 Confidential information.
     Except as may be exempt from disclosure by the California Public Records Act (Government Code Section 6250 et seq.), all information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, permit contracts and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency.

     When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available to governmental agencies for use in making studies; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.

     As outlined in 40 CFR Parts 403.8 and 403.14 and under Section 308 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC Section 1318), all information contained in an industrial user’s file and/or submitted by an industrial user will be available at all times to the Environmental Protection Agency.

     The city shall not be liable in damages to any permit or permit contract applicant or user for any negligent disclosure of any information furnished to the city. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.655 Signatory requirements.
     All reports, permit applications or agreements shall be signed as follows: by an authorized corporate officer(s), if the user is a corporation; by a general partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively; by a duly authorized representative of the designated individual above provided the authorization is submitted in writing to the city.

     If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the signatory requirements above shall be submitted prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative of industrial user.

     Any person signing reports, permit applications or agreements shall make the following certification:

 

I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.

(Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

Article 7. Accidental Discharge
13.04.700 Protection from accidental discharge.
     Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials regulated by these regulations, by state or federal regulations, or other wastes determined to be harmful or hazardous by state or federal regulations into the city’s sanitary sewer and/or storm sewer. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be approved by the director before construction of the protective facilities. The user shall submit plans which are in compliance with federal, state and local regulations.

     The review and approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facilities as necessary to provide the protection necessary to protect the sanitary sewer or storm sewer system. The review and approval of such plans will in no way relieve the user of any responsibility or liabilities in the event of a spill or accidental discharge. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.705 Notification of accidental discharge.
     A.    Industrial users shall immediately notify the director of any slug load or accidental discharge of waste or pollutants from the user’s facility to the city’s facilities. Notification shall be given by phone and shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken. This notification does not relieve the user of the responsibility of notifying all other required agencies as outlined in the California Code of Regulations, Title 19, and other applicable regulations.

     B.     The initial notification shall be followed, within fifteen days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed written statement to the director describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrences. Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage, or for any fines imposed by the city, or for other violations of federal, state, or local law where applicable.

     C.     Industrial users shall notify the director within one business day in the event a sample result indicates that a constituent is in violation of the allowable concentration levels as set forth in the user’s permit or permit contract. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.710 Accidental discharge record keeping requirements.
     Any person, firm, or corporation responsible for any unauthorized discharge shall keep accurate records of the events of the discharge at the time of the discharge. The record shall include all pertinent information related to the unauthorized discharge, including, but not limited to, dates, times, names of parties involved, volume of discharge, substance discharged, agencies notified and corrective action taken. The user shall keep all records related to the unauthorized discharge for at least five years. Records shall be available for review, by the city, upon request. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.715 Accidental discharge liabilities.
     Any person, firm or corporation responsible for any unauthorized discharge shall institute and complete all actions necessary to remedy the effects of such unauthorized discharge, whether sudden or gradual, with the cost borne by the user. When deemed necessary by the director, identification and clean-up of the discharge may be initiated by the city or by an authorized individual or firm. All costs associated with such clean-up shall be borne by the owner, user or other person responsible for the unauthorized discharge.

     In the event that the clean-up costs are less than the cost of legal disposal, a fine may be levied. The fine may be the difference between the cost of legal disposal and the actual cleanup cost, plus twenty-five percent of the total amount. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.720 Accidental discharges notices to employees.
     A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted in a conspicuous place on the premises of each commercial user or industrial user advising employees whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in violation of these regulations. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.725 Discharge regulations available to employees.
     In order that employees of users be informed of city requirements, users shall make available to their employees copies of these regulations together with other environmental information and notices which may be furnished by the city. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.730 Prevention of accidental discharge.
     The user shall provide adequate containment of all persistent or harmful waste products. The user shall protect the city sanitary sewer from intentional or unintentional discharges of non­approved/incompatible wastes. All points of entry to the sanitary sewer are subject to review and approval by the director. Potential points of entry of incompatible pollutants must be clearly labeled to warn against accidental discharge. The user shall immediately report any discharge of any incompatible pollutants to the sanitary sewer. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.735 Development of a slug/spill control plan.
     All users are required, when requested by the director, to develop and implement a slug/spill prevention plan. Each plan shall include as a minimum: discharge practices (including nonroutine batch discharges), guidelines for storage of chemicals, location of chemical storage, procedures to notify the POTW immediately of slug discharges, operation and maintenance procedures, general housekeeping practices, training programs, and other important information as required. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

Article 8. Sewer Connection, Lateral Maintenance and Backflow Protection
13.04.800 Service connections—Obligation to connect to city sewerage system.
     A.    New Developments or New Subdivisions. When approving a development or subdivision of property, each building permit or subdivision map improvement plan will contain provisions for connection to the sewerage system, unless the user requests and is granted a variance from the director in writing on a form provided by the director.

     B.     Existing Premises. The requirement to connect to the sewerage system may be waived for existing premises by the director, provided that the owner or occupant of such premises provides written documentation from the Contra Costa County health department that the existing premises’ system is functioning properly. If the premises’ system is not functioning properly, it shall not be eligible to receive a waiver and will be obligated to connect to the sewerage system. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.805 Lateral requirements.
     The minimum size of a lateral or building sewer shall be six inches in diameter. However, in any building designed or to be used exclusively for residential occupancy of six dwelling units or less, the minimum size shall be four inches in diameter. The director may order or authorize a different size of building sewer consistent with the California Plumbing Code as amended by this chapter. The requirements of this subsection shall not apply retroactively, but any replacement of an existing sewer shall conform to all current city codes, the Uniform Plumbing Code, and the California Plumbing Code.

     Cleanouts shall be installed within close proximity of the premises line, when required by the city, and also at the lower end of the building drain as required by plumbing codes, generally within two feet of the building foundation.

     All excavations for a lateral sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades or lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Any public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to a condition that is as good as or better than existed before the work began.

     All abandoned septic tanks and cesspools must immediately be filled with solid matter or substance which meets with the approval of the director.

     No building, industrial facility nor other structure shall be occupied or used until and unless the owner of the premises has complied with all applicable rules and regulations of this chapter.

     The requirements in this chapter are in addition to any applicable requirements of the Uniform Plumbing Code and the Standard Plans and Specifications. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.810 Sewer construction—Permit required.
     No person shall construct a building sewer or lateral sewer or make any connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer in the sewerage system or appurtenances or perform any work on any lateral or building sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the city community development department and paying all fees and connection charges.

     A person legally entitled to apply for and receive such a permit shall make application on forms provided by the city for that purpose. The applicant shall give a description of the character of the work to be done, and the location, ownership, occupancy, and use of the premises related to the work. The director may require plans, specifications, or drawings, and such other information as the director may deem necessary in their professional judgment.

     If the director determines that the plans, specifications, drawings, description, and information furnished in connection with the application are in compliance with this code and the ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the proposed work and installation, the director shall issue the permit upon payment of the required fees and charges. The director may attach conditions to the permit that are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter and the ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the proposed work and installation. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.815 Sewer construction—Inspection.
     All sewer construction work, building sewers, plumbing and drainage systems shall be inspected by an inspector authorized by the city to insure compliance with all city requirements. No sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and passed. No sewer shall be connected to the city’s sewerage system until the work encompassed within the applicable permit has been completed, inspected and approved by the city inspector. If the test proves satisfactory and the sewer has been cleaned of all debris accumulated from construction operations, the inspector shall issue a certificate of satisfactory completion.

     All building sewers and lateral sewers shall be tested in the presence of the city inspector by filling the line with water or air and inspecting for excessive leakage. Fittings, plugs, water, and labor for testing shall be furnished by the person constructing the sewer. If the existing lateral is to remain, it shall be tested as specified above. All lines showing excessive leakage shall be repaired or replaced at the sole expense of the person controlling the work to the satisfaction of the city inspector. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.820 Private sewer laterals and sewer overflows.
     Each residential premises owner will be required to pay a monthly fee for the maintenance, repair, and/or replacement of their lower lateral as set forth by resolution of the city council. The city will be responsible for the lower lateral so long as the lateral maintenance fee is paid.

     The city shall not be responsible for the maintenance of any lateral for any commercial user, industrial user, community, contractor, and/or institutional sewer service.

     Any person responsible for a sanitary sewer overflow shall be responsible to remedy the effects of such unauthorized discharge. When deemed necessary by the director, clean-up of the discharge or overflow may be initiated by the city. All costs associated with such clean-up shall be borne by the owner, user or other person responsible for the sanitary sewer overflow. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.825 Backflow protection required.
     Drainage piping or a drainage system serving fixtures which have flood level rims less than twelve inches (304.8 mm) above the elevation of the next upstream manhole and/or flushing inlet cover in the city sewerage system or private sewer system serving such drainage system shall be protected from backflow of sewage by installing an approved type backflow prevention device (BPD) or backwater valve as listed in city Standard Plans and Specifications SS-7 - Sewer Backflow Relief Devices. Fixtures above such elevation shall not discharge through the backwater valve, unless first approved by the director. BPDs are also required on all new building laterals and lateral replacements. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.830 Backflow protection device maintenance.
     All BPDs shall fully comply with all city requirements and shall be maintained by the user or premises owner to provide for their continuing function as designed. All BPDs and the box they may be located in shall be accessible at all times and shall be free from any obstructions, including, but not limited to, rocks, soil, vegetation, debris, grass, trees, bushes, plants, landscaping, concrete, asphalt or other ground coverings or any other materials or substances that may impair the proper function of or unobstructed accessibility to the devices. BPDs are subject to inspection by the city. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.835 Backflow prevention devices—Elevation requirements.
     All BPDs shall be installed at an elevation that protects the premises upon which it is installed and other property in its vicinity from damage. The premises owner shall either confirm that the BPD is properly installed and placed at the proper elevation, or obtain competent assistance from a duly licensed plumber or contractor to confirm its proper elevation. If any subsequent modification of the premises results in the BPD being at an improper elevation, the premises owner shall adjust the BPD to the proper elevation at the premises owner’s expense. The premises owner shall be responsible for any damage to property or injury to person that is sustained as a result of the improper installation or location of a BPD. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.840 Failure to follow backflow prevention device requirements.
     Any premises owner whose property has no BPD as required by this chapter or other law or regulation, or which has a defective or improperly installed BPD, or which has a BPD that does not comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter or with any standards adopted or utilized by the director shall be responsible for all damage that results from the lack of such a device, or the failure of the defective or improperly installed or non-compliant device to prevent or minimize such damage. The city will not be liable for damage resulting from sanitary sewer overflows when a BPD has not been installed or maintained as required by this chapter. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.845 Maintenance and operation of private sewer laterals.
     It is the responsibility of the premises owner to maintain the private sewer lateral. The operation and condition of private sewer laterals, their cleanouts and any other wastewater facilities required to serve a connector’s building, shall be the responsibility of the premises owner, who shall keep them in good operating condition at all times and shall undertake all necessary repairs, including replacement of dilapidated and worn out components, at the premises owner’s expense and at no cost to the city. All repairs to and replacements of private sewer laterals shall be performed in accordance with the city municipal code and the city’s Standard Plans and Specifications. Premises owners shall maintain private sewer laterals in a manner that prevents overflows. Upon receiving notice from the city, a premises owner(s) will have twenty-four hours to abate any condition that is causing a private sewer lateral overflow. Failure to abate a private sewer lateral overflow is considered to be a violation of city ordinances and regulations, and a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement or other remedies the city may have. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.850 City right of entry.
     It shall be a condition of continuing use and connection to the city sewerage system that the owner of a private sewer lateral allow the inspection and verification of the condition of the upper lateral or private sewer lateral (from the point of the exterior building drain or cleanout to the city sewerage system connection) and/or monitoring of the constituents of the wastewater discharge entering the sewerage system in the event that the director has a reasonable belief that the manner of connection to the sewerage system, the wastewater flow from the private premises, or the condition of the private sewer lateral is such that the sewerage system will be damaged, rendered inoperable, or caused to spill because of the private property condition or use. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

Article 9. Monitoring and Inspection
13.04.900 Sampling.
     Any user may be required to provide wastewater sampling and/or monitoring results or to submit to monitoring by the director to assist the director in establishing the appropriate class of the user and/or to evaluate compliance with the standards and requirements of this chapter.

     A.    Classification Sampling. All industrial users may be required to sample and analyze their waste stream(s) to determine the appropriate class of the user. Classification sampling shall be at the director’s request. The number and type of samples and pollutants analyzed shall be as specified by the director in order to adequately characterize the user’s wastewater discharge(s).

     B.     Baseline Sampling. All Class A and Class B industrial users shall sample and analyze their regulated waste stream(s) for the BMR as specified in Section 13.04.605(F). Samples shall be analyzed for those pollutants regulated under the applicable pretreatment requirement or as otherwise required by the director.

     C.     Periodic Compliance Sampling. All Class A and Class B industrial users shall sample and analyze their regulated waste stream(s) to evaluate compliance with the user’s permit or permit contract. Periodic compliance monitoring shall be conducted annually unless specified more frequently in the user’s permit or permit contract or in the applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard. If required, Class C industrial users shall sample and analyze their regulated waste stream(s) to evaluate compliance with the user’s permit.

     1.     Samples shall be analyzed for those pollutants regulated under the applicable pretreatment requirement or as otherwise required by the director.

     2.     Industrial users subject to a Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard may request to forgo monitoring for constituents with a Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard provided that the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2) are met.

     3.     For industrial users not subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the director shall specify the constituents to be monitored in the user’s permit or permit contract. This may exclude parameters subject to the standard specifications for wastewater discharge that are not expected to be present in the process discharge at levels of concern, and may include constituents that are not specified in the standard specifications for wastewater discharge.

     D.    Confirmation Sampling. Whenever sampling results indicate that the user’s regulated waste stream(s) is in violation of any pretreatment requirement, the user shall collect a second sample to assess the degree of violation. For the second sample, the user need only analyze for the pollutant(s) found to be in violation. The user shall provide the director with the results from the confirmation sampling within thirty days of the date the violation was discovered.

     E.     Sampling and Evaluation Program. If confirmation sampling indicates a second violation, the director may initiate a sampling and evaluation program (SEP). The SEP will be conducted by the director and may include collection of three to five samples. The SEP will establish whether there is continued noncompliance by the user. Samples collected during the SEP may be analyzed for other pollutants in addition to the pollutant(s) in violation. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.905 Sample collection.
     The collection of samples of wastewater for the measurement of constituents controlled by Sections 13.04.300 through 13.04.315 shall be at the combined facility discharge. The collection of samples of wastewater for the measurement of constituents controlled by Federal Pretreatment Standards are specified in the applicable Federal Regulation and may be at the discharge of the regulated process, or after pretreatment of federally regulated process flows, and prior to the addition of diluting waters. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.910 Self-monitoring.
     Where self-monitoring is required, such monitoring shall be provided by the user at the user’s expense, using an Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Program (ELAP) certified laboratory approved by the director to perform said analysis. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.915 Monitoring facilities.
     The director may require the user to construct, at the user’s own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems and may also require sampling or metering equipment to be provided, installed, and operated at the user’s expense. The monitoring facility should be situated on the user’s premises, but the director may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public right-of-way area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.

     In the event that a monitoring facility is allowed to be constructed in the public right-of-way, the user and its successors or assigns shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city against any claim, cause of action, disability, loss, liability, damage, cost or expense, which in any way arises out of the monitoring facility, or its use.

     If the monitoring facility is inside the user’s secured premises, there shall be accommodations to allow access for city personnel, such as a gate secured with a city lock. There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring facilities to allow accurate sampling. The monitoring facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.

     Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the director’s requirements and all applicable construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety days following written notification by the director that such monitoring facilities are required, unless a time extension is granted by the director.

     In the event that the installation of a monitoring facility is not practical, the director may approve an alternative point for sampling, monitoring or inspection.

     The director may require the user to upgrade or modify an existing monitoring facility. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.920 Inspection and sampling.
     The city may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain compliance with these regulations. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection or sampling in the performance of any of their duties. The city shall have the right to set up on the user’s premises such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force that would require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security personnel. Upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.925 Maintenance of monitoring records.
     The user shall retain all records for five years resulting from all sampling or monitoring performed for analyses of regulated contaminants. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the user or the wastewater treatment facility, or when requested by the POTW or the director. Records shall be available for inspection and copying. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.930 Test procedures.
     All sampling and analysis required under this chapter or the Act or in conjunction with a pretreatment permit shall be conducted using appropriate methods and procedures as outlined in 40 CFR Part 136 entitled, “Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants.” Under certain circumstances, 40 CFR Section 136.5 (see also 40 CFR Part 401.13) alternate test procedures may be used provided such procedures have been previously approved by the EPA Regional Administrator of the region in which the discharge will occur and provided the Executive Officer of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board does not object to the use of such alternate test procedure. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

Article 10. Enforcement
13.04.1000 Enforcement mechanisms.
     It is the intent of this enforcement section to provide adequate mechanisms to achieve a maximum degree of compliance with this chapter by all users. These enforcement provisions apply to all classes of users to the extent such user violates any provision of this chapter or administrative order of the city pursuant to this chapter. In order to achieve the maximum degree of compliance desired, the city will use a variety of enforcement mechanisms. The enforcement mechanisms set forth range from informal administrative action to formal criminal prosecution. The city may, in its discretion, implement the use of any mechanism or the concurrent use of several mechanisms in order to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The enforcement mechanisms provided herein may be cumulative in respect to such other enforcement mechanisms or civil and criminal penalties as may be otherwise available under the laws of the state of California and the United States of America.

     Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent state and/or federal regulatory agencies from undertaking enforcement actions as may otherwise be available due to a violation of this chapter which also constitutes a violation of federal or state statutes and regulations, such as: (1) the Clean Water Act (33 USC Section 1251, et seq.); (2) the California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Act (California Water Code Section 13000, et seq.); (3) the California Hazardous Waste Control Law (California Health and Safety Code Sections 25100 through 25250); (4) the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (42 USC Section 6901, et seq.); and (5) California Government Code Sections 54739 through 54740.6. The referenced state and federal laws, along with other pertinent laws, provide authority for the city’s enforcement mechanisms.

     The enforcement mechanisms available to the city for violations of the provisions of this chapter, applicable city resolutions, and permit or permit contract provisions include, but are not limited to, the following:

     A.    Informal administrative action (including NOVs and warning notices).

     B.     Administrative orders.

     C.     Institution of a SEP, enforcement compliance schedule agreements (ECSA), and related administrative orders.

     D.    Assessment of charges for obstruction or damage to the sewerage system or operations.

     E.     Suspension or termination of services.

     F.     Administrative citations as set forth in Chapter 1.12.

     G.    Administrative complaint.

     H.    Civil action.

     I.      Criminal action. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1005 Informal administrative actions.
     City staff may, on an informal basis, take action against a user for minor violations or technical or clerical shortcomings of a user or a user’s compliance submittals. These informal administrative actions may include informal notices (i.e., telephone calls to the user’s representative), a notice of violation (NOV), and informal meetings or informal warning letters. These informal administrative actions may establish an ECSA for the user to follow in order to document compliance. Such action will not prevent a subsequent or concurrent imposition of other enforcement mechanisms. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1010 Administrative orders and compliance schedules.
     When the director finds that a user has violated the prohibitions or requirements of this chapter or the provisions of a wastewater permit or wastewater discharge permit contract, the city may issue an administrative order directed at those users not complying with such prohibitions, limitations, requirements, or provisions to: (1) cease to discharge immediately (suspension of service); (2) comply with requirements immediately; or (3) make such changes to their pretreatment facility and procedures immediately as to insure full compliance.

     At its discretion, the city may later issue, after the issuance of the administrative order set forth above, an additional administrative order containing a compliance schedule or a time schedule setting forth dates by which specific corrective actions must be completed. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1015 Sampling and evaluation programs.
     A.    Grounds for Instituting a Sampling and Evaluation Program. In addition to those grounds set forth in Section 13.04.900(E), grounds for instituting a SEP include compliance sampling or city sampling indicating a significant noncompliance. The SEP may consist of city sampling of the user’s wastewater at the first opportunity convenient to the city. The city or outside laboratory will analyze these samples for the violating constituents and provide notice to the user in regard to the results of said sampling. Violations which may occur during the SEP shall constitute subsequent violations under this chapter or under any applicable law.

     B.     SEP Revealing Noncompliance. If the SEP reveals noncompliance by the user with the prohibitions or specific pollutant limitations specified in this chapter or in the user’s permit or permit contract:

     1.     The user may be assessed all costs incurred during the SEP for sampling and analysis, including labor, equipment, materials, outside services, and overhead.

     2.     The city may place the user on a compliance schedule or undertake another SEP. The compliance schedule shall provide for minimum required actions to be undertaken by the user to alleviate the violation and a schedule for completion of said actions. The compliance schedule may include interim constituent level maximums. All violations of constituent maximums or other requirements set forth in the compliance schedule, including failure to meet schedule dates shall constitute violations of this chapter and other applicable laws, and each day a user fails to meet a schedule date shall constitute a separate violation. Any constituent limit violation during the compliance schedule period shall provide grounds for the institution of an additional SEP.

     3.     The city may modify an existing permit through an enforcement compliance schedule agreement (ECSA). This may be done after consultation with the user when the user has shown good faith in trying to comply but requires additional time for construction and/or acquisition of equipment related to pretreatment. The permit may be modified with the ECSA for a period of up to one hundred eighty days; however, this period may be extended for a period not to exceed an additional one hundred eighty days upon determination by the director that good cause exists for an additional period.

     4.     Any other enforcement mechanism set forth in this chapter or other applicable law may be commenced.

     C.     Continued Noncompliance after SEP or ECSA. If a user remains in noncompliance because corrective action is not taken within a reasonable time after completion of an SEP or the expiration of an ECSA, an administrative order may be issued. Any of the other enforcement mechanisms set forth in this chapter or applicable laws may also be commenced. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1020 Assessment of charges for obstruction or damage to sewerage system or operations.
     When a user’s discharge, whether due to negligence, accident, spill, or otherwise, causes an obstruction, damage, or any other impairment to the city’s operation or facilities, the city may impose a charge on the user for the cost to clean or repair the facility; costs incurred to resume normal operations; and/or costs associated with the processing and collection of these costs. The total amount shall be paid within forty-five days of invoicing by the city. If it can be shown that the user’s discharge caused or significantly contributed to the city violating its discharge requirements, or incurring additional expenses or suffering loss or damage to the operation or facilities, then the user shall pay any costs or expenses, or a prorated portion of such expenses, including assessments or penalties imposed by other agencies or the court on the city. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1025 Suspension or termination of service.
     A.    Suspension of Service. The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater permit or permit contract by issuance of a cease and desist order when the city makes the determination that such suspension is necessary. A suspension shall be justified in order to prevent an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of individuals or the environment, causes or may cause interference to the wastewater treatment plant or other city operations, or causes or may cause the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Nothing in this subsection will limit the rights of the city to suspend or terminate service pursuant to specific permit or permit contract conditions which may be more stringent.

     Any industrial user notified of a suspension of service and/or the wastewater permit or permit contract shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the administrative order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the city’s facilities or endangerment to persons or the environment. The city may reinstate the wastewater permit, permit contract, and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the non-complying discharge.

     B.     Revocation of Permit/Termination of Permit Contract. Any user who violates the following conditions is subject to having its permit revoked or permit contract terminated:

     1.     Any user who knowingly gives or provides a false statement, representation, record, plan, or other document to the city or falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter;

     2.     Failure of a user to factually and completely report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;

     3.     Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;

     4.     Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;

     5.     Failure of a user to notify the city immediately of an accidental discharge and/or take appropriate corrective action to prevent a reoccurrence;

     6.     Failure of a user to file a periodic compliance report in such time and in such manner as is required by this chapter;

     7.     Significant violation(s) of the permit or permit contract requirements or conditions and/or violation of the chapter. Any violation of the discharge standards where a constituent concentration is determined to be five times the concentration standard set forth in the standard specifications for wastewater discharge limitations or any series of three or more violations of the same constituent within a one-year period, shall constitute a significant violation;

     8.     Failure to pay fees and charges or penalties established pursuant to this chapter.

     C.     Immediate Termination of Discharge. In the case of an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present an imminent danger to the health or welfare of persons, the environment, or the city or its employees or contractors, the city may, after reasonably attempting to informally notify the user, take all necessary steps to halt or prevent such discharge including, but not limited to, plugging or physically disconnecting the user’s access to the city wastewater system. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1030 Administrative complaint.
     In addition to the general penalty provisions of Chapter 1.08 and the administrative citation authority of Chapter 1.12, pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Sections 54739 and 54740.5 through 54740.6, the city or city staff may issue administrative complaints, conduct administrative hearings, and/or impose civil penalties in accordance with the procedures set forth in these sections for violation of the city’s requirements relating to pretreatment of industrial waste or the prevention of the entry of industrial waste into the sewerage system or treatment works.

     The penalties amounts for the following violations shall be set forth in the cost allocation plan:

     A.    Failing or refusing to furnish technical or monitoring reports.

     B.     Failing or refusing to timely comply with any compliance schedule established by the city.

     C.     For discharges in violation of any waste discharge limitation, permit condition, or requirement issued, reissued, or adopted by the city.

     D.    For discharges in violation of any suspension, cease and desist order, or other orders, or prohibition issued, reissued, or adopted by the city.

     Unless appealed pursuant to the appeal provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this code, orders setting administrative civil penalties shall become effective and final upon issuance thereof, and payment shall be made within thirty days. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1035 Civil action.
     The city may bring such civil actions as may be available at law or in equity in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to recover such charges, fees, penalties, and/or damages as may be assessed or may be incurred under the provisions of this chapter.

     A.    Injunction. Whenever a discharge or wastewater is in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the district may petition the Superior Court for issuance of a preliminary of permanent injunction, or both, as may be appropriate in restraining the continuance of such discharge.

     B.     Civil Actions for Penalties. Any user who violates any provision of this chapter, permit condition or permit contract condition, or who violated any cease and desist order, prohibition, or effluent limitation, shall be liable civilly for a penalty not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars for each day in which such violation occurs pursuant to California Government Code Section 54740. Pursuant to the authority of the Clean Water Act, 33 USCA Section 1251, et seq., any user committing a violation of any provision of this chapter, which is also a violation of a pretreatment standard, effluent standard, or limitation or other applicable provision of the Clean Water Act shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars per violation for each day in which such violation occurs.

     C.     Other Civil Actions. The city may require compliance with permit conditions or limitations by issuing administrative orders, including cease and desist orders and compliance schedules. Said orders are enforceable in a California court of general jurisdiction. The city, however, may directly undertake any court action available at law or equity, including, but not limited to, a civil action for penalties without first seeking an administrative order or making use of a compliance schedule, and it may concurrently undertake such administrative and court actions as deemed appropriate. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1040 Criminal action.
     A.    General Criminal Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, permit, or permit contract, or who violates any administrative order, prohibition, or effluent limitation, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is subject to the penalty provisions of Chapter 1.08.

     B.     Falsifying Information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or wastewater permit, wastewater discharge permit contract, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment for not more than thirty days, or both. Each separate act of falsification, tampering, or knowingly rendering inaccurate any device or method, shall constitute a new and separate offense and shall be subject to the penalties contained herein.

     Nothing in this section is intended to exclude the potential for prosecution under the applicable perjury statutes of the state of California to the extent such falsification was incorporated in a document signed under the penalty of perjury. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1045 Notification procedures.
     A.    Notification to User. Whenever the director finds that any user has violated or is violating the provisions of this chapter, a wastewater permit, wastewater discharge permit contract, or any prohibition, limitation, or requirements contained herein, the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty days of the date of this notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction of the violation shall be submitted to the city by the user.

     Whenever the city assesses a penalty or other form of enforcement action under the provisions of this chapter, the city shall serve upon such user a written notice stating the nature of the enforcement action being taken.

     B.     Notification to City. When a user discovers that it has violated or is violating a provision of this chapter, its wastewater discharge permit, its wastewater discharge permit contract, or any prohibition, limitation, or requirement contained therein, including a violation as may be caused by accidental discharge or spill, the user shall immediately notify the director upon discovery of such violation. Thereafter, within fifteen days following the accidental discharge or discovery of a violation, the user shall submit to the director a detailed, written report, describing the accidental discharge or violation, and the measures taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. This written report regarding the violation may be included as a part of a periodic compliance report, or other report as may be required under this chapter, as long as the written report is provided within the fifteen days of discovery, which notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, penalty, fee, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of the violation. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1050 Costs.
     In addition to all the enforcement mechanisms and penalties specified in this code or as may be set by city council resolution, including those contained in Section 1.08.010, for violations of any rule or regulation established in this chapter, the city may recover all costs incurred by the city in attending to the violation and require payment of all applicable fees in the cost allocation plan as well as legal fees and costs as set forth in Chapter 3.26.

     All costs associated with the city’s undertaking of enforcement actions pursuant to this chapter, including attorney’s fees for civil actions undertaken, shall be paid by the user. These costs may include, but not be limited to: the costs for termination of service; reinstitution of service; collections, per Council/Administration Policy 10-15, Collection Policy; compliance sampling and analysis; and administrative activities undertaken by the city. However, if the user prevails in an appeal to the city council or a civil action taken to nullify an enforcement action pursued by the city under this chapter, the user shall not be responsible for the costs incurred by the city in pursuing said enforcement action. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1055 Responding to significant noncompliance.
     Any violation of pretreatment requirements (limits, sampling, analysis, reporting and meeting compliance schedules, and regulatory deadlines) is an instance of noncompliance for which the industrial user is liable for enforcement including penalties. However, the city is required to identify violations or patterns of violations by industrial users that are deemed to be instances of significant noncompliance. To the extent that a violation or pattern of violations is determined to be significant noncompliance, the city shall give additional priority to enforcement actions with regard to that industrial user. Additionally, the determination of significant noncompliance shall be used as the basis for reporting same to the regulatory authorities and publishing of the list of significant non­compliers as is required of the city by law.

     For purposes of this provision, an industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:

     A.    Violations of Wastewater Discharge Limits.

     1.     Chronic Violations. Violations in which sixty-six percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1).

     2.     Technical Review Criteria Violations. Violations in which thirty-three percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).

     3.     Other Effluent Limit Violations. Any other violation of a pretreatment requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference (e.g., slug loads) or pass through (including adverse effect on any toxicity testing), or endangered the health of the sewage treatment plant personnel or the public.

     4.     Danger to Human Health or Welfare. This criterion includes any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment and has resulted in the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.

     B.     Violation of Compliance Milestones. Failure to meet, within ninety days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a city permit or administrative order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance.

     C.     Failure to provide, within forty-five days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules.

     D.    Failure to Accurately Report Noncompliance. Failure of a user to accurately and promptly report any noncompliance. Any attempt to circumvent the reporting requirements or otherwise withhold noncompliance data from the city shall be subject to significant noncompliance status.

     E.     Other Violations. Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, that the director determines may adversely affect its operations or the accomplishment of the objectives of this chapter. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1060 Appeal hearing request.
     Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation and request an appeal hearing pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

Article 11. Administration
13.04.1100 Wastewater charges and fees.
     All customers shall pay charges set forth in the cost allocation plan and the utility billing ordinance set forth in Chapter 3.26. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1105 Severability.
     If any provision of these regulations or the application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the regulations or the application of such provisions to other persons or other circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1110 Requirement of payment of user charges and fees.
     Every user shall pay to the city all charges and fees levied upon their connection to and use of the sanitary sewer in accordance with the city’s schedule of charges and fees as set forth in Chapter 3.26 and the cost allocation plan. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

13.04.1115 Non-payment of water service charges.
     If a customer fails to pay a utility bill pursuant to this code, the city may discontinue utility service and assess any late charges and penalties as set forth in Chapter 3.26 and the cost allocation plan. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1120 Public notification.
     The city will annually provide public notification, in a newspaper of general circulation, of all industrial users which, during the previous twelve months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

Article 12. Comments or Complaints About Sewer Service
13.04.1200 Service comments or complaints.
     A user may comment or complain about sewer service by writing, emailing or telephoning the city. The director will meet with the user in person or by telephone, at the user’s request, and endeavor to resolve the issue. The director will issue a decision on the issue in writing, which decision will be final unless appealed in writing to the city as set forth in Section 13.04.1225. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1210 Billing comments or complaints.
     A dispute over billing will be addressed through the procedures set forth in Chapter 3.26. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

 

13.04.1225 Appeals to city manager.
     A user may appeal a decision of the director in writing to the city manager within five days of receipt of the director’s decision. The written appeal must state the reason for the appeal and specify any facts or evidence in support of the request. The city manager or designee, who may be a city hearing officer, will promptly consider the appeal and provide a written decision within ten days of the filing of an appeal. The city manager’s determination will be final. (Ord. 941 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 13.06 RECYCLED WATER REGULATIONS
13.06.100 Authority.
     The use of water recycled from domestic sewage is regulated by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB). Article 2 of Chapter 7 of Division 7 of the use of recycled water is based on the city of Brentwood’s ability to adequately treat domestic wastewater to the point that the recycled water (effluent) meets the requirements of existing Title 22, Chapter 3 regulations of the California Code of Regulations. Title 22 was promulgated by the California Department of Health Services to ensure proper health protection and specify the treatment degree to match the intended applications.

     In accordance with waste discharge requirements for water reclamation projects, the RWQCB requires regulation measures for facilities distributing recycled water. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.105 Purpose.
     The purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter is to establish rules and regulations including procedures, specifications and limitations for the safe and orderly development and operation of recycled water facilities and systems within the city’s service area. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.110 Goals.
     The goals of this chapter are as follows:

     A.    Achieve conservation of potable water supplies by using recycled water for current and future irrigation demands. Recycled water uses shall be for the maximum public benefit and may include:

     1.     Agricultural irrigation;

     2.     Commercial uses (including flushing toilets and urinals);

     3.     Construction use;

     4.     Industrial processes;

     5.     Landscape irrigation;

     6.     Landscape and/or recreational impoundments;

     7.     Wildlife habitat.

     B.     Maintain recycled water quality through a stringent pretreatment program for commercial and industrial wastes.

 

     C.     Prevent direct human consumption of recycled water through:

     1.     Adherence to all applicable rules and regulations;

     2.     Posting of warning signs by the user;

     3.     Cross-connection/backflow prevention program;

     D.    Control run-off of recycled water through monitoring of the installation and operation of all recycled water facilities and use areas.

     E.     Monitor recycled water quality.

(Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.115 Policy.
     It is the policy of the city that recycled water be used for any purposes approved for recycled water use, when it is economically, technically and institutionally feasible. Recycled water shall be the primary source of supply for landscape irrigation, commercial and industrial uses, whenever available and/or feasible. Use of potable water for landscape irrigation, commercial and industrial uses shall be contrary to city policy; shall not be considered the most beneficial use of a natural resource; and shall be avoided to the maximum extent possible. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.120 Priority.
     Recycled water shall be provided on a first-come, first-served basis, as long as recycled water is available. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.125 Definitions.
     Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, in addition to the definitions set forth in Title 22, Division 4, Chapter 3, regulations of the California Code of Regulations, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.

     “AFY” means acre-feet per year.

     “Agricultural use” means water used for the production of crops and/or livestock.

     “Air-gap separation” means a physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, and in no case less than one inch.

     “Applicant” means any person, group, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or agency that applies for recycled water service.

     “Application rate” means the rate at which irrigation water is applied to a design or use area, expressed in gallons per minute.

     “Approved double check valve assembly” means an assembly of at least two independently acting check valves including tightly closing resilient seated (typ.) shut-off valves on each side of the check valve assembly and suitable leak-detector drains plus connections available for testing the water tightness of each check valve. This assembly shall only be used to protect a nonhealth hazard.

     “Approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device” means a device incorporating two check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, two (typ.) shut-off valves, and equipped with necessary appurtenances for testing. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between two check valves two psi less than the pressure on the city water supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the check valves shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain this reduced pressure by discharging to the atmosphere. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for maintenance and testing, and installed in a location where no part of the valve will be submerged.

     “Approved use” means an application of recycled water in a manner, and for a purpose, designated in a user permit issued by the city and in compliance with all applicable regulatory agency requirements.

     “Approved use area” means a site, with well-defined boundaries, designated in a permit for recycled water service issued by the city to receive recycled water for an approved use as acknowledged by all applicable regulatory agencies.

     “As-built drawings” means the record drawings that show the completed facilities as constructed or modified.

     “Automatic system” means the electrically actuated controllers, valves, and associated equipment used to program and operate irrigation systems for the efficient application of recycled water.

     “Auxiliary water supply” means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city’s potable water.

     “AWWA” means the American Water Works Association.

     “CDHS” means the California department of health services (state and/or county).

     “Check valve” means a check valve that seats readily and completely. It must be carefully machined to have free moving parts and assure water tightness. The face of the closure element and valve seat must be bronze or other noncorrodible material that will seat tightly under all prevailing conditions of field use. Pins and bushings shall be of bronze or other noncorrodible, nonsticking material. The closure element (e.g., clapper) shall be internally weighted or otherwise internally equipped to promote rapid and positive closure in all sizes where this feature is obtainable.

     “City council” means the city council of the city of Brentwood or their designee.

     “City engineer” means the city engineer, or engineer, in either case being the department or division head responsible for supervising engineer activities.

     “Commercial/industrial use” means the water used for toilets, urinals, decorative fountains, decorative indoor and outdoor landscape, industrial process such as rinsing, washing, cooling, flushing, circulation, or construction; and other uses approved by the city.

     “Commodity charge” means a charge imposed by the city for all metered, recycled water used.

     “Connection fee” means a fee imposed by the city for obtaining recycled water service from the city by means of its recycled water facilities, including, but not necessarily limited to, a service activation fee.

     “Cross-connection” means any unapproved and/or unprotected, actual or potential, connection between any part of a potable water system and any equipment, source, or system containing water or other substances not approved as safe and potable for human consumption.

     “Customer” means any person, group, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or agency that legally receives recycled water service from the city.

     “Design area” means a site, with well-defined boundaries, proposed to receive recycled water for an approved use, as delineated in the application for recycled water service.

     “Direct beneficial use” the use of recycled water, which has been transported from the point of production to the point of use, without an intervening discharge to waters of the state.

     “Director of public works” the director of public works or his/her designee in either case being the department or division head responsible for supervising operation and discharge of recycled water.

     “Discharge” means any release or distribution of recycled water to a use area or disposal site/mechanism (outfall, live stream discharge, municipal sewage system). All discharges of recycled water must be approved by the city.

     “Greenbelt areas” means those areas including, but not limited to, parkways, parks, rights-of-way, and landscaping within and/or surrounding a community.

     “Industrial process water” means the water used in industrial facilities for blending, rinsing, washing or cooling.

     “Infiltration rate” means the rate at which water penetrates the soil surface and enters the soil profile.

     “Landscape impoundment” means a body of water containing recycled water, which is used for aesthetic or irrigation purposes and which is not intended for public contact or ingestion.

     “Landscape irrigation/use” means recycled water used for the propagation and maintenance of trees, shrubs, ground cover and turf used for erosion control and aesthetic value, not for resale/profit purposes.

     “Nonpotable water” means water that has not been treated for, or is not acceptable for, human consumption, in conformance with federal, state and local water standards. Nonpotable water includes recycled water.

     “Off-site facilities” means all existing or proposed facilities under the control of the purveyor, from the source of supply to the point of connection with the customer’s on-site facilities, normally up to and including the agency’s meter and meter box.

     “On-site recycled water supervisor” means a qualified person designated by a recycled water user and trained by the city to be responsible for the safe and efficient operation of the user’s recycled water system. This person shall be knowledgeable in the operation of the recycled water system, and in the application of federal, state and local guidelines, criteria, standards and rules and regulations governing the use of recycled water.

     “Open space” means land that has been designated to remain undeveloped. These areas may receive recycled water service for agricultural or landscape irrigation, or other approved uses.

     “Permit” means a processed and approved application package to, and agreement with, the city for recycled water service.

     “POC” means the point of connection at the recycled water service meter.

     “Ponding” means the retention of recycled water on the ground surface or manmade surface for a period of time following the cessation of an approved recycled water use activity, such that potential hazard to the public health may result, as determined by regulatory agencies.

     “Potable water” means water which conforms to the latest federal, state and local drinking water standards.

     “PSI” means pounds per square inch. This is a common unit expression of pressure measurement.

     “Recycled water” means as defined in Title 22, Division 4, of the California Code of Regulations, water, which as a result of treatment of wastewater, is suitable for direct beneficial use or a controlled use that otherwise would not occur. The treatment of wastewater is accomplished in accordance with the criteria set forth in the code.

     “Recycled water facilities” means the systems, structures, and processes used in the treatment, storage, pumping, transmission and distribution of recycled water.

     “Recreational impoundment” means a body of recycled water used for recreational activities including, but not limited to, fishing, boating, and/or swimming. Allowable uses will depend on treatment level of the recycled water.

     “Regulatory agency” means those public entities legally constituted by federal, state and local statutes to protect health and water quality.

     “Runoff” means the flow of water along natural or manmade surfaces away from the designated use area.

     “RWQCB” means the Regional Water Quality Control Board.

     “Secondary effluent” means any wastewater that has been treated by gravity sedimentation to remove settled solids remaining after the primary biological treatment process.

     “Service” means the delivery of recycled water to a user.

     “Service connection” means city facilities between the city recycled water distribution system and the customer’s meter, including, but not limited to, the meter, meter box, valves, and piping equipment.

     “Standard specifications” means the specifications approved by the city for construction of recycled water facilities.

     “Tertiary effluent” means any secondary effluent which has been disinfected and filtered. Allowable uses for tertiary effluent shall include body contact and irrigation of human food crops.

     “Unauthorized discharge” means any release of recycled water that violates these rules and regulations or any applicable federal, state, or local statutes, regulations, ordinances, contracts or other requirements.

     “Use area” means the specific area designated to be served with recycled water through on-site recycled water facilities.

     “User” means any person, group, firm, partnership, corporation, association or agency accepting recycled water from the city’s recycled water facilities for use in accordance with this chapter. “Applicant,” “owner,” or “customer” are terms that are to be considered as users.

     “Windblown spray” means any dispersed, airborne particles of recycled water capable of being transmitted through the air to a location other than that for which the direct application of recycled water is approved. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.130 Administrator.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the director of public works or their designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The director of public works may, at his or her discretion, delegate any or all of these powers and duties. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.135 Validity.
     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter establishing rules and regulations for the use of recycled water is for any reason found to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have approved this chapter by section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the section, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.140 Right of revision.
     The city council reserves the right to amend this chapter, as it deems appropriate. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.145 Service area.
     The rules and regulations contained in this chapter apply to recycled water service to lands and/or improvements lying within the legal boundaries of the city, to properties contiguous to the city under the same ownership as abutting lands within the city or its designated service boundary. Recycled water service shall be provided to a specific service area when related distribution facilities are completed and service becomes available. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.150 Determination of recycled use area.
     A.    General.

     1.     The city council may adopt an engineering report for the production, distribution, and use of recycled water master plan designating current and potential areas for recycled water use. The master plan shall be in accordance with the requirements of all regulatory agencies and encourage recycled water use. The master plan may be reviewed and updated as needed.

     2.     The city council may review its master plan and recommend where water service should be made with recycled water in place of potable water. Where it is determined recycled water is, or will be available within five years, the city may request modifications to existing on-site water facilities and require construction of recycled water systems in new developments.

     3.     The city council may enter into agreements with surrounding cities and/or other agencies to determine recycled water use area within the service area/jurisdiction of those entities.

     B.     Existing Potable Water Service.

     1.     On adoption of this chapter, and each update of the city’s master plan, the city council may make determinations of areas where existing potable water use should be replaced with recycled water.

     2.     A notice of the determination to use recycled water shall be sent to the current owner, explaining the reasons for use and resultant procedures needed to facilitate recycled water use.

     C.     New Recycled Water Service.

     1.     On submittal by applicant of a tentative map, land use permit, other proposed land development/land use, or request for recycled water service, the city engineer shall make preliminary determinations if recycled water service should be provided to the area in question. The city engineer may require the use of recycled water for approved uses, and refuse or otherwise restrict potable water service when recycled water is available and approved for use. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.155 Authorized uses.
     In accordance with the goals as stated in this chapter, the uses of recycled water include only those uses approved by the California department of health services (CDHS) and for which Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations provides treatment requirements and is permitted by the city’s master reclamation permit. Each such use will be considered for approval on a case-by-case basis. Prior to approval, the director of public works may set forth specific requirements as conditions to providing service, and/or require specific prior approval from other appropriate regulatory agencies. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.160 Conditions of services.
     Recycled water service shall be provided by the director of public works only if a permit for such service is obtained in the manner provided in this chapter. Recycled water service shall be available, provided, and used in accordance with other codes, rules, and regulations as listed in Section 13.06.165.

     If any of the following conditions of service are not satisfied at all times, “Permit for Recycled Water Service” may be revoked by the director of public works after which all recycled water service shall cease in the manner described in this chapter.

     A.    Financial. Conditions relating to service fees and billing shall be similar, but not the same, as established for the potable water system. Rates for recycled water service shall be adopted by the city council as listed in Ordinance No. 782.

     B.     Operational.

     1.     Liability. The city shall not be liable for any damage by recycled water or resulting from:

     a.     Defective plumbing;

     b.     Broken or faulty services or recycled water mains;

     c.     On-site facilities failures;

     d.     High or low pressure conditions;

     e.     Interruptions of service.

     2.     Service Basis. All recycled water will be provided to the user in the conditions and quantity specified in the “Permit for Recycled Water Service.” Recycled water use will not be subject to the same restrictions as potable water during drought conditions and will be supplied as available.

     C.     Regulatory. Recycled water service may be terminated whenever the quality of the recycled water does not comply with the requirements of the regulatory agencies, and/or at any time the provisions of the chapter regarding the use of recycled water are violated. Or at any time that the permit conditions, whether contained in an agreement, are violated. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.165 Other applicable rules and codes.
     For regulations that are the same for potable and recycled water, use applicable regulations, or sections of already adopted potable water system regulations:

 

Item

Current Regulation

Backflow prevention:

CMC 14.01.410

Billing:

CMC 14.01.140

Deposits:

CMC 14.01.260

Penalties:

CMC 14.01.640

Delinquencies:

CMC 14.01.580

Metering:

CMC 14.01.240

 

     Other guidelines, rules and regulations, ordinances, specifications that may be applied by the city engineer and/or director of public works to govern the use of recycled water within the city include:

 

Agency/organization

Document #

Document Title

CDHS

Title 22, Division 4

Water reclamation

CDHS

Title 17

Regulations relating to cross-connections

California-Nevada Section AWWA

 

Guidelines for distribution of nonpotable water

Foundation for cross-connection

Most Current Ed.

Manual of Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, School of Engineering, University of Southern California

Regional Water Quality Control Board

TBD

Master Reclamation Permit

 

 

(Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.170 Permit application process.
     The steps for obtaining recycled water permits are as follows:

     A.    Obtain application form for recycled water service from the department of public works. By signing the application form, the applicant states that he or she agrees to comply with this chapter and any and all applicable governing documents.

     B.     Complete application package and submit to the public works department. The application package shall consist of:

     1.     Completed recycled water service application form;

     2.     Existing facility “as-built” drawings or proposed facility plans as appropriate;

     3.     Description of where and how recycled water use is proposed;

     4.     Any other information pertinent to the use of recycled water as requested by the city engineer.

     C.     The applicant may schedule an appointment with the director of public works to review the application packet. Subsequent to meeting, submit any additional information required.

     D.    Prepare “User Report” describing proposed/requested recycled water use(s). Submit “User Report” to the director of public works. As a minimum, the “User Report” shall consist of the following information:

     1.     Applicant’s relationship to the subject property as legal owner, tenant, or lessee;

     2.     Description of recycled water use on the property;

     3.     Legal description of property;

     4.     Technical information requested on Recycled Water Service application form;

     5.     Total irrigated acres (if applicable);

     6.     Special conditions (other items that could be of concern when using recycled water);

     7.     As-built/new drawings of the property, which are to include:

     a.     Locations of all service connections and waterlines (recycled, potable, any other auxiliary source),

     b.     Proposed size of recycled water service connection,

     c.     Areas to be served with recycled water and areas excluded from recycled water service;

     8.     A brief description of any/all special construction requirements.

     E.     The city engineer will review the “User Report.” The director of public works will inform applicant of any needed revisions.

     F.     If not identified in the CDHS approved engineering report for the production, distribution and use of recycled water the “User Report” approved by the director of public works will be forwarded to the CDHS for review and approval.

     G.    The director of public works and applicant will address any concerns that the CDHS has regarding the “User Report” and revise the report accordingly.

     H.    The director of public works will prepare a permit for recycled water service (see Section 13.06.175). Any auxiliary agreement between the city and the applicant, related to the permit for recycled water service, will be with the approval of the city council.

     I.      Applicant will pay any applicable fees.

     J.      The director of public works will schedule a start-up test of on-site recycled water system to ensure that cross-connections do not exist.

     K.    The director of public works will direct recycled water service valves to be turned on and service will begin. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.175 Permits.
     A city permit for recycled water service must be obtained by the user to receive recycled water on any property.

     Permits to receive recycle water service, or any connection for service made as provided in the permit issued under this chapter pursuant to receipt of an application for such service, shall be subject to the following conditions:

     A.    The applicant shall adhere to requirements prescribed by this chapter and to all additional requirements required by all governing agencies governing recycled water use.

     B.     The applicant shall pay any specified connection fees, service line charges and other charges prior to issuance of the permit.

     C.     In order to maintain acceptable operating conditions throughout the recycled water system, the director of public works may schedule recycled water use for specific applications. Such scheduling may involve programming deliveries to different users and/or to various portions of a single users on-site system. Any scheduling shall consider the operating constraints of the affected users.

     D.    The director of public works may temporarily terminate recycled water service at any time the recycled water produced by the city of Brentwood’s reclamation plant does not meet the requirements of the regulatory agencies. Recycled water service would, in such case, be restored when the recycled water meets the governing requirements. The city may provide water service from other approved sources. In addition, approved air gap separations may be modified (as approved) to provide potable water to the recycled water system to ensure water service.

     E.     The city will apply for and process all applicable regulatory agency permits. The cost and preparation of any study or report necessary to comply with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) or other regulatory requirements shall be the responsibility of the applicant, unless otherwise determined by the city council.

     F.     The use permit shall come into force after the project has been completely constructed, tested and been approved by the involved agencies.

     G.    A copy of the current “Permit for Recycled Water” must be available for review at all times, and on file at the user’s office.

     H.    As a minimum, the use permit shall include the following:

     1.     Name and address of owner and user;

     2.     Name of “on-site” supervisor, work phone number and after hours phone number;

     3.     A statement that no changes in the proposed system will be undertaken without application for and issuance of an amended permit;

     4.     A statement that the applicant recognizes potential penalties for violation of this chapter and any regulatory agencies;

     5.     A copy of the approved “User Report;”

     6.     Specific quantity of recycled water to be used. The following must be identified:

     a.     Estimated average annual AFY used;

     b.     Maximum GPM needed at the POC as shown on the plans.

     7.     Permitted/approved uses.

     I.      The use permit shall stay in effect as provided in the permit or related agreement, but shall be cancelled or amended if:

     1.     A change of ownership occurs;

     2.     A change in “on-site” supervisor occurs;

     3.     A change of recycled water use occurs;

     4.     A change in the piping system has been implemented without prior approval;

     5.     A violation of these rules and regulations occurs and results in a system turn-off. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.180 Rates, fees, charges and deposits.
     A.    General. All rates and fees regarding recycled water service and their administrative costs shall be fixed and established by the city council. The most current fee and rate schedules shall be established by ordinance of the city council and incorporated into this chapter. Any changes in fee and rate schedules shall be automatically adopted into this chapter.

     Applicants for recycled water service shall pay their fair share for the construction of facilities needed to deliver recycled water to the applicant’s property. All fees and estimated construction costs shall be paid prior to construction; however, the city may reimburse the applicant for a portion of the cost of such facilities as described in paragraph D “Financial Participation by City.”

     B.     Change of Rates or Charges. The city reserves the right to change the schedule of recycled water rates, service charges and any other charges, deposits, or fees at any time. These changes are subject to the terms of any existing “Permit for Recycled Water Service” (and/or agreements) and will be made by appropriate action of the city council.

     C.     Temporary Service. The recycled water rate for all water sold through temporary meters shall be established by action of the city council. The charges for recycled water sold through temporary meters shall be billed and paid on a monthly basis, or as otherwise determined by the city council.

     D.    Financial Participation by City. Under certain circumstances, the city may contribute to the cost of designing and/or constructing the facilities needed to deliver recycled water to an applicant’s property.

     Subject to the availability of funds, the city may:

     1.     Reimburse an applicant for costs incurred to install oversized facilities in the public right-of-way in accordance with the City’s Development Fee Program;

     2.     Elect to participate in or construct pipelines, reservoirs, pumping stations or other facilities, as it determines necessary, and/or as funds are available. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.185 Size, location, and installation of service line.
     The city reserves the right to determine the size and location and/or type of:

     A.    Recycled water service lines;

     B.     Service connections;

     C.     Meters;

     D.    Backflow protection devices when required and any/all other appurtenances included to the service area.

     Recycled water service lines shall be extended by the property owner/developer to a curb line or property line of the customer’s property, abutting on a public street, highway, road or city easement in which recycled water mains are installed. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.190 Service connection limitations.
     Permits for recycled water service shall be subject to the following conditions:

     A.    A recycled water service connection and its corresponding meter shall not be used to supply adjoining property of a different owner.

     B.     A service connection shall not be used to supply adjoining property of a different owner, or to supply property of same owner across a road, street or other public right-of-way. When a property provided with a recycled water connection and corresponding meter is subdivided, such connection and meter shall be considered as serving the lot or parcel of land on which the meter is located. Additional recycled water mains and/or recycled water service lines will be required for all subdivided areas in accordance with this chapter.

     C.     Private irrigation systems for homeowner’s associations and other developments where landscaping around homes and in common areas are served with one meter, shall not be allowed to cross public roads, easements, or other public right-of-way, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.

     D.    All recycled water used on any property where a meter is installed must pass through the meter. Customers shall be held responsible and charged for all recycled water passing through their meters.

     E.     Every recycled water service line installed by the city (or its agent) shall be equipped with a right angle valve (per city standard) on the inlet side of the meter. The right angle valve is to be used only by city personnel to control the recycled water supply through the water service line. If the right angle valve is damaged by the customer to an extent requiring replacement, then the customer shall bear full financial responsibility.

     F.     Service is commenced after issuance of a “Permit for Recycled Water Service” by the city. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.195 Service pressure.
     The city will make every reasonable effort to supply recycled water at a service pressure that is nearly equal to the potable water system pressure at the location of interest. If recycled water service pressure does not meet the needs of the user, then it shall be the user’s responsibility to increase or decrease the recycled water pressure on the user’s side of the recycled water meter. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.200 Relocation of recycled water service lines.
     Should a recycled water service line installed according to the directions of the applicant, owner, or customer (user) be of the wrong size, or installed at a wrong location or depth, the cost of relocation or removal shall be paid for by the user. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.205 Protective measures.
     The following provisions are intended to protect the city’s potable water supplies against actual, undiscovered, unauthorized, or potential cross-connections to the user’s recycled water system. These provisions are in addition to, not in lieu of, the controls and requirements of other regulatory agencies. These provisions are in accordance with Title 17 (Public Health) of the California Code of Regulations.

     Approved backflow prevention devices, on the city’s potable water services to the property, as required in these provisions, shall be provided, installed, tested, and maintained by the user at the user’s expense, unless otherwise determined by the director of public works. These devices shall be located on the property served immediately downstream of the meter. All devices shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and no device shall be submerged at any time.

     When a request for recycled water service is initiated, the applicant must provide sufficient information, including plumbing and building plans, to enable the city engineer, and other regulatory agencies to determine the level of backflow protection required. The proper backflow protection, as determined by the director of public works and other regulatory agencies, shall then be installed, inspected and tested before recycled water service is provided.

     Each time there is a change of customer (either owner or tenant) on any commercial or industrial premises, the owner or customer shall notify the director of public works within forty-eight hours by written notification. The director of public works will then reassess the level of protection required. In addition, any alterations to existing on-site facilities that may affect required protection level must be reported immediately to the director of public works.

     At their discretion, representatives of any health agency having jurisdiction, and the director of public works, may conduct surveys of any property where recycled water service is provided by the city. These surveys shall serve to determine if any actual or potential cross-connections exist. The applicant, owner, or customer shall provide full cooperation in facilitating these surveys.

     A.    Where protection is required:

     Approved backflow protection for potable water supplies shall be provided as follows:

     1.     Each city water service connection that supplies potable water to a premises having an auxiliary water supply (including recycled water) that is not accepted as potable source by the city engineer, and/or is not approved for potable use by the CDHS, shall be protected against backflow from the premises into the city’s potable water system.

     2.     Each city water service connection supplying potable or recycled water to a premises on which any substance is handled in such a fashion as to permit entry into the city water systems (potable or recycled) from the premises shall be protected against backflow. This shall include, but not be limited to, the handling of fertilizers, process waters, and agricultural use.

     3.     Approved backflow devices shall be installed where premises have intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where not all portions of the premises are readily accessible for inspection.

     4.     Appropriate backflow protection may be required at premises where there has been a history of cross-connections being re-established.

     B.     Other Measures.

     1.     Whenever possible, the city will operate the recycled water system at a slightly lower pressure than the potable water system. This will cause potable water to flow in the recycled water system in the event of a cross-connection.

     2.     Water meters used for recycled water service shall be tagged or color-coded, or otherwise distinguished as such per AWWA standards. These meters shall not be interchanged or used for potable water service after repairs and/or meter testing have been performed.

     3.     Periodic inspection, by the city, of the recycled water facilities will determine if all identifying items are still clearly discernable. If not, they shall be replaced, repaired or refurbished as needed, by the user. These items include:

     a.     Warning tags;

     b.     Painted surfaces;

     c.     Warning tape;

     d.     Identification tape;

     e.     Covers, caps, signs;

     f.      Other items that indicate recycled water is being used.

     4.     To determine the existence of any cross-connections or backflow conditions into the potable water system, periodic testing using the CDHS approved methods will be performed by the department of public works and/or other regulatory agencies as required.

     5.     In the event of contamination or pollution of a city potable water system due to a cross-connection or other failure, the director of public works and the CDHS, shall be promptly notified, so that appropriate and immediate measures may be taken to correct the problem.

     6.     The CDHS, county health department, and the director of public works, shall be kept informed by written document of the identity of the person responsible for the recycled water system on all premises concerned with these rules and regulations. At each authorized use area, an “On-Site” recycled water supervisor shall be designated. This supervisor shall be responsible for:

     a.     The installation and use of all components of the on-site recycled water system(s);

     b.     Prevention of cross-connections;

     c.     Change in use of recycled water.

     C.     Recycled Water Service Termination Due to Health and Safety Concerns. When the director of public works determines that recycled water uses or conditions encountered by the department of public works represent a clear and immediate hazard to the city potable and/or recycled water supply that cannot be immediately removed or corrected, the director of public works shall begin the procedure for terminating recycled water use. Conditions or uses that create a basis for termination include, but are not limited to:

     1.     Refusal to install when required a backflow prevention device;

     2.     Refusal to test a backflow prevention device.

     3.     Refusal to repair or replace a faulty backflow prevention device;

     4.     Direct or indirect connection between the potable and recycled water systems;

     5.     Direct or indirect connection between the recycled water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants;

     6.     A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the city’s potable and/or recycled water system, as determined by the director of public works, or other regulatory agencies. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.210 Type of protection.
     The level of protection required shall be related to the degree of potential hazard that exists on the premises served, and will be determined by the director of public works. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.215 Inspection and maintenance of protective devices.
     The user is responsible for inspection and testing of all backflow prevention devices at least once a year, or more often in those instances where successive inspections indicate repeated failure. All inspections and tests shall be performed at the user’s expense by a city approved testing firm. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled and/or replaced at the expense of the user whenever they are found to be defective. These devices shall also be tested immediately after they are installed, relocated or repaired. The user shall maintain records of all such test, repairs and overhauls. These records shall be made available to the CDHS and city staff, on request, and submitted to the director of public works or designee, annually. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.220 Facilities design.
     The design of off-site facilities, including the preparation of plans and construction specifications shall be under the responsibility of an engineer registered in the state of California. The design of customer (on-site) facilities that will use recycled water, and preparations of plans and construction specifications, shall be stamped and signed by a state of California registered landscape architect or civil engineer, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.

     Before the city engineer grants final acceptance of any system using recycled water, as-built drawings of the system shall be provided. The installed system shall be tested in accordance with the city standard plans and specifications to ensure that the system is in full compliance with these rules and regulations.

     A.    General.

     1.     All off-site and on-site recycled water facilities shall be designed and constructed according to the requirements, conditions, and standards as adopted in the city standard plans and specifications to ensure that this system is in full compliance with this chapter. Recycled water systems, both on-site and off-site, shall be separate and independent of any potable water systems.

     2.     Where the premises contain dual or multiple water systems, the exposed portions of pipelines shall be identified at sufficient intervals to distinguish clearly which water is not safe for drinking purposes.

     3.     Areas irrigated with recycled water must be kept completely separated from domestic water wells and reservoirs. Recycled water shall not be applied or allowed to migrate to within fifty feet of any well used for domestic supply, and no impoundment of recycled water shall be located within one hundred feet of any domestic water well, unless it can be demonstrated that special circumstances justify lesser distances to be acceptable.

     4.     Adequate means of notification should be provided to inform the public, employees and others that recycled water is being used. Conspicuous signs with appropriate wording that can be clearly read, should be placed at adequate intervals around the authorized use are.

     a.     All users will provide appropriate notifications and signage indicating recycled water is being used.

     b.     Languages in addition to English should be used on signs where appropriate.

     B.     Off-site Facilities. Any off-site recycled water distribution facilities required to serve existing or new developments of the property within the city, as determined by the city engineer, shall be provided by the applicant, owner, or customer at their expense, unless the city engineer determines it is a city benefit to construct these capital facilities.

     Plans and specifications for all recycled water distribution facilities shall be submitted to and approved by the city engineer, and other regulatory agencies, in advance of construction.

     The city will assume responsibility for providing recycled water service to the point of connection of such development on transfer, to the city, title to all off-site recycled water systems and any necessary easements. All easements shall be in a form acceptable to the city engineer, and not subject to outstanding obligations to relocate such facilities or any deeds of trust, except in instances where such is determined by the city engineer to be in the best interest of the city.

     The property owner, proponent, or developer may request that the city enter into a reimbursement agreement for the portions of a recycled water system that are required to be oversized (considering standard sizes of materials and city standards) with capacity to supply more recycled water than the property owner, proponent or developer requires. Or for certain items that would not be required if potable water were to be used in place of recycled water. The determination to enter into a reimbursement agreement, and the specific items that are the subject of reimbursement, will be made by the city and shall be in accordance with the city’s development fee program.

     C.     On-site Facilities. Any on-site recycled water facility shall be provided by the applicant, owner, or customer at his or her expense. The applicant, owner or customer shall retain title to all on-site facilities unless determined otherwise by the director of public works.

     When this chapter and/or standard specifications require a higher quality material, equipment, design or construction method than that required by the other governing codes, rules and regulations, the city plans and specifications shall take precedence.

     D.    Interim Service. In areas where recycled water is not immediately available when the use area is ready for construction, and if the city has determined that recycled water will be supplied in the future, on-site facilities shall be designed to use recycled water. Provisions shall be made, and this chapter followed, to allow for connection to the city off-site recycled water facilities, when available. In the interim, potable or other suitable water may be supplied to the on-site facilities through an “interim service connection.”

     1.     Conditions of interim service are:

     a.     The city anticipates recycled water will be available to the site within five years of the time interim service is initiated.

     b.     The applicant must obtain a “Permit for Recycled Water Service.”

     c.     The applicant must agree to perform or pay for all work necessary to remove the interim connection and make connections to the permanent recycled water system at the time the recycled water system is installed.

     2.     An approved backflow prevention device is required on the interim service. The backflow prevention device shall be at the point of connection with the interim supply system and a part of the on-site recycled water facilities.

     3.     Future recycled water customers will pay for the following:

     a.     Cost of constructing and abandoning the interim service, and cost of constructing the recycled water service;

     b.     Applicable recycled water fees at the time service becomes available;

     c.     Applicable interim water rates for the type of water delivered through the interim service.

     4.     When recycled water is available to the site, an inspection of the on-site facilities will be conducted by the director of public works to verify that the facilities have been adequately maintained and are still in compliance with the “Permit for Recycled Water.” Recycled water service shall be provided on verification of compliance. If the facilities are not in compliance, the director of public works shall notify the user to correct the situation before service is reestablished. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.225 Construction.
     A.    New. Construction of all recycled water facilities will follow the city standard plans and specifications, unless otherwise specified by the city engineer.

     B.     Conversion to Recycled Water Use. Where it is planned that an existing nonrecycled water system be converted to a recycled water facility, the facilities to be converted to recycled water shall be investigated in detail at the user’s expense, unless otherwise determined by the city engineer. On a case-by-case basis, the city engineer and other regulatory agencies will review the materials, specified in Section 13.06.170, deemed necessary to determine the measures required to bring the system into full compliance with this chapter. No existing potable water facilities shall be connected to or incorporated into the recycled water system without city and other regulatory agency approvals.

     C.     Conversion from Recycled Water Use. If, due to on-site failure of the recycled water system or use violations, the city and/or other regulatory agencies determine it possible and necessary to convert on-site facilities from a recycled water supply to a potable, or other, water supply, it shall be the responsibility of the user to pay all cost for such conversion, unless determined otherwise by the city engineer. Conversion costs may include, but not limited to, the following:

     1.     Isolation of the Recycled Water Supply. Service shall be removed and plugged at the city main or abandoned in a manner approved by the city engineer;

     2.     Installation of approved backflow prevention devices, as determined by the city engineer and other regulatory agencies. The user shall install approved backflow devices on all potable, and/or other water meter connections;

     3.     Removal of any/all special recycled water quick couplers. The user shall be responsible for replacement with quick couplers approved for potable water systems;

     4.     Notification to all on-site personnel involved;

     5.     Removal of all warning labels/signs;

     6.     Installation of any/all potable water facilities and payment of any associated capacity fees, as provided for in the city water service code;

     7.     System flushing, disinfecting, decontamination, and water quality analyses, as required by the city and/or other regulatory agencies. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.230 Emergency connection of the recycled water system to the potable water system.
     If the director of public works determines an emergency exists where all or parts of the recycled water system are unable to provide recycled water, the director of public works may approve an emergency temporary connection to the potable water system. Before such emergency temporary connection is made, the portion without recycled water shall be isolated by an air gap separation from the remainder of the recycled water system. This isolation shall occur at either individual services or on the off-site system, as determined by the director of public works or other regulatory agencies. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on the potable water lines in accordance with this chapter and all other applicable regulations of the governing agencies. The emergency temporary connection shall be removed before connection to the recycled water system is reestablished. Reestablishment of recycled water service must be inspected and approved by the director of public works prior to resuming delivery of recycled water. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.235 Off-site facilities.
     Operation, maintenance and surveillance of all city off-site recycled water systems including but not limited to, recycled water pipelines, valves, connections, storage facilities, and other related equipment and property up to and including the meter, shall be under the management and control of the city. No other persons except authorized representatives of the city shall have the right to enter any of the city off-site facilities. Only city personnel and their representatives shall operate, adjust, change, alter, move or relocate any portion of the off-site recycled water system. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.240 On-site facilities.
     A.    General.

     1.     The operation, surveillance, repair, and maintenance of all customer recycled water facilities are the responsibility of the user. The user’s designated “on-site” recycled water supervisor shall bear this responsibility.

     2.     The director of public works or will monitor and inspect all on-site recycled water facilities and associated records, and for these purposes will have the right to enter the user’s premises. Where necessary, keys and/or lock combinations shall be issued to the director of public works to provide such access during hours of recycled water system operation. Monitor and inspection includes documenting inspection observations by photograph and copying of records.

     B.     The user shall have the following responsibilities pertaining to operation of on-site facilities:

     1.     To ensure that all operations personnel are trained and familiarized with the use of recycled water. This training will be documented in writing;

     2.     To furnish their operations personnel with maintenance instructions, irrigation schedules, controller charts, and as-built drawings to ensure proper operation in accordance with the on-site facilities design and these rules and regulations;

     3.     To prepare and submit to the director of public works one reproducible set of as-built drawings;

     4.     To notify the director of public works of all updates or proposed changes, modifications, or additions to the on-site facilities and operations. All updates and proposed changes must be approved by the director of public works and/or city engineer prior to construction or implementation. All updates and proposed changes shall comply with this chapter and governing documents of all other regulatory agencies;

     5.     To ensure that the operation and maintenance of all recycled water facilities remain in accordance with this chapter and other documents governing recycled water systems within the city;

     6.     To operate and control the system in order to prevent direct human consumption of recycled water and to control and limit runoff. The applicant, owner, or customer shall be responsible for any and all subsequent uses of the recycled water. Operation and control measures to be utilized in this regard shall include where appropriate, but not limited to:

     a.     On-site recycled water facilities shall be operated to prevent or minimize discharge onto areas not under control of the customer so as to minimize public contact.

     b.     The operation of the on-site recycled water facilities shall be during periods of minimal human use of the service area. Consideration shall be given to allow a maximum dry-out time before the irrigated area will be used by the public. For agricultural operations, the soil moisture reservoir shall be depleted (dried) by at least thirty percent before harvest.

     c.     Adequate first aid kits should be available on the premises. All cuts and abrasions should be promptly treated to prevent infection. If infection is likely, a physician should be consulted.

     d.     Recycled water shall be applied at a rate that does not exceed the infiltration rate of the soil. Where varying soil types are present, the design and operation of the recycled water facilities shall be compatible with the lowest infiltration rate of the soils present.

     e.     When the application rate exceeds the soil infiltration rate, automatic controller systems shall be utilized to minimize ponding and runoff of recycled water. Total sprinkler run times shall not be greater than the time needed to supply the landscape’s water requirement. If runoff occurs before the landscape’s water requirements are met the automatic controllers shall be reprogrammed with additional watering cycles of shorter duration to meet the requirements. This method of operation is intended to control and limit runoff.

     f.      The user shall report immediately to the director of public works all failures in the recycled water system that cause an unauthorized discharge of recycled water.

     g.     All drinking fountains located within the approved use area, designated by the user permit, shall be protected by location and/or a structure from contact with recycled water to the maximum extent possible. Windblown spray, direct application through irrigation or other approved uses are considered sources of recycled water. Protection shall be by design, construction practice, or system operation.

     h.     Facilities that may be used by the public, including but not limited to, eating surfaces and playground equipment and located within the approved use areas designated by the user permit, shall be protected by seating and/or structure from contact with recycled water to the maximum extent possible. Windblown spray, direct contact by irrigation application, or other approved uses are considered sources of recycled water. Protection shall be by design, construction practice, or system operation.

     C.     The user shall enforce the following prohibitions:

     1.     Cross-connections. Cross-connections, as defined by the California Code of Regulations, Title 17, resulting from the use of recycled water or from the physical presence of a recycled water service, whether by design, construction practice, or system operation, are prohibited.

     2.     Discharge in Unapproved Areas. Discharge of recycled water for any purposes, in areas other than those specifically approved in the currently effective user permit issued by the director of public works, and without the prior knowledge and approval of the governing regulatory agencies, is prohibited.

     3.     Ponding. Conditions that directly or indirectly cause recycled water to pond either within or outside of the approved use area, whether by design, construction practice, or system operation are prohibited, unless designed specifically for ponding and approved by regulatory agencies.

     4.     Runoff. Conditions that directly or indirectly cause runoff of recycled water onto areas outside of approved use areas, whether by design, construction practice, or system operation, are prohibited.

     5.     Unapproved Uses. Use of recycled water for any purposes other than those specifically approved, in the currently effective user permit issued by the director of public works, and without the prior knowledge and approval of the governing regulatory agencies, is prohibited.

     6.     Windblown Spray. Conditions that directly or indirectly permit windblown spray to pass outside of the approved use are, whether by design, construction practice, or system operation, are prohibited. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.245 Monitoring and inspection.
     The director of public works will monitor and inspect the entire recycled distribution facility, including both off-site and on-site facilities. The director of public works will conduct monitoring programs, maintain records as deemed necessary, inspect on-site facilities for compliance with these rules and regulations, and provide reports as requested by the regulating agencies. For these purposes, the director of public works will have the right to enter the customer’s premises during hours of recycled water system operation to inspect on-site recycled water facilities and approved use areas, and to verify that the customer’s irrigation practices conform with this chapter. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

 

13.06.250 Maintenance responsibility.
     A.    Recycled Water System. The applicant, owner, or customer is responsible for maintaining all on-site facilities that are under the ownership of parties other than the city.

     B.     Obstruction in Meter Boxes. No person shall place, dispose, deposit or permit the placement, disposal, deposit of oil, toxic, hazardous or contaminated liquid or waste, trash, soil, building materials or other substances, objects, or obstructions in, on, or around meter boxes or other city facilities. No person shall allow or permit meter boxes or other city facilities from becoming obstructed or obscured by trees, shrubs, plants or in any other manner so as to impede their use or access to them to make their location difficult to determine. If such substances, objects, or obstructions are not cleaned and removed or are permitted to obscure or impede use or access to such facilities, the city may accomplish the cleaning and removal at the user’s expense. The director of public works will provide reasonable notice to the user before assessing the charge. (Ord. 784 § 1, 2004)

Title 14 WATER
Chapter 14.01 MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM
Chapter 14.10 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
Chapter 14.20 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL

Chapter 14.01 MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM
Article 1. Purpose of Chapter
14.01.100 Purpose and policy.
     The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations to govern the general operation of the city’s water system to provide an efficient and economical water supply.

     The city council has the power to adopt by resolution administrative policy and a cost allocation plan which will further the purpose of this chapter, and which do not conflict with the provisions herein. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.110 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion will be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding will not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

Article 2. Definitions
14.01.200 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases will have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

     Administrative policy: Rules and policies contained in resolutions adopted by the city council which, in addition to the provisions of this chapter, govern the operation of the water system.

     Applicant: A person, business, or authorized agent thereof applying for water service, water service connection, or water main extension.

     City: The city of Brentwood, a municipal corporation, and its duly authorized representatives.

     Cost allocation plan: A report that presents the analysis of computing overhead charges for citywide and department specific programs, as well as specific user fees and charges. It includes the schedule of all such fees. The cost allocation plan is approved by resolution of the city council.

     Cross-connection: Any unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover assemblies, or other assemblies through which backflow could occur, will be considered to be cross-connections.

     Customer: A person, business, or other entity supplied or entitled to be supplied with water service by the city.

     Director of finance and information systems: The person holding this position in the city.

     Director of public works: The person holding this position in the city.

     Fire chief: The chief officer of the applicable fire service provider.

     Main extension: The addition of mains beyond existing facilities, up to, but not including service connections.

     Mains: The transmission or distribution pipe lines of the water system.

     Meter: The city’s approved measuring device, installed for, and owned by the city, which is used for the purpose of accurately recording the consumption of water used by customers.

     Premises: A lot or parcel of real property under one ownership, except where there are well-defined boundaries such as walls, fences or hedges, which prevent the common use of the property by all occupants, in which case each portion will be deemed separate premises. Apartment houses and office buildings and structures of like nature may be classified as single premises.

     Private fire protection service: Water service and facilities for sprinkler systems, hydrants, hose reels and other facilities installed on private property for fire protection.

     Public fire protection service: A duly organized public authority of the state of California that provides fire protection services.

     Service connection: The city’s facilities that connect with the customer’s facilities. In general, the service connection includes the pipeline laid from the main extension to the property or curb line, up to and including the meter box, meter, and associated fittings. The service connection does not include equipment that is the responsibility of the customer, such as the pipeline from the meter box, control valve and other necessary or required fittings to provide water to the premises from the meter box.

     Standard plans and specifications: A set of standard public works specifications for construction, alteration or repair of facilities within or connected to the city’s water system, as amended from time to time by the city.

     Temporary water permit: The permit required of anyone using water for construction or other temporary purposes.

     Water system: The services, facilities and available water furnished or made available by the city for domestic, commercial, and industrial purposes. Water system includes all appurtenances, lands, public utility easements, rights in land, water rights, contract rights, franchises, water mains, pumping stations, pumps, valves, hydrants, storage tanks, water supply distribution facilities and all other equipment owned by the city. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

Article 3. General Rules and Regulations for the Construction and Use of the Water System
14.01.300 Purpose.
     This article is intended to provide rules and regulations for the construction and use of the water system, including installation, alteration, and repair of facilities within or connecting to the water system. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.305 Water system.
     The city will furnish a water system for obtaining, conserving and distributing water for public and private uses. The delivery of water will be made subject to any terms and conditions established by the city council and in accordance with California law.

     A.    Supply. The city will endeavor to furnish each customer, so far as is reasonably possible, but cannot guarantee, a continuous, safe and potable supply of water at a reasonable pressure at the city’s water meter, and will endeavor to avoid any shortage or interruption in water service. In the event that the city is unable to provide satisfactory water service by reason of insufficient or high pressure, inadequate volume of water, or intermittent supply, the city will not be liable to any consumer for any damage or inconvenience that may occur as a result thereof.

     B.     Continuity of Service.

     1.     Emergency Interruptions. The city reserves the right to implement temporary emergency shut downs of or interruptions in the water system due to operational difficulties, natural catastrophes, and other causes which may prevent the provision of water service. The city will not be liable for any loss or damage resulting from or arising out of such interruption. The city will make all reasonable efforts to prevent interruptions in service and when such interruptions occur will make every effort to reestablish service with the shortest possible delay consistent with the safety of the water system, its customers and the general public. Where an emergency interruption in service may affect a public or private fire protection service the city will notify the fire protection agency or the affected property owner of the interruption and of the subsequent restoration of service.

     2.     Scheduled Interruptions. The city, whenever it may find it necessary or convenient for the purpose of making repairs or improvements to the water system, reserves the right to implement temporary suspensions or scheduled interruptions in water service, and it will not be liable for any loss or damage resulting from or arising out of such interruption. Whenever the city finds it necessary to schedule an interruption in water service, it will, when possible, notify those customers affected by the interruption, giving the approximate time and anticipated duration of the interruption. Scheduled interruptions will be made at such hours as will provide the least inconvenience to the customers consistent with reasonable operations. Repairs or improvements will be implemented as rapidly as practicable. Where a scheduled interruption in service may affect a public or private fire protection system, the city will notify the fire protection agency or affected property owner of the interruption and of the subsequent restoration of service.

     The city will not be liable to any customer for damages resulting from any interruption of service or for damage caused by faucets, valves, or other equipment or fixtures that are open for any reason when water is turned on at the meter, either originally or after a temporary interruption.

     C.     Pressure Conditions. In the installation of all new water mains, the city will endeavor to maintain normal operating pressures of not less than twenty pounds per square inch (psi) nor more than one hundred twenty-five psi at the service connection. Notwithstanding normal operating pressures, during periods of hourly maximum demand at peak seasonal loads and periods of hourly minimum demand, pressures of forty psi and eighty psi, respectively, will be considered reasonable. All applicants for service connections or water service will be required to accept such conditions of pressure and service as are provided by the distribution system at the location of the proposed service connection, and to hold the city harmless for any damages, injuries, or losses arising out of low pressure or high pressure conditions or interruptions in service.

     Customers are responsible for installation and maintenance of privately owned pressure regulators or other devices as may be required. In accordance with the California Plumbing Code, individual pressure reducing valves are required to be installed and maintained by the owner whenever static water pressure exceeds eighty psi.

     The city may adjust pressures as the need arises in its sole discretion.

     D.    Quality of Water. The city will endeavor to supply safe and potable water at all times; provided, however, that the city specifically disclaims and gives no warranty, express or implied, as to merchantability, fitness for purpose, chemical composition, quality, or any other matter, of water supplied. The city assumes no responsibility for loss or damage, including, but not limited to, personal injury, wrongful death, damage to real or personal property, or loss of profits, because of the lack of merchantability, fitness for purpose, chemical composition or quality of water supplied. The city will not be responsible for any loss or damage arising from leaks, breaks or corrosion in or to city facilities or non-city facilities as a result of the quality of water supplied.

     E.     Resale or Redistribution of Water. It is unlawful for any person or entity other than the city to resell or redistribute water within the corporate limits of the city without having first received permission to do so from the city council. Bottled water and vending machines are exempted from this provision. Except by special agreement with the city, no customer will resell any of the water supplied by the city, nor will the city furnish water to premises other than those specified in an application for service. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.310 Customer’s equipment.
     The customer will, at customer’s own risk and expense, furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition all equipment that may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing water, and the city will not be responsible for any loss or damage caused by the improper installation of such water equipment, or the negligence, want of proper maintenance or wrongful act of the customer or of any of customer’s tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees, or permittees in installing, maintaining, using, operating, or interfering with such equipment. The city will not be responsible for damage to property caused by faucets, valves, or other equipment or fixtures that are open for any reason when water is turned on at the meter, either originally or after a temporary interruption. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.315 Customer’s liability for damage to city’s property.
     No person will break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, connect to, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment, which is a part of the water system. Persons causing damage to, or tampering with, city property will be responsible for payment of costs incurred, and any and all penalties as prescribed by law.

     No person except an authorized city employee or its agent will, at any time or in any manner, operate or interfere with the water system, including, but not limited to, opening or closing any valve, or tapping on any of the water pipes of the main line or distribution system, or inserting tees, stopcocks or ferrules therein. The customer will be liable for any damage to the city’s facilities caused by an act or failure to act of the customer or customer’s tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees, permittees, guests, or invitees. Such damage may include, but is not limited to damage to a meter or curb stop or destruction of locks on or near a meter. If repair or replacement is required, as determined by the director of public works or designee, the customer will be assessed by the city for the total cost of such repair or replacement, including all costs of equipment, materials and labor; labor rates charged will be as set forth in the cost allocation plan. This charge will appear on the customer’s utility bill and if unpaid, will subject the customer to service disconnect pursuant to Chapter 3.26. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.320 Damage to customer’s property.
     The city will not be liable for damage to property occasioned by water running from open or faulty piping or fixtures on the customer’s property. Customers who request activation of a service will be responsible for damage resulting from such activation due to open or faulty piping and/or fixtures on the customer’s property. The city may, at its discretion, opt to return the water service to a shut-off condition if there is indication of running water on the customer’s property at the time of service activation. When this occurs, the city will endeavor to leave notice of explanation for the customer. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.325 Right of entry to customer’s premises.
     Unless prohibited by law, authorized city representatives will at all reasonable times have the right to enter or leave the customer’s premises for any purpose reasonably connected with service to the customer, or at any time in emergency situations needed to protect the integrity or quality of the water system. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.330 Authorization and fees.
     No connection to the water system will be installed, altered, or repaired without authorization from the city and the payment of all fees required in the cost allocation plan, plus any special costs for work incurred by city as set forth in this chapter or in a separate resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.335 Notice required for removal or displacement of water facilities for construction or street work.
     All persons engaged in construction or street work will give at least ten days’ written notice to the city for removal or displacement of water system facilities that may interfere or conflict with construction or street work. Any damage to the water system resulting from such failure to give notice will be the responsibility of and will be charged to the person engaged in such work. All costs involved in the removal or displacing of water facilities will be paid by the person engaged in such work, except where provisions of city permits or contracts state otherwise. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.340 Contractors.
     Contractors engaged in street construction or site development must obtain a temporary water permit and may only take water at a location specified by the director of public works. All water will be metered unless exempted by the director of public works for good and sufficient reason. Charges will be in accordance with the cost allocation plan. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.345 Individual building construction.
     Individual builders or contractors engaged in building construction or development not connected with subdivision construction must, upon compliance with the applicable provisions of administrative policy and of this chapter, obtain a temporary water permit and must agree to the provisions of administrative policy. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.350 Title to connections—Easements.
     Title to all meters, service pipes, and appurtenances used in providing a service connection will remain with the city and the charges described herein and set forth in the cost allocation plan are for connections and do not convey any right of title.

     Whether recorded or not, the city has, or has the right to obtain through eminent domain, at least a twenty-foot easement on each side of a water main for purposes of maintaining, repairing and replacing it. The city will not be responsible if any permanent or unique improvements, including, but not limited to vegetation, fences, paving or structures, on or within the easement area are removed or damaged in the course of the city’s maintenance, repair or replacement of the distribution main. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.355 Standard plans and specifications.
     The city may from time to time adopt standard plans and specifications and construction details, and/or requirements for the design and construction of water facilities and lines, which are incorporated herein by reference. All customers must comply with the applicable standard plans and specifications for the design, construction or repair of any facilities connected to or within the city’s water system. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.360 Responsibility for water system facilities on private property.
     All water system facilities installed by the city on private property are and remain the property of the city and may be maintained, repaired, or replaced by the city without consent or interference of the owner or tenant of the property. The property owner or tenant will use reasonable care in the protection of the facilities. No payment will be made to any property owner or tenant for placing or maintaining the facilities on private property. No person will place or permit the placement of any object that will interfere with the city’s ability to freely access any city facility for maintenance, repair, or replacement. In addition, the city will not be responsible for restoring or replacing any improvements or obstacles on private property that interfere with the maintenance, repair or replacement of city facilities. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.365 Changes in customer’s equipment or operations.
     If a customer makes any material change in the size, character or extent of the customer’s equipment connected to the meter located in the meter box or to the operation of the equipment resulting in a material change in the use of water, the customer will immediately notify the city in writing of the nature of the change and, if necessary, amend his or her application for water service. The customer will bear the actual costs of the installation of a larger meter and service connection and any additional charges set forth in the cost allocation plan. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.370 Control valve.
     The customer will install a control valve on the customer’s side of the service connection as close as is practical to the meter location to control the flow of water to the piping on the customer’s premises. The customer is prohibited from using the service connection curb stop to turn water on and off to the customer’s premises. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.375 Pressure relief valve.
     Each water heater must be equipped with a suitable pressure relief valve of type and nature required by the then current edition of the California Plumbing Code and California Building Code. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.380 Water wells.
     All water wells within the city must comply with the Ordinance Code of Contra Costa County, all regulations of the California Department of Public Health, and any applicable federal regulations pertaining to same. Failure to so comply may result in enforcement by the applicable government agency. All water wells within the city must include, at the customer’s sole expense, the prevention devices set forth in Section 14.01.385, or as otherwise required by the city to prevent backflow into the city water system. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.385 Cross-connection and backflow prevention.
     Customers must comply with all cross-connection regulations pursuant to Chapter 14.10. If a customer’s premises has another source of water supply or the customer is engaged in industrial processes using or producing processed water or liquid industrial waste, or is engaged on the premises in handling sewage or any other substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable, the city may discontinue water service until the customer installs a working, suitable, approved double check valve to the service connection on the customer’s side of service connection to protect against backflow of water from the customer’s premises into the city’s water system. If required by the director of public works, a customer will be required to install protective measures (e.g., locks and cages) to protect backflow devices from being tampered with and/or vandalized.

     The customer is responsible for complying with all city, county, state and federal laws governing the separation of dual water systems and installation of backflow protection devices to protect the public water supply from the danger of cross-connections. The customer is also responsible for the maintenance, annual testing, repair or replacement of the backflow protection device. Failure to comply will subject the customer to disconnection of water service and assessment of water disconnect fee as set forth in the cost allocation plan.

     The director of public works is authorized immediately to remove any cross-connection which he or she believes has the potential to jeopardize public health and safety and to charge the customer for costs associated with such removal. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.390 Ground-wire attachments.
     The customer will be liable for any damage to the city’s water system facilities caused by the attachment of an electrical service ground-wire or wires to any plumbing, which is or may be connected to a service connection or main belonging to the city, by the customer or his or her tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees, permittees, guests or invitees unless such plumbing is adequately connected to a lawfully driven ground installation on the premises. Neither the city nor its officers, agents or employees will incur any liability of any nature whatsoever by reason of the use of any facility for grounding purposes, which is or may be connected to the city’s water system. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

Article 4. Meters and Service Connections
14.01.400 General.
     All water delivered through a service connection must be metered and billed. Tampering with meters or the use of any device to allow delivery of unmetered water is prohibited. Connection charges and payment for all water used from the time of initial service installation will be the responsibility of the customer. In addition, the installation of a backflow prevention assembly may be required pursuant to Chapter 14.10. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.405 Monthly water charges.
     All customers are responsible for the monthly charges set forth in the cost allocation plan. In addition, customer will be responsible for all additional fees assessed, including those due to unlawful connection or damage caused to the delivery system by customer, or his or her tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees, permittees, guests or invitees. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.410 Meter requirement.
     All water service will be metered and meters must conform to American Water Works Association (AWWA) standards at the time of initial installation. The city may request from the manufacturer or supplier verification which states that all water meters and/or components comply with all applicable requirements of this standard, and that such meters have been tested in accordance with AWWA standards. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.415 Meter installation.
     Meters will be installed in the public sidewalk, or behind and adjacent to the public sidewalk within the public right-of-way, or at such location as may be determined by the director of public works. Unless the director of public works deems it impractical, all meters must be installed at the minimum distance of three feet from a driveway area. All meters will be owned by the city. No seal may be altered or broken except by one of the city’s authorized employees or agents. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.420 Change in meter location.
     Meters moved for the convenience of the customer will be relocated at the customer’s expense. Meters moved for the city’s convenience will be relocated at the city’s expense. If the lateral distance to which the customer desires to have the meter moved exceeds eight feet, the customer will be required to apply and pay for a new service connection at the desired location. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.425 Changes in size of meter, pipe, at expense of customers.
     Customers making any change in the size, character or extent of their facilities utilizing the water service which will require increasing the size of any water system facilities or result in a large or unusual increase in water usage must immediately notify the director of public works in writing. Changes in service connections, in particular changes in size of meter or service pipe, will be at the expense of the customer, including the cost of a new meter of the size being replaced. These charges are set forth in the cost allocation plan. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.430 Meter testing.
     A.    Request for Test. A customer may request that the city test the meter serving the customer’s premises. The city will conduct the test during normal working hours within ten business days of the request and the customer will be notified of the time and place of the test. A customer may require that the city conduct the test in the presence of the customer or his or her representative.

     B.     Fee. The customer must pay a fee in an amount to cover the cost of the meter test, which is set forth in the cost allocation plan.

     C.     Accuracy. The fee will be credited against the account if the overall accuracy of the meter as tested is outside the defined acceptable parameters as established by the American Water Works Association.

     D.    Report. The city will provide the customer with a written report summarizing the results of the test within ten business days after completion of the test. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.435 Adjustment of bills for meter error.
     Adjustments of water bills due to meter error will be made pursuant to Section 3.26.180 and will only be made after testing in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 14.01.430. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.440 Service connections—Location.
     A.    Service connections will be in public streets, easements or rights-of-way under the control of the city.

     B.     Where the premises to be served fronts on more than one street, the director of public works has the right to designate on which frontage the service connection will be installed. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.445 Service connections—To separate premises.
     A single service connection may not serve more than one premises. Separate premises under a single ownership, control, or management will be supplied water through separate service connections unless the director of public works approves a request for a single service connection to multiple premises. When evaluating requests for such single service connection, the director of public works will be guided by, but not restricted to, the following considerations:

     A.    That the service connection will not violate the provisions of this chapter against reselling or redelivery to other customers;

     B.     That the service connection will not establish a private distribution system;

     C.     That the service connection will not avoid main extension requirements;

     D.    That the service connection will not be a means of avoidance of meter or service connection charges or securing an advantageous water price without an equivalent guaranteed minimum. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.450 Service connections—To separate customer.
     Each separate customer will be supplied water through a separate service connection unless the director of public works determines it is impractical to do so. Where more than one customer is supplied through a single service connection, only the property owner or authorized agent will be the applicant and customer for billing or any other purpose. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.455 Service connections—Obligation to connect to city water system.
     Unless the city takes extraordinary and discretionary action when approving a development or subdivision of property, each building permit or subdivision map improvement plan will contain provisions for connection to the water system. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

Article 5. Drought and Conservation
14.01.500 Drought.
     In the event of a water shortage emergency caused by drought or other circumstance, the city may adopt any necessary rules or regulations in accordance with California Water Code Sections 350 through 359, as amended from time to time, or such other applicable law, including the city’s general water use regulations. During any period of threatened or actual water shortage, the city will have the right to apportion its available water supply among customers in such a manner as appears most equitable under the circumstances then prevailing and with due regard to public health and safety.

     In the event that the city adopts ordinances, rules and regulations to address a water shortage emergency, the director of public works is authorized to enforce the water use regulations in accordance with specific remedies authorized by the city council as well as those remedies authorized by law. The city will not be liable for any shortage or insufficiency of water supply or water pressure or any loss or damage occasioned thereby. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.510 Conservation—Water waste prohibited.
     A.    As a condition of service, customers of the city must use water delivered through the city’s system in a manner that promotes efficiency and avoids waste. Water waste, including, but not limited to, the following actions, is a violation of this code and prohibited, except where necessary to address an immediate health and safety need or to comply with a term or condition in a permit issued by a state or federal agency:

     1.     Failure to correct a malfunctioning device or supply line where the customer or their agent has known of the problem for more than forty-eight hours.

     2.     Discharging swimming pool or spa water drainage off the property where discharge into a public sanitary sewer is available.

     3.     The application of potable water to outdoor landscapes in a manner that causes runoff such that water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, private and public walkways, roadways, parking lots, or structures.

     4.     Noncompliance with watering group assignments under a declaration of water shortage emergency.

     5.     The use of a hose that dispenses potable water to wash a motor vehicle, except where the hose is fitted with a shut-off nozzle or device attached to it that causes it to cease dispensing water immediately when not in use.

     6.     The application of potable water to driveways, sidewalks and other hardscaped surfaces.

     7.     The use of potable water in a fountain or other decorative water feature, except where the water is part of a recirculating system.

     8.     The serving of drinking water other than upon request in eating or drinking establishments, including, but not limited to, restaurants, hotels, cafés, cafeterias, bars, or other public places where food or drink are served and/or purchased.

     9.     Irrigation with potable water between eight a.m. and seven p.m. daily.

     10.   The application of potable water to outdoor landscapes during and up to forty-eight hours after a measurable rainfall.

     11.   The irrigation with potable water of landscapes outside of newly constructed homes and buildings in a manner inconsistent with regulations or other requirements established by the California Building Standards Commission and the Department of Housing and Community Development.

     12.   The use of potable water to irrigate ornamental turf on public street medians is prohibited.

     B.     To promote water conservation, operators of hotels and motels shall provide guests with the option of choosing not to have towels and linens laundered daily. The hotel or motel shall prominently display notice of this option in each guestroom using clear and easily understood language.

     C.     A violation of the regulations in subsections A through B is unlawful, and may be enforced pursuant to Section 14.01.1015 of this chapter. (Ord. 974 § 3, 2016; Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

Article 6. Application for Connection to Water System
14.01.600 Application for connection to water system—Determination of necessity for a main extension or other water system facilities.
     Upon receipt of any application for connection to the city’s water system, the director of public works will determine whether a main extension or other water system facilities are necessary to provide the connection. A main extension or other water system facilities will be installed in the manner directed by the director of public works whenever the director of public works determines that such main extension or facilities are necessary to provide water service to property described in the application. Applicants must follow the application procedures, and must pay all applicable charges, including any applicable security deposit, application fee, service connection charge, meter charge, service line charge, existing facilities charge, and any other charges as set forth in the cost allocation plan. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.605 Application for connection to water system if no main extension is required but service connection is required.
     Prior to approving any application for connection to the city’s water system for which no main extension is required, but a new service connection is required, the city will evaluate the impact of the proposed service on the system and the city’s ability to provide service. The size of connection and meter is dependent upon the water flow requirements for the premises including fire flow. The number and size of meters required will be determined by the director of public works.

     When the city has approved the application for connection to the city’s water system, the customer will furnish and install the new service connection from the main to the meter at such location as the city determines and in accordance with the standard plans and specifications. The service connection will be installed from the water distribution main to the curb line or property line of the premises, which may abut on the street, on other thoroughfares, or on the city right-of-way or easement. Charges for meter and box are to be added to the charges for service installation and are held as a separate charge for the convenience of subdividers or contractors where all pipe is installed by the owner.

     The applicant may apply for as many service connections as may be reasonably required to serve the premises, provided that the customer has separate facilities and equipment for each service connection that is independent of the others and not interconnected.

     Each premises will have at least one service connection, which includes a meter. When two or more buildings are maintained upon a single premises, one service connection may serve both. However, if the premises is divided and the buildings come into separate ownership, new service connections must be installed so that there are separate service connections with meters for each premises in separate ownership. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.610 Service connection location.
     Service connections will be installed at nominal right angles to a main in accordance with city standard plans and specifications. The point of connection will not be within a street intersection from curb return to curb return, nor will any portion of the service connection be within the intersection. The meter location will be directly adjacent to the parcel being served within the public right-of-way. In the event street right-of-way is not available, the city may approve installation within an easement or alley adjacent to or on the parcel to be served. In alleys or easements, meters will be located at a point as close as practicable to the property line within which the main is located. All meters will be located outside of driveways and other areas where access by city personnel for operation and maintenance may be restricted. The meter vault will be located outside of travel lanes and driveways and will be protected from vehicular traffic, as determined by the city. If the applicant feels extraordinary conditions exist that would prevent compliance with this requirement, he or she may submit to the city a written request for a waiver of this requirement at the time the water plan is submitted for review. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.615 Application for service connections—Outside city.
     Applications for new or revised service connections to supply premises which are wholly or partly outside the corporate limits of the city will not be accepted or approved nor ordered to be installed, unless the city council has approved such application after all applicable fees, including city staff time and any fees charged by the local agency formation commission, have been paid by the applicant. Before granting approval, the city council will conduct an investigation and obtain satisfactory proof that all of the following conditions are satisfied:

     A.    A severe hardship exists, for example a failure of an existing well or septic system as certified by the county health department;

     B.     The area is unannexable at present;

     C.     The property will be annexed on city demand;

     D.    There will be full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and administrative policy;

     E.     That the connection will be granted on a temporary basis until annexation is completed with the water system reserving the right to disconnect the applicant or applicant’s assigns upon violation of the terms of the agreement covering the granting of such connection; and

     F.     That the granting of such application will be in the best interest of the city.

     The intent concerning the above provisions is not to cause or prolong any hardship, but to discourage expansion which is uncontrolled or detrimental to the interest of the city, through the use of a vital city service. The sale of water to other public entities is exempt from the provisions of this section, but will be governed by provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.620 Service connection cost—Special conditions.
     In the event of any application the city determines will require installation of a main extension, or other installation, for example if a service connection required is larger than ordinary, or if a special meter is required, all such installation or connection costs will be borne solely by the applicant. as set forth in Section 14.01.675. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.625 Application for connection to water system if main extension and new service connection are required.
     Any owner of one or more lots or parcels of land will make a written application to the city for a main extension, where, in the opinion of the director of public works, one or more main extensions are required to serve such property. Applications will be made in accordance with this code and will include filing the city’s application and providing: the legal description of the property to be served; a written statement from the applicable fire protection authority addressing all requirements for fire protection; the tract number; the plans, profiles and specifications; any additional information required by the city; and a map showing the desired location of the proposed service connections. The main extension application will also include payment of any applicable deposits and fees or charges, including the applicable meter and service connection charges (for city-installed service connections), the existing facilities charges and any other applicable charges required by this chapter or a development service agreement. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.630 Application for connection to water system to a new subdivision or development.
     A person desiring to provide water service to a tract of land, which the person proposes to subdivide or develop, will make a written application to the city for water service to a new subdivision or development and may be required to enter into a development service agreement pursuant to Section 14.01.645. Applications will include: the tract number; the name of the subdivision or development (if applicable); its location; the plans, profiles and specifications for the street work, sanitary and storm work and water distribution system; and a written statement from the applicable fire protection authority addressing all requirements for fire protection. The application should also include a copy of the tentative map showing property lines, streets and other dedicated rights-of-way; number and location of single-family residences to be constructed; number of units and location of apartments; number of estimated students and location of schools; irrigation requirements; and topographic contours. The subdivision or development application will also include payment of any applicable deposits and rates or charges, including the applicable meter and service connection charges (for city-installed service connections), the existing facilities charge and any other applicable charges or deposits required by this chapter or the development service agreement. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.635 Review and approval of the application.
     Prior to approval of the application, the director of public works will investigate the proposed main line extension, service connections or other water system facilities, review the plans and specifications and evaluate the impact of the proposed facilities on the city’s ability to provide water service and report findings to the city council. The public works director will develop conditions of approval regarding the feasibility of providing the service; satisfaction of the criteria in this chapter, the city’s standard plans and specifications, and any other applicable rules and regulations; and estimated cost of the proposed main extension or other water system facilities. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.640 Facilities—Subdivisions, tracts, or housing projects.
     The city may require improvements, dedications or facilities to be provided by the applicant for water service to a new subdivision or development. All facilities, including easements and tank sites, must be dedicated to the city prior to acceptance of the improvements or facilities for water service. The cost of such facilities will be the responsibility of the applicant. All such facilities must meet city’s standard plans and specifications. Examples of such facilities include, but are not limited to: all distribution mains, including connections to existing mains, even if outside the tract; treatment facilities; transmission facilities; service pipe lines; fittings; valves and fire hydrants; tank sites; easements; rights-of-way; storage tanks; and all things necessary and appurtenant to any of these facilities. If additional subdivision facilities, permanent or temporary, are required to provide pressure or storage for the subdivision, such facilities will be required and paid for by the applicant. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.645 Development service agreement.
     When a main extension is required to serve a property including a new development or subdivision, or in other circumstances as determined by the city, prior to approval of an application for water service, the applicant may be required to enter into a development service agreement in a form acceptable to the city and comply with the terms and conditions therein. All fees and costs incurred by city in preparing or reviewing the development service agreement or plans will be paid in full by the applicant prior to commencement of work in accordance with Section 14.01.675. The development service agreement may include provisions to ensure adequate water service for the development, which may include the design for a sufficient number of independent well systems (or other production facilities), pumping equipment and/or storage facilities; contribution to the modification of other city production and/or storage facilities; and/or participation in the construction cost of other new city production and/or storage projects or other water system facilities. During any construction, water service will be metered, with separate meters for each premises as determined by the city, and the applicant will be responsible during construction for all costs of water service as set forth in the cost allocation plan. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.650 Dedication to the city.
     All main extensions or other water system facilities covered by a development service agreement will become the property of the city and upon acceptance by the city will be deeded or dedicated to the city by a proper instrument in writing. Applicant will provide the city with “as-built” drawings for all dedicated facilities. The map, grant deed or other proper instrument will contain sufficient legal description of the right-of-way or easement, within which any water line or system facility is installed and will be duly recorded in the Contra Costa County recorder’s office. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.655 Installation of facilities.
     The city, in its discretion, may install any of the proposed main extensions, service connections or water system facilities with its own employees at the applicant’s cost. If the city installs the service connections, the applicant will be required to pay the applicable meter and service connection charges, and cover all other actual costs incurred by the city relative to the installation. If the applicant is required to install the main extension, service connections or other water system facilities, it will be at the applicant’s cost, in accordance with the city’s standard plans and specifications in effect at the time of the application and any other requirements in the development service agreement. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.660 Future development—City discretion.
     The city will review and approve the size, location and configuration of all main extensions, which will be consistent with the city’s plans for future development of the water system. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.665 Dead-end lines.
     No dead-end water lines will be permitted, unless approved by the director of public works in extremely limited circumstances, and in his or her sole discretion, if it is the only feasible way to supply water to a location and it will not significantly impact or burden the city with respect to its obligations to flush the water system. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.670 Construction requirements.
     Upon city’s approval of the application, the applicant will contract with a contractor duly licensed in the state of California to do the proposed main extension installation work. All work and materials will comply with the city’s standard plans and specifications, inspection requirements and all applicable laws and regulations. Payment and performance bonds from a California-admitted surety insurer, each in the amount of one hundred percent of the estimated construction cost, along with the required insurance coverage must be provided by the applicant or the contractor. A maintenance bond in the amount of ten percent of the costs of the work to remain in effect two years after acceptance by the city will also be required. Pursuant to the terms of the development service agreement, the city will have the right to inspect the work. No pipeline will be backfilled or covered without the presence and consent of a city authorized inspector. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.675 Costs and expenses.
     All costs and expenses incurred by the city under this chapter for preparing or reviewing applications or plans, dedication instruments, easements, agreements or any other documents required by the application or project, including, but not limited to, costs for engineering, legal and administrative services, will be paid in full by the applicant prior to commencement of any work, by depositing an amount estimated by the city to cover all such charges and costs. The applicant will be responsible for any costs in excess of the estimated deposit and will be refunded the amount by which the estimated deposit exceeds the actual costs. In the event the applicant’s original deposit is not sufficient to cover the city’s costs, the applicant must deposit additional monies in an amount to be determined by the director of public works within five days of a request for such increased deposit. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.680 Project termination/refund.
     If the installation work is not started within one year of execution of a development service agreement, as may be extended by the city council, the balance of deposited funds remaining after deducting all city costs, as determined in the city’s sole discretion, will be credited or refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

Article 7. Temporary Service
14.01.700 Authorization for temporary water service.
     Upon application, the city, in its discretion, may authorize a temporary water use for construction or other limited purposes, under acceptable terms and conditions and if no undue hardship to existing customers will result. Temporary water use will be disconnected or terminated at the discretion of the city. Temporary water service typically is provided through a fire hydrant and requires an agreement to use a temporary fire hydrant meter. The customer will agree to return the fire hydrant meter within ten days of the termination of temporary water service. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.705 Application for temporary water service.
     A person desiring temporary water service will submit an application for a temporary water permit following the procedures set forth in Chapter 3.26. The application must include a description of the location of and reasons for the temporary water service.

     The temporary water permit application will include payment of a deposit as set forth in the cost allocation plan. The deposit will be retained by the city until the temporary meter is returned. Once the meter is returned, the deposit will be applied against outstanding charges and any remaining amount will be refunded to the customer. The deposit will be forfeited if the meter is not returned or if it is returned damaged.

     Customers receiving a temporary water permit will also pay all other costs included in the cost allocation plan, together with all actual costs incurred by the city for installation of any required water facilities.

     Hydrant meters rented for a period of longer than three months must be brought into the public works corporation yard on a quarterly basis for a meter reading. If the city grants a written extension allowing a temporary service connection for more than one year, the meter must be calibrated during one of the quarterly reads. If the meter is not brought into the public works corporation yard by the appropriate time designated, there will be a penalty to the customer as listed in the cost allocation plan and the meter must be returned immediately. The customer will pay all fees due before the meter can be re-issued. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.710 Temporary water service monthly charges.
     Temporary water service will be subject to a billing at the rate as set forth in the cost allocation plan. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

Article 8. Fire Protection
14.01.800 Authorization to use fire hydrants for public fire protection.
     The main purpose for fire hydrants connected to the water mains of the city is to furnish water to fight fires. Except for temporary service use as authorized in Article 7 of this chapter, there may be no water used through the fire protection service connection to the city, except for purposes of extinguishing fires or testing the fire fighting equipment. Fire hydrants may be opened and used only by persons authorized in writing by the city. All public governmental fire protection agencies and their officers and employees are hereby so authorized. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.805 Unauthorized connections to a fire hydrant.
     Any persons, other than those authorized in writing by the city, who open or close a fire hydrant will be liable for all damages caused. Any person, firm or agency making a direct connection to a city fire hydrant without written permission from the public works director will be liable for any damages, including costs of lost water, and will pay all incurred costs to repair any fire hydrant or water mains and appurtenances caused by an unauthorized connection to the fire hydrant.

     Upon discovery of the unauthorized connection, the city will immediately disconnect or cause the person to disconnect the unauthorized connection. No further connection will be permitted unless authorized by the city and the perpetrator will be required to make payment in full to the city of any applicable fees and/or cover all costs of damages caused. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.810 Moving of fire hydrants.
     If a property owner or other party requests the city to change the location of a fire hydrant, that person will bear the city’s actual costs of such relocation. The city must approve any change in the location of a fire hydrant and consult with the fire service provider as necessary. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.815 Fire precautions.
     In case of fire, or alarm of fire, should circumstances warrant:

     A.    The city will have the right to shut off water from any customer or number of customers without notice and to keep it shut off as long as necessary;

     B.     The fire chief will have the authority, should the need arise, to request the setting of valves in water mains to secure the greatest possible pressure at the points required. When the need for such changes has passed, the fire chief will notify the director of public works in order that the system may be restored to its normal operating condition. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.820 Application for private fire protection service.
     When an application is made for private fire protection service, installation must be approved by the fire chief, by an approved fire rating bureau, and by the director of public works. Each private fire protection service must have a detector check valve installed therein. An applicant for new private fire protection service will pay the total actual cost of installation of the private fire protection service, in accordance with the city’s standard plans and specifications. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.825 Requirements of private fire protection service.
     There may be no connections between the private fire protection system and any other water distribution system on the premises. All automatic sprinkler systems connected to the water system must be equipped with a backflow protection device. The connection of the automatic sprinkler system to the city’s facilities will be made according to city standard plans and specifications and is subject to inspection by appropriate authorities. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.830 Use of private fire protection service.
     Water furnished through private fire protection service may be used only for extinguishing fires or for authorized testing of the fire system. Whenever a consumer wishes to test a private fire protection system, he/she must notify the director of public works at least three working days in advance. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.835 Violation of applicable regulations.
     If water is used from a private fire protection service connection in violation of this chapter or other rules or regulations of the city, the city may, at its option, discontinue or remove the service connection at the customer’s expense. The city will give thirty days’ written notice prior to discontinuing or removing the service. The city will also notify the local public fire protection service prior to the actual shutdown. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

Article 9. Comments or Complaints About Water Service
14.01.900 Service comments or complaints.
     A customer may comment or complain about water service by writing, emailing or telephoning the city. The director of public works or designee will meet with the customer in person or by telephone, at the customer’s request, and endeavor to resolve the issue. The director of public works will issue a decision on the issue in writing, which decision will be final unless appealed in writing to the city manager as set forth in Section 14.01.910. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.905 Billing comments or complaints.
     A dispute over billing will be addressed through the procedures set forth in Chapter 3.26. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.910 Appeals to city manager.
     A customer may appeal a decision of the director of public works in writing to the city manager within five days of receipt of the director of public works’ ruling. The written appeal must state the reason for the appeal and specify any facts or evidence in support of the request. The city manager or designee, who may be a city hearing officer, will promptly consider the appeal and provide a written decision within ten days of the filing of an appeal. The city manager’s determination will be final. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

Article 10. Violations—Enforcement
14.01.1000 Authorization to enter.
     Upon authorization by an adult on the premises, duly authorized employees of the city will be permitted to enter, in and upon any and all buildings and properties of customers for the purposes of inspection, re-inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing or otherwise performing such duties as may be necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.1005 Illegal service.
     Any water service that is not authorized in city records will be considered a new service. All fees, charges, and deposits required by the city must be paid before the account is established in the city’s water system. In the event such service is discovered and a service application is required by the city and is not obtained or the fees, charges, and deposits are not paid, the city may physically remove all city facilities at the property owner’s expense. Any service which is in violation of this section will be considered an illegal service and will be back billed per Chapter 3.26. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.1010 Obstructing water meters.
     It is unlawful for anyone to enclose a meter within or under a fence, wall, hedge, or otherwise obstruct access to meters. Upon the failure or refusal of the property owner or customer to remove any such unlawful obstruction within three days, after written notification to do so, the director of public works may take such reasonable actions as may be necessary to remedy the obstruction in order to access the meter, or may order the discontinuance of water service to the premises until the obstruction is removed. The customer will bear all costs, and will pay the city in accordance with the cost allocation plan, of remedying the obstruction and taking any additional meter reading that may be required. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.1015 Violations other than for nonpayment of water service charges.
     Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city, will be given written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory corrective action. Except in the case of emergencies when the public interest and necessity require otherwise, and for the nonpayment of bills as set forth in Chapter 3.26, the time limit to correct such violation will be three working days. The property owner will be held strictly responsible for any and all acts of their tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees, permittees, guests or invitees.

     In addition to all the enforcement mechanisms and penalties specified in this code, including those contained in Section 1.08.010, for violations of any rule or regulation established in this chapter or any other provision of this code related to the water system, the city may recover all costs incurred by the city in attending to the violation and require payment of all applicable fees in the cost allocation plan as well as legal fees and costs as set forth in Chapter 3.26.

     The city may file civil actions to request the court to grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies:

     A.    A temporary and/or permanent injunction.

     B.     Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this chapter.

     C.     Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs of suit.

     The city may also pursue criminal prosecution for violations pursuant to Penal Code Section 498 or such other applicable laws. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

 

14.01.1020 Nonpayment of water service charges.
     If a customer fails to pay a water bill pursuant to this code, the city may discontinue water service and assess any late charges and penalties as set forth in Chapter 3.26 of this code. (Ord. 918 § 2, 2013)

Chapter 14.10 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
14.10.100 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to:

     A.    Protect the city’s water supply system against actual or potential contamination through cross-connections, by isolating sources of contamination that may occur within a water user’s premises because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises and potential backflow into the city’s water supply system;

     B.     Eliminate existing connections between the city’s water supply system and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human consumption;

     C.     Eliminate cross-connections between the city’s water supply system and sources of contamination;

     D.    To evaluate and reduce potential hazards to the city’s water supply system, including, but not limited to, the following:

     1.     Health Hazard. Any actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the city’s water supply system or the water user’s potable water system that creates or, in the judgment of the cross-connection control specialist, may create a danger to health;

     2.     Plumbing Hazard. Any internal or plumbing type of cross-connection in a water user’s potable water system that may be either a pollutant or contamination-type hazard. The term “plumbing hazard” includes, but is not limited to, cross-connections to toilets, sinks, lavatories, wash trays, washing machines or lawn sprinkling systems;

     3.     Pollution Hazard. Any actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the city’s water supply system or to the potability of the city’s or the water user’s potable water system, but which would not otherwise constitute a health or system hazard;

     4.     System Hazard. Any actual or potential threat of severe damage to the city’s water supply system or the water user’s potable water system or of a pollutant or contaminant that may have an effect on the quality of potable water;

     5.     Industrial Fluids System Hazard. Any fluid or solution that may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as to constitute a health, water system, pollution or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This type of contamination includes, but is not limited to, polluted waters; all types of process waters and used waters; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalis; contaminated natural waters, such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, harbors or irrigation canals; oils; gases; glycerin; caustic and acidic solutions; and all other solutions which may be used for industrial or fire-fighting purposes. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.110 Authority.
     These regulations are adopted pursuant to Title 17, Chapter V, Sections 7583 through 7605, inclusive, of the California Code of Regulations (hereafter “state regulations”). (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.120 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings ascribed to them by this section:

     Air-gap separation (AG): A physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel.

     Approved backflow prevention assembly: An assembly which has passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization which has demonstrated its competency to perform such tests to the State of California Department of Health Services.

     Approved water supply: Any water supply whose potability is regulated by the state or local health agency.

     Auxiliary water supply: Any water supply on or available to the premises, other than the approved water supply.

     AWWA standard: An official standard developed and approved by the American Water Works Association (AWWA).

     Backflow: A flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipe network of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved water supply source. Back siphonage is one cause of backflow. Back pressure is the other cause.

     Backflow prevention assembly tester: A person who holds a current certificate issued by the California-Nevada section of the AWWA or an organization with equivalent certification requirements attesting that an individual has proven his or her qualifications for performing inspections, tests, and maintaining of approved backflow prevention assemblies and has met any additional city qualification requirements.

     City: The city of Brentwood.

     Contamination: A degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which creates a hazard to the public health, or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water.

     Cross-connection: Any unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover assemblies, or other assemblies through which backflow could occur, will be considered to be cross-connections.

     Cross-connection control program specialist: A city employee who is certified as a cross-connection control program specialist by the California-Nevada section of the AWWA or an organization with equivalent certification requirements.

     Double check—detector check valve assembly (DCDA): A specifically designed assembly composed of two independently operating, approved check valves installed as a unit between two tightly closing, resilient-seated shut-off valves and fittings with properly located test cocks for testing each check valve, along with a specific bypass water meter in series with a double check valve assembly (DC). The bypass water meter will register accurately for only very low rates of flow in gallons and will show a registration for all rates of flow.

     Double check valve assembly (DC): An assembly of two internally-loaded, independently-acting check valves, including resilient seated shut-off valves on each end of the assembly and test cocks for testing the watertightness of each check valve.

     Hazardous substances: Any hazardous waste or hazardous substance as defined in any federal or state law or local ordinance, rule or regulation including, without limitation, the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (Title 42 United States Code Section 9601, et seq.); the Carpenter-Presley-Tanner Hazardous Substance Account Act (California Health and Safety Code Section 25300, et seq.); and the Hazardous Waste Control Law (California Health and Safety Code Section 25100, et seq.). Hazardous substances also include asbestos or asbestos-containing materials, radon gas, and petroleum or petroleum fractions, whether or not defined as a hazardous substance in any such statute, ordinance, rule or regulation.

     Health agency: The California Department of Public Health (CDPH).

     Local health agency: The Contra Costa County environmental health division.

     Person: An individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, municipality, public utility, or other public body or institution.

     Pollution: The presence of any organic, inorganic, biological or foreign substance in water which degrades its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.

     Potable or potable water: Any public water supply which has been investigated and approved by the state or local health agency.

     Premises: Any and all areas on a water user’s property which are served or have the potential to be served by the city’s water supply system.

     Reclaimed water: Wastewater which, as a result of treatment, is suitable for uses other than potable use.

     Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RP): An assembly incorporating two internally-loaded, independently-operating check valves and an automatically-operating differential relief valve located between the two check valves, including resilient seated shut-off valves on each end of the assembly, and equipped with necessary test cocks for testing the assembly.

     Reduced pressure principle-detector backflow prevention assembly (RPDA): An assembly composed of a line-sized approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly with a bypass containing specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter will register accurately for only very low rates of flow in gallons and will show a registration for all rates of flow.

     Service connection: The point of connection of a water user’s piping to the city’s water supply system.

     State: The state of California.

     Water supply system: All city owned facilities including mains, valves, pumps, pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment and other appurtenances used to convey water for public consumption or use.

     Water user: Any person obtaining water from the city’s water supply system. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.130 General cross-connection protection requirement.
     Unprotected cross-connections with the city’s water supply system are prohibited. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.140 Backflow prevention assembly installation at water user’s expense.
     Whenever backflow protection is required by Section 14.10.170, the water user will install an approved backflow prevention assembly at the water user’s expense for continued service or before a new service will be granted. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.150 Properties with multiple water supply lines.
     Wherever backflow protection is required on a water supply line entering a water user’s premises by Section 14.10.170, then each water supply line from the city’s mains entering such premises, buildings or structures must be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly. The type of approved backflow prevention assembly to be installed will be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.160 New service connection review.
     The cross-connection control program specialist or designee will review all requests for new service to determine if backflow protection is needed. Plans and specifications must be submitted to the cross-connection control program specialist upon request for review of possible cross-connection hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a backflow prevention assembly is necessary to protect the city’s water supply system, the required assembly must be installed before service will be granted. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.170 Required backflow protection.
     Each service connection from the city’s water supply system for supplying water to premises having an auxiliary water supply must be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the city’s water supply system unless the auxiliary water supply is accepted as an additional source by the city, and is approved by the state or local health agency having jurisdiction.

     Each service connection from the city’s water supply system for supplying water to any premises on which any substance is handled in such a fashion as may allow its entry into the city’s water supply system must be protected against backflow of the water from the premises into the city’s water supply system. This will include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the city’s water supply system which have been subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.180 Locations for installation of approved backflow prevention assemblies.
     Approved backflow prevention assemblies must be installed on the service connection to any premises having:

     A.    Internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled to the satisfaction of the state or local health agency and the cross-connection control program specialist; or

     B.     Intricate plumbing and piping arrangements, or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not a cross-connection exists.

     Approved backflow prevention assemblies must be installed in accordance with the manner prescribed in Section 7603, Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations and the city of Brentwood standard plans and specifications. Location of the assemblies should be as close as practical to the water user’s connection. The cross-connection control program specialist will have the final authority in determining the required location of an approved backflow prevention assembly. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.190 Type of approved backflow protection required.
     Only backflow prevention assemblies which have been approved by the city will be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the city’s water supply system. Backflow preventers must pass laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization, and conform to applicable AWWA standards. Upon request, the city will provide a list of approved backflow prevention assemblies to any affected water user.

     The type of backflow prevention that will be required to prevent backflow into the city’s water supply system will be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the water user’s premises. The type of approved backflow prevention assembly that may be required (listed in increasing levels of protection) includes:

     A.    An approved double check valve assembly (DC);

     B.     An approved double check—detector check valve assembly (DCDA);

     C.     An approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RP);

     D.    An approved reduced pressure principle-detector backflow prevention assembly (RPDA); or,

     E.     An approved air-gap separation (AG). The air-gap must be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel. In no case will the air-gap be less than one inch. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.200 Level of backflow protection.
     The water user may choose a higher level of protection than required by the cross-connection control program specialist. The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the city’s water supply system at the water user’s service connection to the premises with varying degrees of hazard are given in the following table. Situations which are not covered in the table will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, and the appropriate backflow protection will be determined by the cross-connection control program specialist or state or local health agency with jurisdiction.

 

 

Degree of Hazard

Minimum Type of Backflow Prevention

Sewage and Hazardous Substances

(1) Premises where the water supply system is used to supplement the reclaimed water supply.

AG

(2) Premises where there are wastewater plumbing and/or treatment plants and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city.

AG

(3) Premises where reclaimed water is used and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city.

AG

(4) Premises where hazardous substances are handled in any manner in which the substances may enter a potable water system. This does not include a single lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city.

AG

(5) Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers, herbicides or pesticides are, or can be, injected.

RP

(6) Premises with commercial irrigation systems.

RP

(7) Premises with potable water supply connected to carbonators.

RP

Auxiliary Water Supplies

(1) Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which is interconnected with the water supply system. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city.

AG

(2) Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply and there are no interconnections with the city water supply system.

RP

Fire Protection Systems

(1) Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the city water supply system and there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply on or to the premises (not interconnected).

DCDA

(2) Premises where the fire system is supplied from the city water supply system and interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply.

AG

(3) Premises where the fire system is supplied from the city water supply system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction from the private reservoirs or tanks are used.

RPDA

Administrative Sites

(1) Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist.

RP

(2) Premises where there is a repeated history of cross-connections being established or re-established.

RP

(Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.210 Multiple services.
     Two or more services supplying water from different street mains to the building, structure or premises through which an inter-street main flow may occur, will have at least a DC on each water service connection to be located adjacent to, and on the property side of, the respective meters. The DC will not be considered adequate if backflow protection is deemed necessary to protect the city’s water supply system from pollution or contamination. In such cases, the installation of approved backflow prevention assemblies at such service connections will be required. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.220 Backflow prevention assembly testing and maintenance.
     The water user on whose premises approved backflow prevention assemblies are installed, will have the approved backflow prevention assemblies tested by a backflow prevention assembly tester. Approved backflow prevention assemblies must be tested at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation, or repair. The cross-connection control program specialist may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary. No backflow prevention assembly will be placed back in service unless it is functioning as required. A report, in a form acceptable to the cross-connection control program specialist, will be filed with the city each time an approved backflow prevention assembly is tested, relocated, or repaired. These approved backflow prevention assemblies will be serviced, overhauled, or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of testing, repair and maintenance will be borne by the water user.

     The cross-connection control program specialist will supply affected water users with a list of persons acceptable to the city to test approved backflow prevention assemblies. The cross-connection control program specialist will notify affected water users by mail when annual testing of an approved backflow prevention assembly is needed and also furnish water users with the necessary forms which must be filled out each time an approved backflow prevention assembly is tested or repaired. Reports of testing and maintenance will be maintained by the city for a minimum of three years. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.230 Water user notification—Testing and maintenance.
     The cross-connection control program specialist will notify each affected water user when it is time for the approved backflow prevention assembly installed on their service connection to be tested. This written notice will give the water user thirty days to have the approved backflow prevention assembly tested and provide the water user with the necessary form to be completed and resubmitted to the city. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.240 Second notice—Testing and maintenance.
     A second notice will be sent to each water user who does not have his or her approved backflow prevention assembly tested as prescribed in the first notice within the thirty-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to have his or her approved backflow prevention assembly tested. If no action is taken within the two-week period, the city may terminate water service to the affected water user’s premises until the subject approved backflow prevention assembly is tested. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.250 Prior approval for backflow prevention assembly removal.
     Approval must be obtained from the cross-connection control program specialist before an approved backflow prevention assembly is removed, relocated or replaced. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.260 Removal from service.
     The use of an approved backflow prevention assembly may be discontinued and the approved backflow prevention assembly removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the cross-connection control program specialist to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.270 Relocation.
     An approved backflow prevention assembly may be relocated following confirmation by the cross-connection control program specialist that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A re-test will be required following the relocation of the approved backflow prevention assembly. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.280 Repair.
     An approved backflow prevention assembly may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the approved backflow prevention assembly is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the cross-connection control program specialist. A re-test will be required following the repair of the approved backflow prevention assembly. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.290 Replacement.
     An approved backflow prevention assembly may be removed and replaced, provided it is in compliance with Sections 14.10.170, 14.10.180, and 14.10.190. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.300 User supervisor.
     At each premises where it is necessary in the opinion of the cross-connection control program specialist (e.g., premises that have a multi-piping system that conveys hazardous liquids), a user supervisor will be designated by and at the expense of the water user. This user supervisor will be responsible for the monitoring of the approved backflow prevention assemblies and for avoidance of cross-connections. In the event of contamination or pollution of the city’s water supply system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the cross-connection control program specialist will be promptly notified by the user supervisor so that appropriate measures may be taken to address the contamination. The water user will inform the cross-connection control program specialist of the user supervisor’s identity on, at a minimum, an annual basis and whenever a change occurs. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.310 Site inspection.
     The cross-connection control program specialist may require a site inspection to evaluate cross-connection hazards. The cross-connection control program specialist will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any water user who cannot or will not allow a site inspection of his or her piping system will be required to install the approved backflow prevention assembly the cross-connection control program specialist considers necessary. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

14.10.320 Re-inspections.
     The cross-connection control program specialist may, at his or her discretion, require a re-inspection for cross-connection hazards of any premises to which it serves water. The cross-connection control program specialist will transmit a written notice requesting a re-inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any water user who cannot or will not allow an on-premises re-inspection of his or her piping system will be required to install the approved backflow prevention assembly the cross-connection control program specialist considers necessary. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.330 Water user notification—Assembly installation.
     The cross-connection control program specialist will notify the water user of the inspection, or re-inspection, findings, listing the corrective actions to be taken if any are required. A period of sixty days will be given to complete all corrective actions required, including installation of approved backflow prevention assemblies. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.340 Second notice—Assembly installation.
     A second notice will be sent to each water user who does not take the required corrective actions prescribed in the first notice within the sixty-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a fourteen-day period to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within the fourteen-day period the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the required corrective actions are taken. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.350 Water service termination.
     When the cross-connection control program specialist encounters water uses that represent a hazard to the city’s water supply system that cannot be immediately abated, the cross-connection control program specialist will institute the procedure for terminating the city’s water service to water user’s premises pursuant to Section 14.10.360. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination will include, but are not limited to, the following items:

     A.    Refusal to install an approved backflow prevention assembly;

     B.     Refusal to test an approved backflow prevention assembly;

     C.     Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention assembly;

     D.    Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention assembly;

     E.     Direct or indirect connection between the city’s water supply system and a sewer line;

     F.     Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the city’s water supply system and a system or equipment containing contaminants;

     G.    Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the city’s water supply system and an auxiliary water supply;

     H.    Any other situation which presents an immediate health hazard. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.360 Water service termination procedures.
     For subsection A, B, C or D of Section 14.10.350, termination of service will be initiated in accordance with Section 14.01.1015. If corrective action is not taken within the specified time period, water service may be terminated.

     For subsection E, F, G, or H of Section 14.10.350, service may be terminated immediately if an immediate health or safety hazard exists. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.370 Violation.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation at any time to make or maintain or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any period of time whatsoever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served with water by the city and any other source of water supply or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenances or fixtures which, by reason of their construction, may cause or allow backflow of water or other substances into the city’s water supply system. No person may violate a provision of this chapter or fail to comply with the requirements of this chapter. The city may seek any and all available penalties, fines and cost recovery for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

 

14.10.380 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion will be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding will not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. (Ord. 919 § 2, 2013)

Chapter 14.20 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
14.20.010 Intent and purpose.
     A.    The intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality in the city of Brentwood’s watercourses pursuant to, and consistent with the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Water Code Section 13000 et seq.) and the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.).

     B.     This chapter also carries out the conditions in the city’s national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit that require implementation of appropriate source control and site design measures and stormwater treatment measures for development projects.

     C.     It is the purpose of the city council in enacting this chapter to protect the health, safety and general welfare of Brentwood’s citizens by:

     1.     Minimizing non-stormwater discharges, whose pollutants would otherwise degrade the water quality of local streams, to the stormwater system.

     2.     Minimizing increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development that would otherwise degrade local water quality.

     3.     Controlling the discharge to the city’s stormwater system from spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater.

     4.     Reducing stormwater run-off rates and volumes and nonpoint source pollution whenever possible, through stormwater management controls and ensuring that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.020 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall be as defined herein. Words and phrases in this chapter and not otherwise defined shall be interpreted as defined in the regulations issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to implement the provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act, and as defined by the State Water Resources Control Board to implement the Porter-Cologne Act:

     “Best management practices” or “BMPs” are structural devices, measures, stormwater management facilities, activities, prohibitions, or practices; general good housekeeping, pollution prevention practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices, to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands.

     “City’s NPDES permit” shall mean the NPDES permit issued to the city of Brentwood [Permit No. CAS083313] and any subsequent amendment, reissuance or successor to this NPDES permit.

     “Development runoff requirements” shall mean the provisions in the city’s NPDES permit that contain performance standards to address both the construction and post-construction phase impacts of new projects and redeveloped projects on stormwater quality.

     “Director” shall mean the public works director of the city of Brentwood or designee.

     “Enforcement officer or officer” shall mean those individuals designated by the director to act as authorized enforcement officers.

     “Guidebook” shall mean the most recent version of the Contra Costa Clean Water Program Stormwater C.3. Guidebook.

     “Non-stormwater discharge” is any addition of any pollutant to the city’s stormwater system, except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit, or discharges further exempted in Section 14.20.060(C) and (D) of this chapter.

     “Pollutant” shall mean any material other than stormwater including, but not limited to, petroleum products or by-products, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, sewage sludge, heat, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, soil and industrial, municipal or agricultural waste discharged into the water or stormwater system.

     “Premises” shall mean any building, structure, facility, or installation, (including a building’s grounds or other appurtenances), and adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

     “Responsible person” shall mean the owner or occupant of any premises or who engages in any activity from which there is or may be a non-stormwater discharge or any person who releases pollutants to the city’s stormwater system.

     “Stormwater” shall mean flow on the surface of the ground resulting from precipitation.

     “Stormwater control plan” shall mean a plan that meets those criteria contained in the most recent version of the Contra Costa Clean Water Program Stormwater C.3. Guidebook.

     “Stormwater management facility” shall mean any device that utilizes detention, retention, filtration, harvest for reuse, evapotranspiration or infiltration to provide treatment (and/or control volume, flows, and durations) of stormwater for purposes of compliance with development runoff requirements.

     “Stormwater system” is that system of facilities by which stormwater may be conveyed to any stream, watercourse, other body of water or wetlands, including flood control channels, any roads with drainage systems, city streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, improved channels, storm drains or storm drain system, which are not part of a publicly owned treatment works (“POTW”) as that term is defined in 40 CFR Section 122.2. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.030 Responsibility for administration.
     The director or designee shall administer this chapter for the city. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.040 Construction and application.
     This chapter shall be construed consistent with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and amendments thereto or applicable implementing regulations and the city’s NPDES permit. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.050 Stormwater control plan required.
     A.    In accordance with thresholds and effective dates in the city’s NPDES permit, every application for a development project, including, but not limited to, a rezoning, tentative map, parcel map, conditional use permit, variance, site development permit, design review, or building permit that is subject to the development runoff requirements in the city’s NPDES permit shall be accompanied by a stormwater control plan that meets the criteria in the most recent version of the Contra Costa Clean Water Program Stormwater C.3. Guidebook.

     B.     Implementation of an approved stormwater control plan and submittal of an approved stormwater control operation and maintenance plan by the applicant shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a project subject to this section.

     C.     All stormwater management facilities shall be designed in a manner to minimize the need for maintenance and reduce the chances of failure. Design guidelines are outlined in the Guidebook.

     D.    All stormwater management facilities shall be maintained according to the Guidebook and the approved stormwater control operation and maintenance plan. The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance shall be designated in the stormwater control operation and maintenance plan. Unless a different time period is provided for in the plan, those responsible for maintenance shall inspect the stormwater management facility at least annually. The stormwater operation and maintenance plan shall also describe how the maintenance costs will be funded. Upon the failure of a responsible person to maintain a stormwater management facility in accordance with this chapter or the plan, the city may perform the maintenance and recover its costs from the responsible person as provided in Sections 14.20.190 and 14.20.200.

     E.     For access to stormwater management facilities for inspections and maintenance, recorded covenants or easements shall be provided by the property owner for access by the city, the Contra Costa Mosquito and Vector Control District, and the Regional Water Quality Control Board. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.060 Prohibited discharges.
     A.    The release of non-stormwater discharges to the city stormwater system is prohibited.

     B.     The discharge of stormwater from premises or an activity that causes or contributes to a violation of receiving water limitations in the city’s NPDES permit is prohibited.

     C.     The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in subsection A above:

     1.     Any discharge in compliance with a NPDES permit issued to the discharger.

     2.     Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, diverted stream flows, flows from natural springs, rising ground waters, uncontaminated and unpolluted groundwater infiltration, single-family homes’ pumped groundwater, foundation drains, and water from crawl space pumps and footing drains, and pumped groundwater from drinking water aquifers.

     D.    The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in subsection A if and only if the discharges are in accordance with conditions including, but not limited to, specific conditions for each type of discharge set forth in Section C.15 of the city’s NPDES permit: pumped groundwater from non-drinking-water aquifers; pumped groundwater from other sources, foundation drains, and water from crawl space pumps and footing drains; air conditioning condensate; planned discharges from routine operation and maintenance activities in the potable water distribution system; unplanned discharges from breaks, leaks, overflows, fire hydrant shearing, or emergency flushing of the potable water distribution system; emergency discharges of the potable water distribution system as a result of firefighting, unauthorized hydrant openings, or natural or man-made disasters; individual residential car washing; swimming pool, hot tub, spa, and fountain water discharges, and discharges from irrigation water, landscape irrigation, and lawn or garden watering. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.070 Discharge in violation of NPDES permit.
     Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of the city’s NPDES permit either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge, and such person shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharge. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.080 Unlawful discharge and unlawful connections.
     A.    It is unlawful to establish, use, maintain or continue unauthorized drainage connections to the city’s stormwater system, and to commence or continue any unauthorized discharges to the city’s stormwater system.

     B.     No discharge shall cause the following conditions, create a nuisance, or adversely affect beneficial uses of waters of the state:

     1.     Floating, suspended or deposited macroscopic matter or foam;

     2.     Bottom deposits or aquatic growth;

     3.     Alterations of temperature, sediment load, nutrient load, or dissolved oxygen, which cause significant adverse impacts to native aquatic biota;

     4.     Visible, floating, suspended or deposited oil or products of petroleum origin; or

     5.     Substances present in concentrations or quantities which cause deleterious effects on aquatic biota, wildlife or waterfowl, or which render any of these unfit for human consumption. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.090 Best management practices and standards.
     A.    Generally. Any person owning or operating premises that may contribute pollutants to the city’s stormwater system shall undertake best management practices to reduce the potential for pollutants entering the system to the maximum extent practicable. Examples of such premises include, but are not limited to, parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, and other commercial enterprises. Examples of best management practices include, but are not limited to, those described in publications by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the California Water Boards, the California Stormwater Quality Association, the Bay Area Stormwater Management Agencies Association, the Contra Costa Clean Water Program, and the city of Brentwood.

     B.     Litter. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any refuse, rubbish, garbage or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles or other litter in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, business place, creek, stormwater system, fountain, pool, lake, stream, river or any other body of water, or upon any public or private parcel of land so that the same might become a pollutant, except in containers or in lawfully established waste disposal facilities.

     C.     Sidewalks. The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner or proprietor of any real property in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain said sidewalk free of dirt or litter to the maximum extent practicable. Sweepings from the sidewalk shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained as required for the disposal of solid waste. This section constitutes an alternative procedure and shall not limit or restrict the city from the civil, criminal or administrative enforcement of this or other city ordinances in any other matter provided by law.

     D.    Maintenance of Facilities and Landscaped Areas. Best management practices shall be implemented to minimize the release of pesticides, fertilizers, herbicides, and other related materials used to maintain landscaping and facilities.

     E.     Parking Lots, Paved Areas and Related Stormwater Systems. Persons owning, operating or maintaining a paved parking lot, the paved areas of a gasoline station, a paved private street or road, and related stormwater systems shall clean those premises as frequently and thoroughly as practicable in a manner that does not result in the discharge of pollutants to the city’s stormwater system. The director may require installation and maintenance of devices or facilities to prevent the discharge of trash or other pollutants from private parking lots, streets, roads, and drainage facilities into the storm drain system. Failure or refusal to comply with such requirement is prohibited and shall constitute a violation of this chapter.

     F.     Construction Activities. All construction projects shall incorporate site-specific BMPs, which can be a combination of BMPs from the California BMP Handbook, Construction, January 2003, the CalTrans Stormwater Quality Handbooks, Construction Site Best Management Practices Manual, March 2003, the San Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board Erosion and Sediment Control Field Manual, 2002, the city’s grading and erosion control ordinance and other generally accepted engineering practices for erosion control as required by the director. The director may establish controls on the rate, volume, and duration of stormwater runoff from new developments as may be appropriate to minimize the discharge and transport of pollutants.

     G.    Notification of Intent and Compliance with General Permits. Each discharger associated with construction activity or other discharger described in any general stormwater permit addressing discharges, as may be adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay Region [for East County: Central Valley Region], shall provide the director with the notice of intent, comply with and undertake all other activities required by any general stormwater permit applicable to such dischargers. Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit relating to stormwater discharges shall comply with and undertake all activities required by the permit.

     H.    Development Runoff Requirements. For each new development project subject to the development runoff requirements, every applicant will submit a stormwater control plan and implement conditions of approval that reduce stormwater pollutant discharges through the construction, operation and maintenance of treatment measures and other appropriate source control and site design measures. Similarly, increases in runoff volume, flows, and durations shall be managed in accordance with the development runoff requirements.

     I.      Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. The director may require any business or utility in the city that is engaged in activities that may result in non-stormwater discharges or runoff pollutants to develop and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan, which must include an employee training program. Business activities which may require a stormwater pollution prevention plan include maintenance, storage, manufacturing, assembly, equipment operations, vehicle loading, fueling, vehicle maintenance, food handling or processing, or cleanup procedures, carried out partially or wholly out of doors.

     J.      Coordination with Hazardous Material Release Response and Inventory Plans. Any business subject to the Hazardous Material Release Response and Inventory Plan, Division 20, Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code (commencing with Section 25500), shall include, in that Plan, provision for compliance with this chapter, including the prohibitions of non-stormwater discharges and the requirement to reduce release of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.100 Authority to inspect.
     A.    Generally. Routine or scheduled inspections shall be based upon as reasonable a selection process as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter, including, but not limited to, random sampling or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, evidence of the discharge of non-stormwater to the stormwater system, inspection of stormwater treatment and flow-control facilities for proper operation and evidence of routine and corrective maintenance, or similar activities. Inspections may also be conducted in conjunction with routine or scheduled inspections conducted by other public agencies or special districts, including, but not limited to, the Central Contra Costa sanitary district, the Contra Costa County fire protection district, county environmental health department, the Contra Costa mosquito and vector control district, or the Regional Water Quality Control Board. The city council may by resolution establish a schedule of fees for inspections.

     B.     Authority to Sample and Establish Sampling Devices. With the consent of the owner or occupant, or pursuant to a search or inspection warrant, any officer may establish on any property such devices as are reasonably necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. During all authorized inspections, the officer may take any sample deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or in the recordation of the activities on site.

     C.     Notification of Spills. All persons in charge of the premises or responsible for emergency response for the premises have a responsibility to train premises’ personnel and maintain notification procedures to ensure that immediate notification is provided to the city of any suspected, confirmed or unconfirmed release of pollutants creating a risk of non-stormwater discharge into the city stormwater system.

     As soon as any person in charge of the premises or responsible for emergency response for the premises has knowledge of any suspected, confirmed or unconfirmed release of non-stormwater discharge entering the city stormwater system, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the detection and containment and cleanup of such release and shall notify the city of the occurrence by telephoning the director. This notification requirement is in addition to and not in lieu of other required notifications.

     D.    Requirement to Test or Monitor. Any officer may require that any person engaged in any activity or owning or operating any premises that may cause or contribute to non-stormwater discharges, undertake such monitoring activities or analysis and furnish such reports as the officer may specify. The burden, including costs of these activities, analysis and reports shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring, analysis and reports and the benefits to be obtained. The recipient of such request shall undertake and provide the monitoring, analysis and reports required. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.110 Violations.
     A.    The violation of any provision of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor, except that notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, any violation constituting a misdemeanor under this chapter may, at the discretion of the officer or city attorney, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction.

     B.     Any person required to perform monitoring, analysis, reporting or corrective activity pursuant to this chapter by any officer may be informed of such decision, in writing, by a notice of violation. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the officer, may file a written appeal of the notice of violation to the director within ten days following the date of the notice of violation. Upon receipt of such request, the director shall request a report and recommendation from the officer and shall set the matter for hearing at the earliest practical date. At said hearing, all evidence and testimony deemed relevant and admissible by the director shall be considered, and the director may reject, affirm, or modify the officer’s decision. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The decisions of the director shall be final. Failure to request a hearing or appear at the hearing shall constitute a waiver and failure to exhaust administrative remedies.

     C.     In addition to the penalties and procedures provided herein, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare. Such condition is hereby declared and deemed to be a nuisance, which may be abated as provided in this code, including the assessment of the costs of abatement which may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes as provided by Government Code Section 38773.5, and by civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance by the city attorney. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.120 Penalty for violation.
     A.    Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, a person shall be subject to payment of a fine, or imprisonment, or both, not to exceed the limits set forth in California Government Code Section 36901.

     B.     Upon conviction of an infraction, a person shall be subject to payment of a fine, not to exceed the limits set forth in California Government Code Section 36900. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.130 Continuing violation.
     Every day that any violation of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.140 Concealment.
     Concealing, aiding or abetting a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of such provision. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.150 Acts potentially resulting in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act or Porter-Cologne Act.
     Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who releases a non-stormwater discharge, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition or effluent limitation, may also be in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act or the Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the enforcement provisions of those acts, including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement actions authorized pursuant to this chapter may also include notice to the violator of such potential liability pursuant to federal or state law. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.160 Civil actions.
     A.    In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the city. In any such action, the city may seek, as appropriate, any and all of the following remedies:

     1.     A temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction and permanent injunction;

     2.     An action for an unlawful business practice pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 17206.

     B.     In addition any person violating this chapter shall be liable for:

     1.     Reimbursement for the costs of any investigation, inspection or monitoring which led to the discovery of the violation;

     2.     Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effect(s) resulting from the violation;

     3.     Compensatory damages for the loss of, or destruction to, water quality, wildlife, fish or aquatic life. Costs and damages under this subsection shall be paid to the city and shall be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring and establishing a stormwater discharge pollution control system and implementing or enforcing the provisions of this chapter;

     4.     The cost of maintenance and repair of any BMP or stormwater management facility that is not maintained in accordance with the guidebook or the stormwater control plan;

     5.     The reasonable costs of preparing and bringing administrative action under this chapter. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.170 Remedies not exclusive.
     The remedies identified in this chapter are in addition to, and do not supersede or limit, any and all other remedies, administrative, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.180 Fee.
     All fees associated with this chapter shall be set forth in the city’s master fee schedule as adopted by the Brentwood city council. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.190 Enforcement officer.
     For the purpose of Section 1.08.030 of this code, the city manager has designated code enforcement officers as enforcement officers. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

 

14.20.200 Judicial review.
     The provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 are applicable to judicial review of determinations made by the director pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 929 § 2, 2014)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.04 CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS CODES
Chapter 15.06 CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS CODE FIRE CODE
Chapter 15.07 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
Chapter 15.12 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS
Chapter 15.14 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
Chapter 15.36 MOVING OF STRUCTURES
Chapter 15.52 GRADING, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Chapter 15.68 GAS-SHUT-OFF DEVICES

Chapter 15.04 CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS CODES
15.04.010 California Building Standards Code adopted by reference.
     A.    Adoption. The following volumes and appendices of the California Building Standards Code, 2019 Edition, published by the California Building Standards Commission are adopted by reference:

     California Administration Code Part 1:

     California Building Code Part 2: Volumes 1 and 2

     Appendix I, Patio Covers

     Appendix J, Grading

     Appendix L, Earthquake Recording Instrumentation

     Appendix O, Emergency Housing

 

     California Residential Code Part 2.5, including:

     Appendix H, Patio Covers

     Appendix Q, Tiny Houses

     Appendix S, Strawbale Construction

     Appendix X, Emergency Housing

 

     California Electrical Code Part 3:

     California Mechanical Code Part 4, including:

     Appendix B, Procedures to be Followed to Place Gas Equipment in Operation

     Appendix C, Installation and Testing of Oil (Liquid) Fuel-Fired Equipment

 

     California Plumbing Code Part 5, including:

     Appendix A, Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System

     Appendix B, Explanatory Notes on Combination Waste and Vent Systems

     Appendix D, Sizing Storm Water Drainage Systems

     Appendix H, Private Sewage Disposal Systems

     Appendix I, Installation Standards For Pex Tubing Systems for Hot and Cold Water Distribution

     Appendix J, Combination of Indoor & Outdoor Combustion and Ventilation Opening Design

 

     California Energy Code Part 6:

     California Historical Building Code Part 8:

     California Existing Building Code Part 10:

     Appendix A, Guidelines for the Seismic Retrofit of Existing Buildings

 

     California Green Building Standards Code Part 11:

 

     California Referenced Standards Part 12:

     B.     Copy available. A copy of the California Building Standards Code is on file in the city of Brentwood community development department for use and examination by the public.

     C.     Fees. The fees for permits issued under this chapter are those established by resolution of the city council.

     D.    Enforcement and Penalties. The city may enforce this Chapter 15.04 by any means set forth in the California Building Standards Codes or in Brentwood Municipal Code Title 1 (General Provisions). (Ord. 1011 § 2, 2019; Ord. 979 § 2, 2016; Ord. 931 § 3, 2014)

 

15.04.020 Amendments.
     The 2019 California Plumbing Code is amended by the changes, additions and deletions set forth in this section, and section numbers below refer to that Code.

 

CPC Section 1208.6:

High levels of acid (PH) found in many locations throughout the city from natural soils and imported soils have proven to have a highly corrosive effect on metallic piping laid underground. The city prohibits the use of metallic gas piping underground without the approval of the city’s chief building official and a soils analysis showing a level of (PH) that will not corrode metallic piping.

(Ord. 1011 § 3, 2019; Ord. 979 § 3, 2016)

Chapter 15.06 CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS CODE FIRE CODE
15.06.010 California Building Standards Code Fire Code adoption by reference.
     A.    Adoption. The California Building Standards Code, 2019 edition, published by the California Building Standards Commission, The California Fire Code Part 9 is adopted by reference.

     B.     Copy Available. A copy of the California Building Standards Code Fire Code is on file in the city of Brentwood community development department for use and examination by the public.

     C.     Fees. The fees for permits issued under this chapter are those established by resolution of the city council.

     D.    Enforcement and Penalties. The city may enforce this Chapter 15.06 by any means set forth in the California Building Standards Codes or in Brentwood Municipal Code Title 1 (General Provisions). (Ord. 1011 § 4, 2019; Ord. 998 § 3, 2018; Ord. 979 § 4, 2016; Ord. 959 § 3, 2015)

Chapter 15.07 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
Article 1. General
15.07.010 Statutory authorization.
     The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Brentwood does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

15.07.020 Findings of fact.
     A.    The flood hazard areas of the city of Brentwood are subject to periodic inundation which has the potential to result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

     B.     These flood losses may be potentially caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, flood proofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities may also contribute to potential flood loss. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

15.07.030 Statement of purpose.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

     A.    Protect human life and health;

     B.     Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

     C.     Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

     D.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

     E.     Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

     F.     Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

     G.    Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

     H.    Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

15.07.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.
     In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes methods and provisions to:

     A.    Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

     B.     Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

     C.     Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

     D.    Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

     E.     Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other area. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

15.07.050 Definitions.
     Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.

     A.    “Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

     B.     “Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.

     C.     “Apex” means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front.

     D.    “Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter.

     E.     “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

     F.     “Area of special flood hazard” see “special flood hazard area.”

     G.    “Area of special mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazard” is the area subject to severe mudslides (i.e., mudflows). The area is designated as zone M on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM).

     H.    “Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “one-hundred-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.

     I.      “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade; i.e., below ground level on all sides.

     J.      “Building” see “structure.”

     K.    “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or

drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

     L.     “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

     M.    “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

     N.    “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

     O.    “Flood, flooding, or flood water” means:

     1.     A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and

     2.     The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.

     P.     “Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

     Q.    “Flood hazard boundary map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards.

     R.     “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

     S.     “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

     T.     “Flood-related erosion” means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical level or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusually and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.

     U.    “Flood-related erosion area” or “flood-related erosion prone area” means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.

     V.    “Flood-related erosion area management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works, and floodplain management regulations.

     W.    “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source - see “flooding.”

     X.    “Floodplain administrator” is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

     Y.    “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

     Z.     “Floodplain Management Regulations” means the ordinance codified in this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

     AA.  “Flood proofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents (refer to FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93 for guidelines on dry and wet flood proofing.)

     BB.  “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “Regulatory Floodway.”

     CC.  “Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the “regulatory floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.

     DD.  “Fraud and victimization” as related to Article 5 of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city of Brentwood will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

     EE.   “Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

     FF.   “Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

     GG.  “Hardship” as related to Article 5 of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city of Brentwood requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

     HH.  “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

     II.     “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

     1.     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

     2.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

 

     3.     Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

     4.     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

     JJ.    “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

     KK.  “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

     LL.   “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see “basement” definition).

     1.     An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

     a.     The wet flood proofing standard in subsection 15.07.300(C)(3);

     b.     The anchoring standards in Section 15.07.300(A);

     c.     The construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.07.300(B); and

     d.     The standards for utilities in Section 15.07.310.

     2.     For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see “basement” definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.

     MM. “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

     NN.  “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

     OO.  “Market value” shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences.

     PP.   “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on

a community’s flood insurance rate map are referenced.

     QQ.  “Mudslide” describes a condition where there is a river, flow or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain.

     RR.  “New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

 

     SS.   “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community.

     TT.   “Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare, or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

     UU.  “One-hundred-year flood” or “100-year flood” - see “base flood.”

     VV.  “Public safety and nuisance,” as related to Article 5 of this chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.

     WW.           “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

     1.     Built on a single chassis;

     2.     Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

     3.     Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

     4.     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

     XX.  “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

     YY.  “Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

     ZZ.   “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

     AAA. “Sheet flow area” see “area of shallow flooding.”

     BBB. “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH.

     CCC. “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

     DDD. “Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

     EEE. “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

     FFF. “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

     1.     Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

     2.     Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

     GGG. “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

     HHH. “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this ordinance. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

     III. “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

     JJJ. “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

Article 2. General Provisions
15.07.100 Lands to which this chapter applies.
     This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of Brentwood. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2002)

 

15.07.110 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
     The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated July 16, 1987 and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated July 16, 1987, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of the ordinance codified in this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at “City of Brentwood, 104 Oak Street, Brentwood, CA 9451 3, Community Development Department.” (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

15.07.120 Compliance.
     No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of the ordinance codified in this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the Brentwood city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2002)

 

15.07.130 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
     This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where the ordinance codified in this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2002)

 

15.07.140 Interpretation.
     In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

     A.    Considered as minimum requirements;

     B.     Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

     C.     Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2002)

 

15.07.150 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
     The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Brentwood, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on the ordinance codified in this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2002)

 

15.07.160 Severability.
     This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2002)

 

Article 3. Administration
15.07.200 Establishment of floodplain permit.
     A floodplain permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.07.020. Application for a floodplain permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required.

     A.    Site plan, including but not limited to:

     1.     For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; and

     2.     Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; and

     3.     If available, the base flood elevation from the Flood Insurance Study and/or flood insurance rate map; and

     4.     If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway; and

     B.     Foundation design detail, including but not limited to:

 

     1.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

     2.     For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 15.07.300 of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93;

     3.     For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to ninety-five percent using the Standard Proctor Test method); and

     C.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be flood proofed, as required in Section 15.07.300 of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93;

     D.    All appropriate certifications listed in subsection 15.07.300(c)(3) of this chapter; and

     E.     Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

15.07.210 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
     The chief building official is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying floodplain permits in accord with its provisions. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

15.07.220 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
     The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:

     A.    Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:

     1.     Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

     2.     All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

     3.     The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and

     4.     The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

     B.     Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data.

     1.     When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.07.110, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer. Any such information shall be submitted to the Brentwood city council for adoption; or

     2.     If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or state agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate zone A Areas – A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations” dated July 1995 in order to administer Article 4:

     a.     Simplified method:

     i.      One-hundred-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. Geological Survey publication, or the discharge-drainage area method; and

     ii.     Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program developed by FEMA; or

     b.     Detailed method:

     i.      One-hundred-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ HEC-HMS computer program; and

     ii.     Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ HEC-RAS computer program.

     C.     Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

     1.     Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

     2.     Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

     3.     Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

     D.    Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

     1.     Certification required by Section 15.07.300(C) and Section 15.07.330 (lowest floor elevations);

     2.     Certification required by Section 15.07.300(C)(2) (elevation or flood proofing of nonresidential structures);

     3.     Certification required by Section 15.07.300 (wet flood proofing standard);

     4.     Certification of elevation required by Section 15.07.320 (subdivision standards);

     5.     Certification required by Section 15.07.350(A) (floodway encroachments).

     E.     Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard. Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevations shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article 5.

     F.     Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.07.120. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

15.07.230 Appeals.
     The city council of the city of Brentwood shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

Article 4. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
15.07.300 Standards of construction.
     In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

     A.    Anchoring.

     1.     All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

     2.     All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.07.330.

     B.     Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed:

     1.     With flood resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2-93, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

     2.     Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

     3.     With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if

     4.     Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

     C.     Elevation and Flood Proofing. (See Article I definitions for “basement,” “lowest floor,” “new construction,” “substantial damage” and “substantial improvement.”)

     1.     Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

     a.     In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified;

     b.     In an A zone, elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation; said base flood elevation shall be determined by one of the methods in Section 15.07.220(b) of this chapter;

     c.     In all other zones, elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation.

     Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

     2.     Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with Section 15.07.300(C)(1) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

     a.     Be flood proofed below the elevation recommended under Section 15.07.300(C)(1) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

     b.     Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

     c.     Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this section (15.07.300(C)(2)) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

     3.     All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93, and must exceed the following minimum criteria:

     a.     Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or

     b.     Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect.

     4.     Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 15.07.330. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

15.07.310 Standards for utilities.
     A.    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

     1.     Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and

     2.     Discharge from the systems into floodwaters.

     B.     On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

15.07.320 Standards for subdivisions.
     A.    All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

     B.     All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

     C.     All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

     D.    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

     E.     All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

15.07.330 Standards for manufactured homes.
     A.    All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map, on sites located:

     1.     Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

     2.     In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

     3.     In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

 

     4.     In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

     B.     All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH, AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection 15.07.330(A) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:

     1.     Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at two feet above the base flood elevation; or

     2.     Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade.

     Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

15.07.340 Standards for recreational vehicles.
     A.    All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map will either:

     1.     Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use; a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions, or

     2.     Meet the permit requirements of Article 3 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.07.330(A). (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

15.07.350 Floodways.
     Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.07.110 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply.

     A.    Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in (the base) flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

     B.     If Section 15.07.350 is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

Article 5. Variance Procedure
15.07.400 Nature of variances.
     A.    The variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

     B.     It is the duty of the city of Brentwood to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood chapter are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

15.07.410 Appeal board.
     A.    The city hereby creates a flood management appeal board which shall consist of the city of Brentwood’s chief engineer, director of community development department, and the city attorney. In passing upon requests for variances, the flood management appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, any appellant’s relevant material, and the:

     1.     Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

     2.     Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

     3.     Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

     4.     Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

     5.     Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

     6.     Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

     7.     Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

     8.     Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

     9.     Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

     10.   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

     11.   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

     B.     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

     1.     The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage; and

     2.     Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Contra Costa county recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

     C.     The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

 

15.07.420 Conditions for variances.
     A.    Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Articles 3 and 4 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

     B.     Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Article 1 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

     C.     Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

     D.    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this ordinance. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city of Brentwood need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city of Brentwood believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.

     E.     Variances shall only be issued upon a:

     1.     Showing of good and sufficient cause;

     2.     Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” (as defined in Article 1 of this chapter) to the applicant; and

     3.     Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Article 1 - see “public safety or nuisance”), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Article 1) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

     F.     Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that the provisions of Sections 15.07.403(A) through 15.07.430(E) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

     G.    Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.07.410(A) and the purposes of this chapter, the city of Brentwood may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 694 § 1, 2001)

Chapter 15.12 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS
15.12.010 Authority—Purpose—Applicability.
     A.    Authority. This chapter is adopted under the authority of Government Code Section 65850.5.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems.

     C.     Applicability. This chapter applies to the permitting of a small residential rooftop solar energy system. (Ord. 955 § 2, 2015)

 

15.12.020 Definitions.
     In this chapter:

     “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means a system that meets all of the following:

     1.     A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal.

     2.     A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes, and to Civil Code Section 714(c).

     3.     A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family dwelling.

     4.     A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the city’s maximum legal building height as set forth in Municipal Code Title 17, Zoning. (Government Code Section 65850.5.)

     “Solar energy system” means either of the following:

     1.     A solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating; or

     2.     A structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. (Civil Code Section 801.5.) (Ord. 955 § 2, 2015)

 

15.12.030 Requirements for expedited permitting.
     A.    Application. An applicant for a small residential rooftop solar energy system shall submit a building permit application on the form provided by the city, accompanied by each item of information listed in the city’s small residential rooftop solar energy checklist. Both the application form and the checklist are available online.

     An application that satisfies the application and checklist requirements will be considered complete, and the city will issue the building permit within three days. If an application is incomplete, the city will issue a written correction notice detailing each deficiency.

     B.     Inspection. When a building permit is issued for a small residential rooftop solar energy system, the city will require only one inspection (which may include a consolidated inspection). However if the system fails inspection, the city may perform one or more subsequent inspections. (Ord. 955 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 15.14 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
15.14.010 Authority—Purpose—Applicability.
     A.    Authority. This chapter is adopted under the authority of Government Code Section 65850.7. The chief building official is authorized to implement this chapter and to create a checklist of requirements consistent with Section 65850.7.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to create an expedited and streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging systems.

     C.     Applicability. This chapter applies to the permitting of electric vehicle charging stations. (Ord. 992 § 1, 2017)

 

15.14.020 Definitions.
     In this chapter:

     “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with the California Electrical Code, Article 625, as it reads on October 8, 2015, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

     “Electric vehicle charging station checklist” means the checklist prepared by the chief building official to implement this chapter. (See Sections 15.14.010(A) and 15.14.030.)

     “Electronic submittal” means the use of email, the Internet, or facsimile. (Ord. 992 § 1, 2017)

 

15.14.030 Requirements for expedited permitting.
     A.    Application. An applicant for an electric vehicle charging station must submit a building permit application on the form provided by the city, accompanied by each item of information listed in the city’s electric vehicle charging station checklist. Both the application form and the checklist are available online.

     If an application is incomplete, the city will issue a written correction notice detailing each deficiency.

     B.     Permit Issuance. An application that satisfies the application and checklist requirements will be considered complete, and the city will issue a building permit.

     C.     Permit Denial. The city may deny the building permit if it makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation will have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the impact (as the terms are defined in Government Code Section 65850.7 (i)). (Ord. 992 § 1, 2017)

Chapter 15.36 MOVING OF STRUCTURES
15.36.010 Permit—Required.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move, or cause to be moved, any structure upon any lot, piece or parcel of land located within the city, without first having obtained a permit as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.36.020 Initial inspection fee.
     Prior to making an application for a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, any person may, upon payment of the initial inspection fee hereinafter prescribed, have an inspection made by the chief building inspector of the structure to be moved and written report prepared listing the alterations, if any, which will be required in the structure. The initial inspection fee shall be nonrefundable. Initial inspection fee shall be established by city council resolution. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.36.030 Permit—Application—Form, contents and fee.
     Every application for a permit to move a structure shall be:

     A.    Made on forms provided by the chief building inspector;

     B.     Accompanied by plans and specifications in such detail as the chief building inspector may require; indicating thereon the location of the property upon which the structure is to be moved, the exact location on that property to be occupied by the structure to be moved, and any additions to be constructed, the alterations and remodeling to be done to the structure and the estimated cost thereof, and the site improvements planned for the property and their estimated costs. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.36.040 Permit—Application—Action.
     Every application for a permit to move a structure shall be processed as follows:

     A.    The director of planning shall determine whether the proposed move will conform to existing zoning regulations.

     B.     The chief building inspector shall inspect the structure for conformance to the building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes of the city, and determine what repairs, alterations or remodeling will be required to make the structure conform to all requirements of the aforementioned codes.

     C.     The chief building inspector shall examine the parcel, lot or building site upon which the structure is to be moved and determine what public improvements such as concrete curb and gutter, sidewalk and street trees are required to conform to city codes, ordinance and regulations and what site improvements such as driveways, walkways, retaining walls, etc., are required to serve the structure.

     D.    The chief building inspector shall then examine the plans and specifications submitted with the application to determine whether the building, when completed in accordance with the plans and specifications, will conform to all applicable ordinances, codes, rules and regulations.

     E.     The chief building inspector shall determine the reasonable cost of placing and completing the building in its new location, excluding costs of moving, but including costs of new foundations and all necessary improvements in front of the site, which total cost shall be the principal amount of a performance bond to be posted by the applicant to guarantee performance of the required alterations and improvements.

     F.     The applicant, or agent, must furnish evidence to the chief building inspector that the police chief has approved the moving route to be followed and that there has been compliance with the reasonable requirements of the affected public utility companies as required by Section 15.36.100.

     G.    If there is any defect in the application or in the accompanying plans and specifications, the applicant shall have thirty days’ written notice from the building official within which to remedy the defects. If the defects are not remedied within the thirty days, the chief building inspector shall deny the application and shall so inform the applicant in writing. Thereafter, should the applicant desire to revive the application, he or she shall pay another application fee of twenty-five dollars.

     H.    Upon finding that the applicant has complied with all applicable codes, ordinances, rules and regulations, the chief building inspector shall then cause the application to be set for public hearing before the planning commission, with notice to be given as is prescribed for use permits and variances.

     I.      The planning commission shall hold the public hearing on the application and shall within thirty days thereafter, either approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application. The planning commission shall determine among other things whether the structure will, when moved onto the desired land, be as architecturally compatible with the neighborhood, as conducive to good development on nearby land, as much in the public interest and as protective of public health, safety and welfare as a new structure which could legally be constructed on the property.

     J.      Upon approval of the application by the commission, the chief building inspector shall inform the applicant of the principal amount of the required performance bond.

     K.    The applicant shall, after approval of his or her plans and specifications, post with the chief building inspector a performance bond in the amount determined by the chief building inspector, the bond to be written by a surety company licensed to do business in the state. The bond shall name the city as obligee and the condition of the bond shall be that the holder of the permit will place and complete the building and construct the site improvements according to the approved plans and specifications and within the time limits specified in this chapter.

     L.     Not sooner than five days after approval of the application by the commission, and after receipt of the required performance bond, the chief building inspector shall, unless the commission’s approval has been appealed pursuant to Section 15.36.050, issue a permit to move the structure in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.36.050 Permit—Decision appeal.
     The applicant or any opponent of the application may appeal the decision of the planning commission to the city council. In case of appeal, the chief building inspector shall not issue the permit to move the structure unless and until the appeal is resolved in favor of the applicant. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.36.060 Permit—Repeat applications.
     No application for a permit to move a structure may be filed with the chief building inspector within a period of one year after a previous application to move the same structure onto the same parcel of land or onto any parcel of land within three thousand feet of the desired new location for the structure has been denied. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.36.070 Time for completing alterations and improvements.
     In order to prevent moved structures from remaining incomplete for indefinite periods of time, the following time schedule shall apply to the moving of structures:

     A.    All required alterations and improvements to structures and site, as shown on the approved plans and specifications, shall be completed within ninety days after issuance of the permit.

 

     B.     This time may be extended for not to exceed an additional thirty days by the chief building inspector upon submission of written proof by the holder of the permit that conditions beyond his or her control make it impossible to complete the required alterations and improvements within the first ninety days.

     C.     Should the permittee be unable to complete the required alterations and improvements within the allowed time, he or she may make written application to the planning commission for an extension of time, setting forth in the application the reasons why the additional time is needed. The commission may grant such time extension as, in its opinion, is justified by the circumstances, or it may deny the application.

     D.    Where the holder of a permit moves a structure and fails to complete the required alterations and improvements within ninety days or any extension thereof, the building official shall, with the advice and assistance of the city attorney, take such action against the principal and surety on the performance bond as is necessary to accomplish completion of the required alterations and improvements.

     E.     If the holder of the permit and the surety have failed to place and complete the building and construction site improvements according to the approved plans and specifications within one year of the date of issuance of the permit, the chief building inspector may summarily abate the structure by completion according to the plans or by demolition, upon at least ten days’ notice of such intention to the holder of the permit and the surety, absent substantial action by the holder of the permit and the surety to place and complete the removal of the structure. The cost of the completion or demolition by the chief building inspector shall be a charge upon the holder of the permit and his or her surety. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.36.080 Nuisance declaration—Abatement.
     Every violation of this chapter is a public nuisance. The city attorney shall, when so directed by the city council, take such action or proceedings in such court or courts as he or she may deem necessary or expedient to abate the same. In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the chief building inspector may, when he or she finds that the condition of any moved structure is a present and imminent menace to public safety, take such measures as are necessary to protect life and limb, without notice to any person and without further process. The cost of performing such measures shall be a charge upon the holder of the permit and a lien upon the building. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.36.090 Street improvements.
     All properties upon which structures are to be moved must have concrete curb and gutter and concrete sidewalk along the street frontages of the property, or such curb, gutter and sidewalk must be shown on the approved plans and specifications and constructed along with other site improvements as specified in this chapter. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.36.100 Requirements for house movers.
     Structures may be moved on city streets only by owners of their own use or by duly licensed house moving contractors. In any event, no person, firm or corporation shall move any structure along the streets of the city without complying with the following requirements:

     A.    Every mover must have on file with the city clerk a valid, current performance bond, issued by a surety company licensed to do business in California, naming as obligees, the city and all persons, in the principal amount of three thousand dollars, the conditions of which bond shall be as follows:

     1.     That the mover will comply with all applicable laws and ordinances;

     2.     That the mover will pay any and all damages which may result from any structure moving done by him or her, his or her agents, employees or workers, in the city, to any house, building, fence, tree, pavement, sidewalk, curb, gutter, utility pole, wire, hydrant, traffic signal, traffic sign or any other appurtenance in, on or under any street right-of-way, whether such facility is owned by the city, a private person or by some privately-owned public utility using the streets by virtue of a franchise;

     3.     That the mover will save, indemnify and keep harmless the city against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses which may in any way accrue against the city in consequence of such structure moving.

     B.     No structure being moved in or through the city shall be permitted to stand on any street between the same intersecting streets for a longer period than twenty-four hours.

     C.     Notice of the route to be followed must be given to the police chief at least twenty-four hours prior to the intended movement of any structure in or through the city. Upon approval of the route to be followed, the police chief shall issue his or her written approval of the route. Every person, firm or corporation moving a structure in or through the city shall have in his or her possession the written approval of the police chief.

     D.    Should the moving of any structure described herein require interference with any public utility structure, the applicant shall, after obtaining the written approval of the police chief as to the route to be followed, notify any and all public utilities involved of the tentative time of such moving and the estimated load height of the structure and moving equipment. Applicant shall indemnify a public utility against any and all damages or charges that are a direct and proximate result of the moving of any structure described herein. Application shall bear the cost and indemnify a public utility for any and all reasonable claims or charges that are a direct and proximate result of necessary measures required to protect utility structures from damages that may reasonably result from the moving of structures as herein described. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

Chapter 15.52 GRADING, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
15.52.010 Purpose.
     A.    It is the declared intent of the city to promote the conservation of natural resources, including the natural beauties of the land, streams and watersheds, hills and vegetation; to protect public health and safety, including the reduction or elimination of the hazards of earth slides, mud flows, rock falls, undue settlement, erosion, siltation and flooding, or other special conditions as described in Government Code Section 54460(b); by minimizing the adverse effects of grading, cut and fill operations, water runoff and soil erosion. Therefore, the following regulatory provisions of this chapter are adopted for the purpose of stringent control of all aspects of grading operations within the city limits.

     B.     Any grading within the city limits shall conform to the provisions of this chapter, and other applicable provisions of this code and to the latest edition of the city standard specifications and details. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions listed under this section shall be construed as specified in this section.

     1.     “Applicant” means any persons, corporation, partnership, association of any type, public agency or any other legal entity who submits an application to the city engineer for a permit pursuant to this chapter.

     2.     “Architect” means a professional architect registered in and by the state of California.

     3.     “As-graded” means the surface conditions existent on completion of grading.

     4.     “Bedrock” means in-place solid rock.

     5.     “Bench” means a relatively level stop excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed, or within a cut or fill slope.

     6.     “Berm” means a built up mound of soil approximately one foot above grade or higher, all along the perimeter of a property, or the heel (top) of a slope to prevent water runoff from running onto adjacent property or eroding a slope.

     7.     “Best management practices” means a technique or series of techniques which, when used in an erosion control plan, is proven to be effective in controlling construction related runoff, erosion and sedimentation.

     8.     “Blending” means the intermixing and compaction of natural site soils, such as of materials from two natural soil horizons, or for the intermixing and compaction of natural site soils with imported soil or other materials.

     9.     “Borrow” means earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site.

     10.   “Buttress fill” means a compacted fill which is placed in an area where soft natural soils beneath a planned fill would be over-stressed by the weight of the fill. The buttress fill is placed after the soft natural soils have been removed.

     11.   “Certification” means a written opinion concerning the progress and completion of the work, prepared by a registered civil engineer or geologist.

     12.   “City” means the city or designated official.

     13.   “City engineer” means the city engineer for the city or authorized representative.

     14.   “Civil engineering” means the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics and the properties of materials to the evaluation, design and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses of mankind.

     15.   “Contour rounding” means the rounding of cut and fill slopes in the horizontal plane to blend with existing contours or to provide horizontal variation, to eliminate the artificial appearance of slopes.

     16.   “Compaction” means the densification of a fill by mechanical means.

     17.   “Competent material” means earth material capable of withstanding the loads which are to be imposed upon it without failure to detrimental settlement, as certified by the soils engineer.

     18.   “Depth of cut or fill” means the vertical distance between existing natural ground and the finish elevation at any location.

     19.   “Drainageway” means natural or manmade channel which collects and intermittently or continuously conveys stormwater runoff.

     20.   “Earth material” means any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof.

     21.   “Engineering geologist” means a professional engineering geologist registered in and by the state of California to practice in the field of engineering and geology.

     22.   “Engineering geology” means the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works.

     23.   “Erosion” means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water and/or ice.

     24.   “Excavation” means the mechanical removal of earth material.

     25.   “Existing grade” means the grade prior to grading.

     26.   “Fill” means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.

     27.   “Final erosion and sediment control plan (final plan)” means a set of best management practices or equivalent measures designed to control surface runoff and erosion and to retain sediment on a particular site after all other planned final structures and permanent improvements have been erected or installed.

     28.   “Finish grade” means the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan.

     29.   “Grade” means the vertical location of the ground surface.

     30.   “Grading” means any land disturbance, excavation or fill or any combination thereof.

     31.   “Height of cut and fill slopes” means the finished vertical distance from the top to toe of slope, measured prior to the application of any required slope rounding.

     32.   “Interim erosion and sediment control plan (interim plan)” means a set of best management practices or equivalent measures designed to control surface runoff and erosion and to retain sediment on a particular site during the period in which preconstruction and construction-related land disturbances, fills and soil storage occur, and before final improvements are completed.

     33.   “Key” means a designated compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the top of a proposed fill slope.

     34.   “Land disturbance/land disturbing activities” means any moving or removing by manual or mechanical means of the soil mantle or top six inches of soil, whichever is more shallow, including, but not limited to, excavations.

     35.   “Land fill” means any activity depositing soil or other earth materials.

     36.   “Manual of standards” means a compilation of technical standards and design specifications adopted by the city engineer as being proven methods of controlling construction-related surface runoff, erosion and sedimentation.

     37.   “Modification” means any procedure that will reduce the Atterberg limits (liquid limit, plastic limit and Plasticity Index) of a soil.

     38.   “Nesting” means the placement of large rocks such that voids in the fill are created and that required compaction becomes difficult or impossible.

     39.   “Permittee” means the applicant in whose name a valid permit is duly issued pursuant to this chapter and his or her agents, employees and others acting under his or her direction.

     40.   “Replacement” means the removal and wasting of natural soil materials judged unsuitable for the support of dwellings or other site improvements and their replacement with suitable soil materials properly compacted.

     41.   “Reworking” means the mechanical densification or consolidation of natural loose soil material.

     42.   “Rough grade” means the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.

     43.   “Sediment” means earth material deposited by water or wind.

     44.   “Site” means any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, where grading is performed or permitted.

     45.   “Slope” means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.

     46.   “Slope control specialist” means a professional landscape architect or other professional person experienced in erosion control work, retained by the developer in a professional or consultative capacity (not as a contractor performing construction work in the development) and responsible for analysis, plans, specifications, supervision and certifications regarding slope control planting and related slope control work, other than grading, for a specific project.

     47.   “Soil” means the top layer of the earth’s surface, excluding rock.

     48.   “Soils engineer” means a civil engineer licensed in the state of California, experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of soil engineering.

     49.   “Soil engineering” means the application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof.

     50.   “Stabilization” means any procedure that will result in increased strength of a soil to a required level.

     51.   “Terrace” means a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.

     52.   “Variable slope” means the variation in steepness of a cut or fill slope in either, or a combination of the horizontal or vertical plane of the slope.

     53.   “Vertical slope rounding” means the rounding the tops or toes of cut and fill slopes.

     54.   “Wet season” means the period from October 15th to April 15th. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.030 Permit required.
     A.    No person may grade, fill, excavate or store or dispose of soil and earth materials or perform any other land-disturbing or land-filling activity without first obtaining a permit as set forth in this chapter.

     No permit shall be granted until the applicant has obtained approval of all his or her legislative requirements, such as, but not limited to, use permits, hillside planned development permit, tentative map, building permit or site plan review, where required. The environmental impact report shall be considered in the granting of a permit, and conditions may be imposed by the city to minimize or mitigate the negative environmental impacts of the proposed work. The city engineer shall determine when appropriate approvals and conditions have been met.

     Additionally, no permit shall be granted for any project of one acre or more in size until the applicant has filed a notice of intent (NOI) with the Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) and has been notified by the Board of the waste discharger identification number (WDID No.). The applicant shall also prepare, and submit to the city engineer for review and comment, a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) to include appropriate design guidelines and adequate erosion and sediment control measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants into drainage facilities. The applicant shall ensure that the SWPPP complies with the current general permit for construction activities adopted by the state Water Resources Control Board.

     B.     All land-disturbing or land-filling activities or soil storage shall be undertaken in a manner designed to minimize surface runoff, erosion and sedimentation. A person performing such activities need not apply for a permit pursuant to this chapter, if all the following criteria are met:

     1.     The site upon which land area is disturbed or filled is ten thousand square feet or less;

     2.     Natural and finished slopes are less than ten percent;

     3.     Volume of soil or earth materials disturbed or stored is fifty cubic yards or less;

     4.     Rainwater runoff is diverted, either during or after construction, by the activities from an area smaller than five thousand square feet;

     5.     An impervious surface, if any, of less than five thousand square feet is created;

     6.     No drainageway is blocked or has its stormwater carrying capacities or characteristics modified;

     7.     The activity does not take place within fifty feet, by horizontal measurement, from the top of the bank of a watercourse, the mean high water mark (line of vegetation) of a body of water or within the wetlands associated with a watercourse or water body, whichever distance is greater.

     C.     Subsections (A) and (B) (l—6) of this section notwithstanding, the following activities are always categorically exempt from the permit requirements:

     1.     An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings if a building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building permit, unless such excavation requires de-watering. This shall not exempt any fill made with material from such excavation nor exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of the structure;

     2.     Cemetery graves;

     3.     Refuse disposal sites meeting regional water quality control board water discharge requirements and in compliance with other regulations;

     4.     Excavations for wells or tunnels;

     5.     Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay where a valid use permit from the city is in effect and regional water quality control board waste discharge requirements are met and there is compliance with other regulations, also provided such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous property;

     6.     Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists;

     7.     Agricultural use of land that is operated in accordance with a conservation plan approved by the resource conservation district (RCD) or when it is determined by the RCD that such use will not cause excessive erosion or sediment losses, provided:

     a.     Cut or fills do not exceed three feet in depth, and

     b.     Cut or fill slopes are no steeper than two to one,

     c.     Notwithstanding, agricultural use of land which is determined by the city engineer to cause excessive discharge of sediment into the storm drain system shall be required to reimburse the city for any and all costs associated with mitigating the impact of the discharge and cleaning of the storm drain facilities;

     8.     Subsection (B)(7) of this section notwithstanding, any activity where total volume of material disturbed, stored, disposed of or used as fill does not exceed twenty-five cubic yards is always categorically exempt from the permit requirements;

     9.     Work conducted in any city street, public right-of-way or easement when the work is for a public facility, public utility or other public purpose and for which an encroachment permit has been issued;

     10.   City public works projects;

     11.   Emergency work authorized by the city necessary to protect life, limb or property, or to maintain the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage. (Ord. 671 § 1, 2001; Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.040 Permit application.
     To obtain a permit the applicant shall first file a written application on a form approved by the city engineer containing no less than the following information:

     A.    Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;

     B.     Names, addresses and telephone numbers of any and all contractors, subcontractors or persons actually doing the land-disturbing and land-filling activities and their respective tasks;

     C.     Name, addresses and telephone numbers of the person(s) responsible for the preparation of the site map and grading plan;

     D.    Name, address and telephone number of the registered geologist responsible for the preparation of the soils and geological report, where required;

     E.     An estimate of the time schedule of work;

     F.     The city business license number of the contractor performing the work;

     G.    Date of application;

     H.    Signature(s) of the owner(s) of the site or of an authorized representative;

     I.      Description of site location. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.050 Data and documents to accompany application.
     The application shall be accompanied by not less than the following material:

     A.    General Plans and Data.

     1.     Application form;

     2.     Site map and grading plan;

     3.     Interim erosion and sediment control plan;

     4.     Final erosion and sediment control plan;

     5.     Soils engineering report, where required;

     6.     Geology engineering report, where required;

     7.     Work schedule;

     8.     An engineer’s estimate of the quantity and cost of the work to be done;

     9.     Ten percent cash bond or certificate of deposit;

     10.   Any supplementary material required by the city engineer;

     11.   Application fees (inspection and plan checking fees) shall be paid. Permit fees shall be established by council resolution;

     12.   Copy of notice of intent (NOI) filed with Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board with WDID Number;

     13.   Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) detailing best management practices to ensure adequate sedimentation control measures to maximize stormwater quality controls for all projects of one or more acres.

     B.     Specific Plans and Data.

     1.     Grading Plan and Site Map. Plans shall be twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches and to a form approved by the city engineer. The plans shall contain the following items, plus any additional material which the city engineer deems necessary to show conformance of the proposed grading with the requirements of this section and other related ordinances. They shall contain:

     a.     A vicinity map showing the location of the site in relationship to the surrounding area’s watercourses, water bodies and other significant geographic features, and roads and other significant structures;

     b.     Boundary lines of the site;

     c.     Each lot or parcel of land into which the site is proposed to be divided;

     d.     The location of any existing buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed, and the location of any buildings or structures on adjacent land within one hundred feet of the proposed work;

     e.     Accurate contours showing the topography of the existing ground extending at least one hundred feet outside all boundary lines of the site, or sufficient to show on-site and off-site drainage;

     f.      Elevations, locations, cross-sections, extent and slope of all proposed grading shown by contours, or other acceptable means and location of any rock disposal areas, buttress fills, subdrains or other special features to be included in the work;

     g.     Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage systems and facilities, walls, cribbing or other erosion protection devices to be constructed in connection with, or as part of the proposed work, together with a map showing the draining area and estimated runoff of the area served by any drainage systems or facilities;

     h.     The location, circumference, species and approximate elevation at the base, of all trees. The design of the plans shall attempt to save wherever possible trees and other natural features of high aesthetic value. A tree care specialist shall review the trees to be saved at the site for physical condition and prepare a report setting requirements of grading and development adjacent to the saved trees. These requirements shall be incorporated into the grading plan;

     i.      Location and graphic representation of all existing and proposed natural and manmade drainage facilities;

     j.      Location of proposed final surface runoff, erosion and sediment control measures;

     k.     A statement of the quantities of material to be excavated and/or filled and the amount of such material to be imported to, or exported from, the site;

     l.      Outline of the methods to be used in clearing vegetation, and in storing and disposing of the cleared vegetative matter;

     m.    Proposed sequence and schedule of excavation filling, and other land-disturbing and filling activities, and soils or earthen material storage and disposal;

     n.     Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners which are within fifty feet of the property or which may be affected by the proposed grading operations.

     2.     Interim Erosion and Sediment Control Plan (Interim Plan). All the following information shall be provided with respect to conditions existing on the site during land-disturbing or filling activities or soil storage:

     a.     Maximum surface runoff from the site shall be calculated using methods approved by the Contra Costa Flood Control District;

     b.     A delineation and brief description of the measures to be undertaken to retain sediment on the site, including, but not limited to, the designs and specifications for berms and sediment detention basins and a schedule for their maintenance and upkeep;

     c.     A delineation and brief description of the surface runoff and erosion control measures to be implemented, including, but not limited to, types and method of applying mulches, and designs and specifications for diverters, dikes and drains, and a schedule for their maintenance and upkeep;

     d.     A delineation and brief description of the vegetative measures to be taken, including, but not limited to, seeding methods, the type, location and extent of preexisting and undisturbed vegetation types, and a schedule for maintenance and upkeep;

     e.     The location of all the measures listed by the applicant under subsection b above, shall be depicted on the site map and/or grading plan;

     f.      An estimate of the cost of implementing and maintaining all interim erosion and sediment control measures must be submitted in a form acceptable to the city engineer;

     g.     The applicant may propose the use of any erosion and sediment control techniques in the interim plan provided such techniques are proven to be as or more effective than the equivalent best management practices contained in the manual of standards;

     h.     The requirements for the interim plan may be waived by the city engineer provided that:

     i.      The average ground slope of the site is less than ten percent,

     ii.     The total area of the site is less than one acre,

     iii.    The site will be totally built upon and landscaped upon completion, and

     iv.    No adverse erosion or sediment impacts are likely to occur as a result of the development.

     3.     Final Erosion and Sediment Control Plan (Final Plan). All the following information shall be provided with respect to conditions existing on the site after final structures and improvements (except those required under this section) have been completed and where these final structures have not been covered by an interim plan:

     a.     A description of and specifications for sediment retention devices;

     b.     A description of and specifications for surface runoff and erosion control devices;

     c.     A description of vegetative measures;

     d.     The location of proposed final surface runoff, erosion and sediment control measures;

     e.     A graphic representation of the location of all items in subsections a through c above;

     f.      An estimate of the costs of implementing all final erosion and sediment control measures must be submitted in a form acceptable to the city engineer;

     g.     Maximum runoff from the site shall be calculated using Contra Costa Flood Control District methods, the method in the manual, or any other method approved by the city engineer;

     h.     A complete and detailed specification shall be prepared by an erosion and sediment control specialist. The specification shall indicate the material and methods for slope control planting, including ground covers, trees and shrubs, with special emphasis on the following:

     i.      Soil preparation, fertilization, plant material and methods of planting,

     ii.     Initial maintenance of the plant material and slopes until a specified percentage of plant coverage is established uniformly on the cut and fill slopes,

     iii.    Minimizing erosion and sedimentation;

     i.      The specifications shall include a statement by the slope control specialist giving a professional opinion regarding the following:

     i.      The length of time after planting in which the specified planting with the specified initial maintenance will normally produce, on the slopes in the slope control areas, the specified percentage of plant coverage,

     ii.     The length of time in which this specified plant coverage, without any special additional maintenance, will normally produce a coverage of permanent planting which will control erosion;

     j.      The applicant may propose the use of any erosion and sediment control techniques in the final plan provided such techniques are proven to be as or more effective than the equivalent best management practices contained in the manual of standards;

     k.     No final plan will be required where an interim plan requirement has been waived.

     4.     Soils and Engineering Geology Report. The soils and geology report required in this chapter shall be prepared by a professional soil investigation firm under the direction of a registered soils engineer and an engineering geologist. The soils report shall not be accepted if it is not current within twelve months.

     a.     Sufficient soil samples to represent a true cross-section of the cut and fill areas and of the material to be used as fill shall be taken and tested under the supervision of the soils engineer. All soils shall be classified in accordance with the unified soils classification system. Report, including all test reports by the soils engineer and geologist shall be submitted covering the following:

     i.      An adequate description of the geology of the site,

     ii.     Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development,

     iii.    The location and effects of active faults which may affect the proposed development. The results of seismic activity on the soils as the site is proposed to be graded and on the proposed buildings to be evaluated. Recommendations shall be made relating to building distances from nearby active faults and foundation design due to seismic activity.

     iv.    Data regarding the nature, distribution, strength, expansive quality and erodibility of existing soils,

     v.     Data regarding the nature, distribution, strength and erodibility of soils to be placed on the site, if any,

     vi.    Conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures,

     vii. Conclusions and recommended designs for interim soil stabilization devices and measures and for permanent soil stabilization after construction is completed,

     viii. Design criteria for corrective measures when necessary.

     ix.    Opinions and recommendations covering adequacy of sites to be developed by the proposed grading,

     x.     Any potential groundwater condition which may affect soil strength, consolidation or slope stability shall be defined and evaluated. This is of particular importance in areas subject to vibratory or shock loadings;

     b.     A complete and detailed specification shall be prepared by the soils engineer for clearing, grubbing, and all aspects of grading, including utility trench backfill, with special emphasis on the depth of fill layers, compaction methods, moisture content, frequency of field density tests, and minimum density to be obtained in the field as related to laboratory density tests;

     c.     A statement regarding specified grading slopes shall be prepared by the soils engineer, giving professional opinion including the following:

     i.      Shrinkage or settlement of a fill constructed in compliance with the proposed specification for controlled earthwork,

     ii.     The safe load-bearing capacity of such controlled sites,

     iii.    The maximum slope ratios necessary for slope stability for proposed fill and cut slopes, with recommended planting on the slope to assure freedom from erosion,

     iv.    The remaining movement, if any, anticipated in cut areas. Any forecast of appreciable settlement shall be supported by appropriate site soils data;

     d.     Recommendations included in this report and approved by the city shall be incorporated in the grading plans and/or specifications;

     e.     All or portions of this requirement may be waived by the city engineer, provided that:

     i.      The average ground slope of the site is less than ten percent,

     ii.     The total site area is less than ten thousand square feet, and

     iii.    There are no known geologic hazards on or adjacent to the site;

     f.      The city reserves the right to require additional soils and/or geologic investigations be made if it deems necessary in order to further insure the safety and maintainability of the site.

     5.     Work Schedule. The applicant must submit a master work schedule showing the following information:

     a.     Proposed grading schedule;

     b.     Proposed conditions of the site on each September 15th and October 15th during which the permit is in effect;

     c.     Proposed schedule for installation of all interim erosion and sediment control measures, including, but not limited to, the stage of completion of erosion and sediment control devices and vegetative measures on each of the dates set forth in subsection b above;

     d.     Schedule of construction of final improvements, if any;

     e.     Schedule for installation of permanent erosion and sediment control devices, where required. (Ord. 671 § 1, 2001; Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.060 Grading regulations.
     A.    General.

     1.     Grading shall be designed, as far as possible, so that lot lines are at the top of slope and with adequate property line setback from the slope to provide for required vertical slope rounding.

     2.     Grading shall be designed wherever possible to be at the same elevation or below adjoining properties outside the development so as not to negate the privacy of the adjoining property owners. If it is not possible and there are adjoining properties which will be adversely affected, the developer shall be required to either move the slope onto the adjacent property owner’s land replacing fences and improvements or replace the property owner’s fence (if one exists) at the top of the slope and deed the slope to the property owner. The city may waive this requirement wherein the adversely affected property owner fails to negotiate for either option.

     3.     Stockpiling of materials shall be subject to city approval and shall be removed or relocated when required for public health or safety.

     4.     All graded surfaces and materials, whether filled, excavated, transported or stockpiled, shall be wetted, protected or contained in such a manner as to prevent any nuisance from dust, or spillage upon adjoining property or streets. Equipment and materials on the site should be used in such a manner as to avoid excessive dust.

     5.     All grading and noise therefrom including, but not limited to, warming of equipment motors in residential zones, or within one thousand feet of any residential occupancy, hotel, motel or hospital shall be limited to the following hours: Monday through Friday from seven a.m. until three-thirty p.m., or until five-thirty p.m. with the express written approval of the city engineer or designee. No such work shall be performed on Saturday or Sunday or city holidays, except that such work may be performed on Saturday between eight a.m. and five p.m. with the express written approval of the city engineer or designee.

     a.     Construction and grading activities within city right-of-way, such as road work or installation of drainage facilities, may be performed outside of the specified work hours of this subsection 5, including overnight work, with the express written approval of the city engineer or designee.

     b.     The planning commission and city council may impose more restrictive hours of construction or grading upon any projects involving construction or grading activity by adding appropriate conditions to the city’s approval of subdivisions, planned development permits, conditional use permits, variances and other projects.

     c.     The performance of emergency work is exempt from the provisions of this subsection 5. The city engineer may require the production of evidence after the fact that an emergency existed that would constitute a hazard to persons or property and may cite the responsible parties for a violation of this section if no such evidence is produced.

     6.     Whenever any portion of the work requires entry onto adjacent property for any reason, the permit applicant shall obtain a right of entry from the adjacent property owner or his or her authorized representative in a form acceptable to the city, and shall file a copy of the fully executed right of entry with the city prior to issuance of the grading permit and/or approval of the grading plans.

     B.     Setbacks.

     1.     The tops and toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from property lines and structures as far as necessary to provide for safety of adjacent property, safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic, required slope rounding, adequate foundation support, required swales, berms and drainage facilities and applicable zoning requirements. Except for pier-type foundations or other special foundation design, setbacks shall be not less than shown in Figure “A.”

     2.     The setbacks and other restrictions specified by this section are minimum and may be increased by the chief building inspector or by the recommendations of a civil engineer, soils engineer or engineering geologist, if necessary, for safety and stability or to prevent damage of adjacent properties from deposition or erosion or to provide access for slope maintenance and drainage. Retaining walls may be used to reduce the required setbacks when approved by the chief building inspector.

     C.     Preparation of Ground. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials scarifying to provide a bond with the new fill, and where slopes are steeper than five to one, and the height is greater than five feet, by benching into sound bedrock or other competent material, as determined by the soils engineer. The bench under the toe of a fill on a slope steeper than five to one shall be at least ten feet wide. The area beyond the toe of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain shall be provided. Where fill is to be placed over a cut, the bench under the toe of fill shall be at least ten feet wide, but the cut must be made before placing fill and approved by the soils engineer and engineering geologist as suitable foundation for fill. Unsuitable soil is soil which, in the opinion of the city or the civil engineer or the soils engineer or the geologist, is not competent to support other soil or fill, to support structures or to satisfactorily perform the other functions for which the soil is intended.

     D.    Cut and Fill Slopes.

     1.     Cut and fill slopes shall be in general, no steeper than is safe for the intended use or is necessary to insure the protection and safety of adjacent properties.

     2.     Unless recommended otherwise by the soils engineer, and approved by the city, the steepness of cut or fill slopes shall not exceed two horizontal to one vertical.

     3.     The height of cut and fill slopes (including retaining walls) and the maximum depth of cut or fill shall not exceed that which is shown on the approved hillside planned development permit.

     4.     Guidelines for vertical slope rounding shall be in accordance with details as approved by the city engineer.

     5.     Cut and fill slopes shall be contour rounded as approved by the city during the various stages of approval.

     6.     Variable slopes shall be used to mitigate environmental and visual impacts of grading.

     7.     Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability.

     E.     Excavations and Embankments.

     1.     General.

     a.     Excavations and embankments, in general, shall conform to the latest edition of the city’s standard specifications and as required herein.

     b.     Cut and fills shall be designed to balance as near as possible to avoid the nuisances created by off-site hauling. If off-site hauling is determined necessary by the city, details of the hauling operation, including, but not limited to, size of trucks, haul route, dust and debris control measures and time and frequency of haul trips shall be submitted to the city for approval. The city shall be empowered to place such restrictions as it deems necessary to minimize health, safety and general welfare problems which might arise from this hauling.

     c.     Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than two horizontal to one vertical.

     d.     All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of ninety percent of maximum density as determined by the State Impact Method Test No. 216F or equivalent method approved by the city of determining maximum soil density. Field density shall be determined by a method acceptable to the city.

     2.     Fill Material.

     a.     Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be permitted in fills. Except as permitted by the chief building inspector, no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than twelve inches shall be buried or placed in fills.

     b.     The city may permit placement of larger rock when the soils engineer properly devises a method of placement, continuously inspects its placement and approves the fill stability. The following conditions shall also apply.

     i.      Prior to issuance of the grading permit, potential rock disposal areas shall be delineated on the grading plan;

     ii.     Rock sizes greater than twelve inches in maximum dimension shall be ten feet or more below grade, measured vertically;

     iii.    Rock shall be placed to as to assure filling of all voids with fines.

     F.     Erosion and Sediment Control.

     1.     Erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented as specified by the approved interim and final sediment and erosion control plans. Erosion and sediment control measures shall be consistent with the Manual of Sediment and Erosion Control Practices and the California Storm Water Best Management Practices Handbook, published by the Storm Water Task Force, 1993.

     2.     No grading shall be conducted as to cause erosion or flooding of any natural drainage.

     3.     Sediment basins, as required by the interim and final erosion and sediment control plans, shall be constructed to detain runoff and trap sediment. Temporary sediment basin dams and collected silt shall then be removed and resulting material hauled from the site or used as topsoil.

     4.     The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion and to return the slope to its natural appearance as near as possible. The protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to calling for final approval. The planting shall be so timed that ground covers will not be washed out by rains nor burned due to lack of water. Where necessary, check dams, cribbing, rip rap and other devices or methods shall be employed to control erosion and to provide safety.

     5.     All exposed or finished banks or slopes of any fill or excavation shall be protected from erosion by approved planting, irrigation, hydroseeding, cribbing, walls, or terracing or a combination thereof. All graded surfaces exceeding five thousand square feet in area shall be planted and irrigated, paved or built upon and shall be provided with berms and approved drainage facilities adequate to prevent erosion and to conduct the accumulation of runoff of surface waters to an approved place of discharge. All graded surfaces shall be protected within thirty days of any portion of the grading being completed, or immediately upon completion if grading operations are conducted during the rainy season. In no instance shall graded surfaces remain unprotected past September 30th. It is the intent of this section to prohibit the abandonment of graded areas or slopes which are not provided with erosion protection and adequate requirements in this section have been provided and approved.

     G.    Drainage.

     1.     General.

     a.     All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest practicable drainage approved by the city and/or other appropriate jurisdiction as a safe place to deposit such waters. Erosion of ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of nonerosive downdrains or other devices.

     b.     All building site shall be graded and sloped away from the building foundation with a minimum slope of two percent for a distance of ten feet on all sides of every building, except where yard requirements are less than twenty feet, in which case the soil shall be graded away from the foundation to a minimum of two-tenths of one foot in elevation at a distance not less than one-half the required yard width.

     c.     Lot drainage shall be directed toward approved drainage facilities at a minimum gradient of one and one-half percent. The gradient from the building pad may be one percent if all the following conditions exist throughout the building area:

     i.      No proposed fills are greater than ten feet in maximum depth;

     ii.     No proposed finish cut or fill slope faces have a vertical height in excess of ten feet;

     iii.    No existing slope faces have a slope face steeper than ten horizontal to one vertical.

     2.     Terraces.

     a.     Terraces at least six feet in width shall be established at not more than thirty-foot vertical intervals to control surface drainage and debris on cut or fill slopes. For cut or fill slopes greater than sixty feet and up to one hundred twenty feet in vertical height, one terrace at approximately mid-height shall be twelve feet in width. Terrace widths and spacing for cut and fill slopes greater than one hundred twenty feet in height shall be designed by the civil engineer and approved by the city.

     b.     Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance.

     3.     Interceptor Ditches.

     a.     Interceptor ditches shall be installed where necessary to protect slopes from surface runoff. They shall be designed for the anticipated runoff from a twenty-five year design storm and paved with Portland cement to a minimum three-inch thickness and a thirty-two-inch top width. The minimum depth at the center shall be one foot or as required for a minimum of three-inch free board during the twenty-five-year design storm.

     b.     The minimum gradient of interceptor ditches shall be one percent and no single run shall collect runoff from a tributary area exceeding fifteen thousand square feet (horizontal projection) without discharging into an approved down drain.

     4.     Trash Racks. Properly designed trash racks shall be installed on the upstream end of storm drain pipes where that pipe accepts drainage from a waterway which is not to be undergrounded. These racks are to be constructed so as to preclude large debris and small children from being pulled into the pipe from heavy storm flows. The city may require the installation of trash racks at other locations as deemed necessary for proper maintenance and safety.

     H.    Wet Season Work.

     1.     For commencement of the activity during the wet season, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city engineer, that land disturbance is relatively minor and that erosion and sedimentation can be controlled.

     2.     For continuation of activities, other than installation, maintenance or repair of measures in the interim or final plans, during the wet season, the permittee must apply for and receive, every five working days, special permission to proceed. The request shall be accompanied by a recommendation from the soils engineer for continuation of the work.

     3.     The city engineer may grant permission under this section on the basis of weather forecasts, recommendation of the soils engineer, experience and other pertinent factors which indicate the activity may commence or continue without erosion and/or sedimentation occurring.

     4.     The applicant/permit tee’s failure to obtain permission for wet season activity shall result in the imposition of suspension/revocation, and action against the security or criminal penalties as described herein.

     5.     The city engineer may prohibit the activity during the months in which he/she finds that rainfall will likely preclude compliance with these recommendations.

     I.      Modifications.

     1.     Modifications to the specific grading regulations in this section may be approved or required by the city upon finding that such modification:

     a.     Is necessary to preserve existing natural features, such as trees, streams, hills, significant vegetation or rock outcroppings, etc.; or

     b.     Will reduce the adverse visual impacts of cut and fill operations.

     2.     For subdivisions of five or more units, this finding must be made by the planning commission and/or the city council at the time of approval of the tentative map or hillside planned development permit.

     3.     For all other grading where a grading permit is required, the finding must be made by the city engineer.

     4.     When a soils report is required for the proposed grading, the modifications shall be subject to approval by the soils engineer. (Ord. 986 § 3, 2017; Ord. 671 § 1, 2001; Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.070 Security/performance bond.
     A.    Amount for Form of Security.

     1.     The applicant shall provide security for the performance of the work described and delineated on the approved grading plan and interim and final erosion and sediment control plans in an amount not less than ten percent of the total estimated cost of the work. The estimated cost of work shall be as approved by the city engineer.

     2.     The type of security shall be either:

     a.     Cash deposit with the city; or

     b.     A certificate of deposit approved by the city attorney from a financial institution subject to regulation by the state or federal government who said financial institution pledges funds are on deposit and

 

guaranteed for payment, and payable, immediately, partially or in full, to the city upon demand.

     B.     Action Against Security.

     1.     Should the city find that the permittee has failed to comply with any of the following or should any of the following conditions exist, the city engineer may take appropriate action against the security after giving written notice to the permittee and surety.

     a.     The permittee ceases land-disturbing activities and/or filling and abandons the worksite prior to completion of the work;

     b.     The permittee fails to conform to the approved interim or final erosion and sediment control plans;

     c.     The permittee fails to correct a hazardous condition, to remedy defective work or repair damage caused by the work;

     d.     The permittee fails to conform to the approved grading plan and/or any condition of approval.

     2.     The written notice to the permittee and surety by the city engineer shall include:

     a.     The work to be completed and/or repairs to be made;

     b.     The approximate cost to perform the required work;

     c.     The time in which all work is to be completed.

     3.     Should the required work not be completed within the time specified by the city, the city may cause such work to be completed or partially completed to a condition acceptable to the city, and deduct the cost thereof from any cash deposit or collect such amount from the surety.

     C.     Release of Surety. Any unused security posted with the city for faithful performance shall be released as follows:

     1.     Eighty percent of the unused security will be returned upon completion and acceptance of the work by the city engineer (less any outstanding claims); and

     2.     Any remainder of the security will be released twelve months after completion and acceptance by the city engineer provided all defective work is corrected to the satisfaction of the city engineer. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.080 Permit approval, conditional approval or denial.
     A.    General. No permit shall be approved or issued until all required plans, reports, documents and security have been submitted and approved by the city engineer and all fees have been paid.

     B.     Action by the City Engineer.

     1.     The city engineer, or authorized representative, shall review all plans and documents submitted pursuant to this chapter and, if necessary, request additional data, clarification of submitted data or correction of defective submissions with twenty working days after the date of submission. The city engineer shall notify the applicant in writing of his or her approval, conditional approval or denial of the permit application within thirty calendar days of the initial submission or of the corrected submissions, whichever is later.

     2.     In the case of subdivisions, the approval to proceed by the city engineer, after having signed grading plans and having received all required bonds, fees, agreements and deeds, shall constitute the issuance of a grading permit. Grading shall be defined as an improvement for the purpose of the subdivision improvement agreement. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.090 Permit duration, suspension, revocation or assignment.
     A.    Duration of Permit.

     1.     Permits issued under this chapter shall be valid for the period specified on the permit form, or as specified by an improvement agreement.

     2.     Should grading not commence within sixty calendar days of the time specified on the permit, the city engineer may void the permit and require a reapplication for issuance of a new permit.

     3.     The city engineer may grant an extension of time upon just showing by the permittee. The city engineer may require additional fees or reasonable conditions in consideration for such time extension.

     B.     Suspension or Revocation of Permit.

     1.     General. The city engineer shall first resort to the procedures set forth in this section before any other enforcement procedure set forth in this chapter is implemented.

     2.     Suspension.

     a.     The city engineer shall suspend the permit and issue a stop work order, and the permittee shall cease all work on the work site, except work necessary to remedy the cause of the suspension, upon notification of such suspension when:

     i.      The city engineer determines that the permit was issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or the provisions of this title;

     ii.     The permittee fails to submit reports where required; or

     iii.    The work on-site is not being performed in accordance with approved plans and specifications; or

     iv.    The permittee fails to comply with an order to modify the work within the time limits imposed by the city engineer.

     v.     The permittee fails to obtain permission for wet season activity; or

     vi.    The permittee is causing excessive erosion and/or sediment.

     b.     The city engineer may reinstate a suspended permit upon the permit tee’s correction of the cause of the suspension.

     3.     Revocation.

     a.     The city engineer may revoke the permit and issue a stop work order upon finding the permittee:

     i.      Conducts or carries on the grading in such a manner as to materially affect adversely the health, welfare or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the property of the permittee; or

     ii.     Conducts or carries on the grading so that the grading is materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood; or

     iii.    Fails to cease work under an order of suspension.

     b.     Any revocation will be effective immediately upon notification by the city engineer. The city engineer shall not reinstate a revoked permit.

     C.     Assignment of Permit. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be assigned, provided:

     1.     The permittee notifies the city engineer of the proposed assignment;

     2.     The proposed assignee;

     a.     Submits an application form, and

     b.     Agrees in writing to all the conditions and duties imposed by the permit, and

     c.     Agrees in writing to assume responsibility for all work performed prior to the assignment, and

     d.     Provides the necessary security/performance bond(s), and

     e.     Agrees to pay all applicable fees;

     3.     The city engineer approves the assignment. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.100 Responsibility of permittee, permit tee’s engineer and contractor.
     A.    Permittee/Contractor.

     1.     The permittee and/or the permit tee’s engineers, contractors or agents shall be responsible for the satisfactory and safe conduct of all work.

     2.     The permit applicant and grading contractor shall be responsible for the protection of adjacent properties during grading operations. Prior to commencing any grading of the site, the exterior boundaries shall be marked as required by the city engineer. Boundary markers shall be maintained throughout the grading operation. Temporary barriers and/or protective fencing shall be used when necessary to protect adjacent properties.

     3.     In addition to the security to be posted in accordance with Section 15.52.070, the applicant shall agree to employ a civil engineer, soils engineer and/or engineering geologist to give technical supervision or make inspections of the work whenever a soils report has been required for the proposed grading.

     4.     The permittee shall maintain a copy of the permit, approved plans and reports on the worksite and available for public inspection during all working hours.

     5.     The permittee shall, at all times, be in conformity with approved site map and grading plan and interim and final plans.

     6.     Unless waived by the city engineer, the permittee shall notify the city engineer within thirty-six hours of the following:

     a.     The beginning of the permitted activity;

     b.     The completion of rough grading;

     c.     The completion of finish grading;

     d.     The installation of all erosion control devices and the completion of planting requirements; and

     e.     The readiness of the site for final inspection, including but not limited to, finished grading, installation of drainage devices and final erosion control measures.

     7.     The permittee shall submit to the city engineer written reports if:

     a.     There are any delays in obtaining materials, machinery, services or manpower necessary to the implementation of the grading and interim of final plans as scheduled;

     b.     There are any delays in land-disturbing or filling activities or soil storage;

     c.     The work is not being done in conformance with the approved grading plan or interim or final plans;

     d.     There are any departures from the approved grading plan which may affect implementation of the interim or final plans as scheduled;

     e.     There are any delays in the implementation of the interim or final plans; or

     f.      There are any other departures from implementation of the interim or final plans.

     8.     Unless this requirement is waived by the city engineer, the permittee shall submit recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary and appropriate, with the reports.

     9.     The city will review all reports submitted by the permittee. The city engineer may require the permittee to modify the site map and grading plan, interim or final plans, and maintenance methods and schedules. The city engineer shall notify the permittee in writing of the requirement and specify a reasonable period of time within which the permittee must comply. All modifications are subject to the city engineer’s approval.

     B.     Soils Engineer.

     1.     The soils engineer’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, the professional inspection and certification concerning the preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for required compaction, stability of all finished slopes and design of buttress fills and the design and need for subdrains and other groundwater control devices, where required, incorporating data supplied by the engineering geologist.

     2.     Upon completion of the grading, the soils engineer shall certify that the site was graded and filled with material in accordance with the approved specifications. He shall also give his or her professional opinion regarding remaining shrinkage or settlement, expansive characteristics, slope stability, load-bearing qualities, saline or alkaline conditions, and of any other conditions pertinent to construction upon the completed cut or fill.

     C.     Civil Engineer.

     1.     It shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer who prepared the approved grading plans to incorporate all recommendations from the soils engineer and engineering geology reports into the grading plan. He shall also be responsible for the professional inspection and certification of the grading within his or her area of technical specialty. The civil engineer shall act as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the other professionals, the contractor and the city. The civil engineer shall also be responsible for the preparation of revised plans and the submission of as-graded plans upon completion of the work.

     2.     Prior to foundation work, the permit tee’s engineer shall certify that the building pad elevations do not vary more than two-tenths of one foot from the approved pad elevations.

     3.     When work has been completed, all drainage devices, systems and facilities installed and slope planting established, the civil engineer shall certify that all grading, lot drainage and drainage facilities have been completed and the slope planting installed in conformance with the approved plans and the requirements of this chapter.

     D.    Engineering Geologist. The engineering geologist’s area of responsibility shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, professional inspection and certification of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills and the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters. He shall report his or her findings to the soils engineer and the civil engineer for engineering analysis.

     E.     Slope Control Specialist. The slope control specialist’s area of responsibility shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, professional design and inspection of erosion control measures and the certification of the completion and adequacy therefor. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.110 Inspection.
     A.    General.

     1.     All grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the city.

     2.     The city, upon at least thirty-six hours’ prior notification from the permittee or his or her agent, shall inspect the work at the following stages of the work and shall either approve the portion then completed, or shall notify the permittee or his or her agent wherein it fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter:

     a.     Initial. When the site has been cleared of vegetation and unapproved soils have been scarified and/or removed, benched or otherwise prepared and before any fill is placed;

     b.     Rough. When rough grading has been completed and approximate final elevations have been established; drainage terraces, swales and other drainage devices graded ready for paving; and berms installed at the top of slopes;

     c.     Final. When all grading has been completed, all drainage facilities installed and slope planting completed and all certifications filed with the city.

     3.     In addition to the inspections specified in this section, the city may make such other inspections as it deems necessary to determine that the work is being performed in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

     4.     During grading reports on compaction data and soils engineering test results and recommendations shall be submitted to the civil engineer and the engineering geologist on a weekly basis or more frequent basis, if required by the city engineer.

     5.     If, in the course of fulfilling his or her responsibility under this chapter, the civil engineer, the slope control specialist, the soils engineer, the engineering geologist or the testing agency finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this chapter, or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the permit tee’s contractor and to the city engineer. Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be submitted for city approval.

     6.     If the civil engineer, the soils engineer, the engineering geologist or the testing agency of record is changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed to accept the responsibility within the area of his or her technical competence for certification upon completion of the work.

     B.     Testing.

     1.     The soils engineer shall perform sufficient testing during the grading operations to adequately certify that the grading is performed in accordance with the approved plans, specifications and as required by this chapter.

     2.     Periodic compaction tests and soils samples shall be made on all fills and submitted to the city. The test results shall include the dry density, moisture content, location, elevation and sampling date of each sample taken shall be reported, along with sufficient data to correlate with laboratory analyses submitted.

     3.     Relative resistance (“R”) values for determining street structural sections will be arranged by the city. The city will also perform all necessary trench compaction testing for underground facilities within city-maintained right-of-way and for subgrade compaction within streets to be maintained by the city. Any necessary retests due to test failure will be charged to the permittee in accordance with the city’s fee schedule.

     C.     Final Reports and As-Built Plans. Upon final completion of the work, the following reports and drawings and supplements thereto shall be submitted to the city:

     1.     A soils and geologic grading report prepared by the soils engineer and engineering geologist, including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests and other substantiating data and comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the soil engineering investigation report. The report shall include a final description of the geology of the site, including any new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of same on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. A certification shall be provided as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use as affected by soil and geologic factors;

     2.     An as-graded grading plan prepared by the civil engineer, including original ground surface elevations, as graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns and locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities;

     3.     An as-built erosion and sediment control plan prepared by the civil engineer. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.120 Hazards.
     Whenever the city engineer determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill has or may become a hazard to life or limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of the property, upon receipt in writing from the city, shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment so as to eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.130 Appeals.
     A.    The applicant, permittee or permit tee’s agents or any person(s) adversely affected, not satisfied with the decision by the city engineer in regard to the issuance of a grading permit or performance of the work, may file a written appeal to the city clerk for a hearing before the city council.

     B.     Any such appeal must be made within three calendar days following the decision.

     C.     The city council will set a hearing to consider the appeal at the earliest possible regularly scheduled city council meeting. Written notification of the hearing time and date will be given to the appellant and any interested person(s) requesting such notification, not less than seven calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing.

     D.    The city council, after receiving and considering all testimony and pertinent documents may:

     1.     Uphold the city engineer’s decision; or

     2.     Approve the appeal; or

     3.     Modify the city engineer’s decision, consistent with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.140 Nuisances.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to authorize any person to maintain a private or public nuisance upon their property, and compliance with the terms of this chapter shall not be a defense in any action to abate such nuisance. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.150 Other laws.
     Neither this chapter nor any administrative decision made under it:

     A.    Exempts the permittee from procuring other required permits or complying with the requirements and conditions of such a permit; or

     B.     Limits the right of any person to maintain, at any time, any appropriate action, at law or in equity, for relief or damages against the permittee arising from the permitted activity. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.160 City held harmless.
     The permittee, permit tee’s contractors and agents shall indemnify and save harmless the city and all officers and employees thereof connected with the work, from all claims, suits or actions of every name, kind and description, brought for, or on account of, injuries to or death of any person or damage to property resulting from the issuance of the grading permit, construction of the work or by or in consequence of any negligence in guarding the work, use of improper materials in construction of the work, or by or on account of any act or omission by the permittee or permit tee’s agents. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.170 Liability and property damage insurance.
     The permit tee’s contractor shall file a certificate of liability insurance in accordance with Section GP-10 of the city’s standard specifications prior to commencing any work. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.180 Fines and penalties.
     Any violation of this chapter may be subject to enforcement through the administrative citation procedure codified in Chapter 1.08 of this code or any other appropriate remedy specified in this code or state or federal law. The permit holder shall be responsible for compliance by its agents, including any subcontractors. Failure to comply with the approved construction BMPs will result in the issuance of verbal warnings, correction notices, citations or a project stop work order. In the event of the issuance of a stop work notice on the project for engineering, public works or building violations, the permit holder shall be fined through additional fees/fines placed on the building permits or, when possible, by the reduction of any applicable development fee credits (collectively “fines”). Except in the event of an emergency, the city shall provide verbal and written notice of the violation to the applicable permit holder prior to the issuance of a stop work notice. Fines shall be one hundred dollars for the first violation, two hundred fifty dollars for the second occurrence of the same violation (regardless of subcontractor) and one thousand dollars for each subsequent violation. (Ord. 671 § 1, 2001; Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

 

15.52.190 Severability and validity.
     If any part of this chapter is found not valid, the remainder of this chapter shall remain in effect. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1989)

Chapter 15.68 GAS-SHUT-OFF DEVICES
15.68.010 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this section, certain terms shall be defined as follows:

     A.    “Downstream of gas utility meter” refers to all customer-owned gas piping or in liquid petroleum gas installations shall refer to the gas piping on the structure side of the gas regulator.

     B.     “Excess flow gas-shut-off device” means those valves or devices that are not actuated by adoption but are activated by significant gas leaks or over-pressure surges, which can occur when pipes rupture inside the structure. The design of the device provides a proven method to automatically provide for expedient and safe gas-shutoff in an emergency. The design of the device shall provide a capability for ease of consumer or owner resetting in a safe manner. The device is certified by the State Architect or the operational and functional design of the device meets or exceeds the device certified by the office of the State Architect. The determination of whether the operational and functional design of the device is at least equal to the device certified by the State Architect may be made by one of the following: the Independent Laboratory of the International Approval Services (IAS), Underwriter’s Laboratory (UL), International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), or any other recognized listing and testing agency.

     C.     “Gas-shut-off device,” as used in this section, refers to either a seismic gas-shut-off device or excess flow gas-shut-off device.

     D.    “Residential building” means any single-family dwelling, duplex, apartment building, condominium building, townhouse building, lodging house, congregate residence, hotel, or motel.

     E.     “Seismic gas-shut-off device” means a system consisting of a seismic sensing means and actuating means designed to actuate automatically a companion gas-shutoff means installed in a gas piping system in order to shut off the gas downstream of the location of the gas-shutoff means in the event of a severe seismic disturbance. The system may consist of separable components or may incorporate all functions in a single body. The device is certified by the State Architect, and the operational and functional design of the device meets or exceeds the device certified by the office of the State Architect. The determination of whether the operational and functional design of the device is at least equal to the device certified by the State Architect may be made by one of the following: the Independent Laboratory of the International Approval Services (IAS), Underwriters Laboratory (UL), International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), Office of the State Architect, or any other recognized listing and testing agency.

     F.     “Upstream of gas utility meter” refers to all gas piping installed by the utility up to and including the meter and the utility’s bypass fee at the connection to the customer owned piping. (Ord. 715, 2002)

 

15.68.020 Devices—When required.
     Approved seismic gas-shut-off devices (motion sensitive) or approved excess flow gas-shut-off devices (non-motion sensitive) shall be installed:

     A.    In any new building construction (commercial, industrial or residential) containing gas piping for which a building permit is first issued on or after the effective date of the ordinance;

     B.     In any existing residential, commercial or industrial building, when any addition or alteration is made to the interior of a building that contains gas piping, and a building permit is required for such work; or

 

     C.     When any plumbing permit is issued for gas piping. (Ord. 715, 2002)

 

15.68.030 Exceptions.
     A.    Gas-shut-off devices installed on a building prior to the effective date of this chapter, are exempt from the requirements of this section provided they remain installed on the building or structure and are maintained for the life of the building or structure.

     B.     Gas-shut-off devices installed on a gas distribution system owned or operated by a public utility shall not be subject to the requirements of this chapter (Health and Safety Code Section 19201(b)).

     C.     Installation of gas-shut-off devices is not required for building permits issued for minor and non-structural repairs such as re-roofing, window replacement, siding replacement, decks and any other minor permit as determined by the chief building official. (Ord. 715, 2002)

 

15.68.040 Devices—Location required.
     A.    Seismic gas-shut-off devices shall be installed downstream of the gas utility meter or liquid petroleum tank on each fuel gas line where the gas line serves a building; and/or

     B.     Excess flow gas-shut-off devices shall be installed downstream of the gas utility meter or liquid petroleum tank on each fuel gas line where the gas line serves a building and at each gas appliance within a building. (Ord. 715, 2002)

 

15.68.050 General requirements.
     Gas-shut-off devices installed either in compliance with this chapter or voluntarily, with a permit issued on or after the effective date of this chapter, shall comply with the following requirements:

     A.    Be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions;

     B.     In the case of seismic gas-shut-off devices (motion sensitive) only, such devices must be mounted rigidly to the exterior of the building or structure containing the fuel gas piping. This requirement need not apply if the building and safety division determines that the seismic gas-shut-off device (motion sensitive) has been tested and listed for an alternate method of installation;

     C.     Seismic gas-shut-off devices shall be certified by the State Architect and be listed by an approved listing and testing agency such as IAS, IAMPO, UL or the office of the State Architect;

     D.    Have a thirty-year warranty which warrants that the valve or device is free from defects and will continue to properly operate for thirty years from the date of installation; and

     E.     Where gas-shut-off devices are installed voluntarily or as required by this section, they shall be maintained for the life of the building or structure or be replaced with a valve or device complying with the requirements of this section. (Ord. 715, 2002)

 

15.68.060 List of approved valves and devices.
     The building division of the city of Brentwood shall maintain a list of all seismic gas-shut-off devices (motion sensitive) and excess flow gas-shut-off devices (non-motion sensitive) which meet or exceed the requirements of devices certified by the office of the State Architect for installation in the state of California and which comply with the standards and criteria set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 19180 et seq., including quality and design regulation for earthquake actuated automatic gas-shut-off systems (see 24 Cal. Code Regs. Ch. 12-16-1). (Ord. 715, 2002)

Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

Chapter 16.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 16.020 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 16.040 PRELIMINARY MAP PROCEDURE (OPTIONAL PROCEDURE)
Chapter 16.050 TENTATIVE MAP PROCEDURE
Chapter 16.060 PARCEL MAP PROCEDURE
Chapter 16.070 FINAL MAP PROCEDURE
Chapter 16.080 PRELIMINARY MAP, FORM AND CONTENTS
Chapter 16.090 TENTATIVE MAP, FORM AND CONTENTS
Chapter 16.100 PARCEL MAPS, FORM AND CONTENTS
Chapter 16.110 FINAL MAPS, FORM AND CONTENTS
Chapter 16.120 LAND DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURE
Chapter 16.130 FACILITY FEES AND CHARGES
Chapter 16.140 DEDICATIONS
Chapter 16.150 DEDICATION, PARK LAND OR FEES-IN-LIEU
Chapter 16.160 PUBLIC FACILITY RESERVATIONS
Chapter 16.165 CITY MANAGER APPROVAL OF FINAL MAP AND SUBDIVISION AGREEMENTS
Chapter 16.166 SUBDIVISION AGREEMENTS
Chapter 16.168 HABITAT CONSERVATION PLAN (HCP)/NATURAL COMMUNITY CONSERVATION PLAN (NCCP) IMPLEMENTATION
Chapter 16.170 APPEALS
Chapter 16.180 ENFORCEMENT

Chapter 16.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS
16.010.010 Title of provisions.
     The provisions of Title 16 shall be known as the “Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of the city of Brentwood” and may be referred to herein by such title or as the “subdivision regulations,” the “subdivision ordinance,” “this ordinance” or as “this title.” (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.010.020 Authority for provisions.
     Title 16 is adopted pursuant to Division 2 of the Government Code of the state of California, The Subdivision Map Act, hereinafter to be called the “Map Act,” which act vests the city with the responsibility of regulating and controlling subdivisions and requires the adoption of an ordinance for this purpose. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.010.030 Purpose of provisions.
     It shall be the purpose of the subdivision ordinance to implement and supplement the Map Act through the adoption of local procedures and regulations for the subdivision and/or development of land. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.010.040 Limitations of provisions.
     It shall be the purpose of this title only to set forth or highlight those provisions of the Map Act that are necessary to carry out its purpose and to inform the general public as to local procedures and requirements. The Map Act must be consulted to be completely informed on the subdivision process. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.010.050 Applicability of provisions.
     A.    Generally. Prior to the division of any land in the city the subdivider thereof shall conform to and comply with the requirements, rules and regulations of this title and of the Map Act.

     B.     State Subdivision Map Act to Prevail. In the event of conflict of this title with the Map Act or in the event of the accidental or purposeful omission of provisions of said Map Act or in the event of subsequent amendment of said Map Act the provisions of the Map Act shall prevail.

     C.     Exclusions.

     1.     This title shall not be applicable to those divisions of land or space cited in Sections 66412 through 66413 of the Map Act.

     2.     A parcel map shall not be required for any of the following:

     a.     For subdivision of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, which are created by short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than thirty days’ notice in writing);

     b.     The conveyance of land to or from a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to that public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates such a parcel map. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.010.060 Advisory agency—Powers and duties.
     The planning commission is empowered to approve, conditionally approve or deny tentative maps, and has all the related powers and duties under the Map Act and this title. However, when a subdivision is combined with an application requiring legislative action (such as a zoning amendment, general plan amendment, exception under general plan density transition policy LU2a, or development agreement), the planning commission’s action will be advisory to the city council, which becomes the decision maker. (Ord. 976 § 4, 2016; Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.010.080 Public hearing notice.
     A.    Unless otherwise provided by State Code, notice of a hearing held pursuant to this title shall be given pursuant to Sections 65090 and 65091 of the Government Code.

     B.     If the proposed subdivision is a conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative project, the notice shall also be given by the local agency by United States mail to each tenant of the subject property, and shall also include notification of the tenant’s right to appear and be heard. The requirements of this subsection may be satisfied by service of the notice in compliance with the requirements for service of legal process by mail.

     C.     Fees shall be collected from the subdivider for expenses incurred under this section.

     D.    Any interested person may appear at the hearing and shall be heard. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.010.090 Conformance with city ordinances and plans.
     In no case shall the city accept for filing any map for subdivision which is not in conformance with this title or with the city zoning ordinance, the community development plan, any applicable specific plan or any other ordinance or plan regulating the subdivision and development of land in the city except that an amendment to any ordinance or plan may be submitted for concurrent consideration with the map. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

Chapter 16.020 DEFINITIONS
16.020.010 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “subdivision and land development ordinance definitions” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to promote understanding, consistency and precision in the interpretation of the subdivision and land development regulations. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.020.020 Applicability of provisions.
     A.    The meaning and construction of words and phrases as hereinafter set forth shall apply throughout this title, except where the context of such words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction.

     B.     The definition of words and phrases used in this chapter is supplemental to those defined in the Map Act and whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined herein but are defined in the Map Act as last amended, such definitions are incorporated herein and shall be deemed to apply as though set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.020.030 Definitions.
     The following words or phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them:

     A.    “Alley” means a right-of-way intended primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street, and providing only secondary access to such property.

     B.     “Bicycle Path” means a path, trail, route, way, or lane designated for use by bicycles and other nonmotorized vehicles. Public paths shall include only those for which rights-of-way are dedicated or deeded to and accepted by the city.

     C.     “Block” means an area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways or ways, railroads, or subdivision boundary, except alleys.

     D.    “City” means the city of Brentwood and any one or more public officials, bodies, commissions or agencies of the city having jurisdiction over the particular matter referred to.

     E.     “Commission” means the planning commission of the city of Brentwood.

     F.     “Community plan” means the community development plan of the city of Brentwood, including any precise or area plans or elements adopted as part thereof.

     G.    “Council” means the city council of the city of Brentwood.

     H.    “Design” means:

     1.     Street alignments, grades and widths;

     2.     Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades thereof;

     3.     Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way;

     4.     Fire roads and firebreaks;

     5.     Lot size and configuration;

     6.     Traffic access;

     7.     Grading;

     8.     Land to be dedicated for park and recreational purposes;

     9.     Such other specific physical requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the community plan or any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.020.040 Definitions—Continued.
     A.    “Developer” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who proposes to subdivide, divides, or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for him or herself or for others. It shall also mean a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association proposing to construct or reconstruct any improvement on real property for which a building, sewer or water connection, encroachment, grading, or use permit is required.

     B.     “Development” means the uses to which the land, which is the subject of a map, shall be put, the buildings to be constructed on it, and all alteration of the land and construction incident thereto and the construction of new structures which require a city building or other permit, except for “minor improvements” as defined in Section 16.120.040A.

     C.     Distribution Facilities. Distribution facilities are hereby classified as those facilities which use at or below 21,000 KV lines for power. The facilities shall be those included, but not limited to: PG&E power lines, Cable TV lines.

     D.    Drainage Channel or Conduit, Major. “Major drainage channel or conduit” means a channel or conduit which serves a storm drainage area of four square miles or more.

     E.     Drainage Channel or Conduit, Secondary. “Secondary drainage channel or conduit” means a channel or conduit which serves a storm drainage area less than four square miles and more than one square mile.

     F.     Drainage Channel or Conduit, Minor. “Minor drainage channel or conduit” means a channel or conduit which serves a storm drainage area of one square mile or less.

     G.    “Dwelling unit” means any building or portion of a building or a mobile home or trailer having one or more rooms and only one kitchen or kitchenette and designed and/or used for occupancy by one family living as a housekeeping unit.

     H.    “Final map” means a map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Map Act which map is designed to be recorded in the office of the recorder of Contra Costa County.

     I.      “Flood control district” means the Contra Costa County Flood Control and Water Conservation District which serves the city in an advisory capacity relating to storm drainage and flood control issues and problems.

     J.      “Freeway” means as defined in the Streets and Highways Code of the state, a highway which because of its design and location in the state and county highway system, is or will be used primarily for fast, heavy or dense traffic, and which rights of access from abutting properties or streets along the right-of-way therefor will be prohibited or limited. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.020.050 Definitions—Continued.
     A.    “Health department” means the health department of the County of Contra Costa, acting through the county health officer or his or her representative, and which shall advise the city concerning matters of sanitation and public health.

     B.     “Improvement” means:

     1.     Any street work and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, driveways, and easements, as is necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and the general public needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof.

     2.     Any other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the local agency, or by a combination thereof, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the community development plan or any applicable specific plan.

     C.     “Improvement plan” mean an engineering plan, prepared by a civil engineer licensed to practice in the state of California, showing the design, sanitary sewers, water systems, grading and earthwork, and all other development, appurtenant structures, and facilities and construction, including engineering calculations therefor, comprising on-site and off-site improvements required for a subdivision.

     D.    “Map Act” means The Subdivision Map of the state of California (Title 7 of the Government Code), as amended.

     E.     “Median” means the area or a structure separating the traveled ways of opposing directional movements of vehicular traffic along and within a roadway.

     F.     “Parcel map” means a map prepared in accordance with the requirements of this title and the Map Act, which map is designed to be recorded in the office of the county recorder, as required for subdivisions of four or less parcels and as otherwise provided in said Act.

     G.    “Pedestrian walkway” means a path, trail route, way or lane designated for pedestrian traffic only and not intended for use as a way for motor driven vehicles. Public walkways shall include only those for which rights-of-way are dedicated to and accepted by the city.

     H.    “Preliminary map” means a map acceptable to the planning director prepared for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed subdivision, the existing conditions in and around such subdivision and other information as may be required.

     I.      “Public facilities” means all improvements installed to serve the public, including, but not limited to, water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, street improvements, street trees, street lights, natural gas, electricity, telephone, parks and cable television.

     J.      “Standard plans and specifications” means specifications for construction materials, methods of construction, tests, design and construction standards and related conditions of the city of Brentwood. Such specifications shall be deemed to apply as though set forth in this title. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.020.060 Definitions—Continued.
     A.    “Street” means a right-of-way, for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, freeway, arterial, expressway, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, court, terrace, circle, loop or way but not including trails, paths and alleys.

     B.     Street, Collector. “Collector street” means a street intermediate in function between residential streets and thoroughfares which, because of its location relative to other streets or traffic generators, carries or will carry traffic between residential and thoroughfare streets, or serves as a primary access to a neighborhood unit, or for the circulation of traffic within or through such neighborhood unit. Collector streets shall also serve industrial and commercial properties.

     C.     Street, Cul-de-sac. “Cul-de-sac street” means a minor street which connects to another street at one end only and is not intended for further extension.

     D.    Street, Frontage. “Frontage street” means a street auxiliary to and located adjacent to an arterial, thoroughfare or freeway which provides access to abutting property and adjacent areas and protection from through traffic on the adjacent streets.

     E.     Street, Residential. “Residential street” means a local residential street which serves or will serve local neighborhood traffic only, and which because of its location relative to other streets and traffic generators will not become a collector street, or is a cul-de-sac.

     F.     Street, Stub. “Stub street” means a street which connects to another street at one end only and is intended for further extension.

     G.    Street, Thoroughfare. “Thoroughfare street” means a major street, road, highway or parkway either existing or proposed, of general city or county importance, and so designated in the circulation element of the community development plan.

     H.    “Subdivider” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for him or herself or for others except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not “subdividers.”

     I.      “Subdivision” means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future except for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property under one ownership shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. “Subdivision” includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code or a common interest development. As used in this section, “agricultural purposes” means the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock.

     J.      “Tentative map” means a map, prepared by or under direction of a land surveyor or civil engineer licensed to practice in the state of California, for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed subdivision, the existing conditions in and around such subdivision, and other information as may be required.

     K.    Tentative Map, Vesting. “Vesting tentative map” means a tentative map for a residential subdivision, as defined herein, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “vesting tentative map” at the time it is filed in accordance with this title, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions hereof. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

Chapter 16.040 PRELIMINARY MAP PROCEDURE (OPTIONAL PROCEDURE)
16.040.010 Filing.
     Prior to the filing of any map for the division of land in the city the subdivider shall submit to the planning director four prints of a preliminary map prepared in the manner set forth in Chapter 16.080. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.040.020 Filing fee.
     At the time of filing of the preliminary map, the subdivider shall pay the preliminary map filing fee as set forth in the current city fee schedule. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.040.030 Preliminary map conference.
     The planning director shall within thirty days of the receipt of the preliminary map schedule a conference with the subdivider or his or her agent, at which time he shall advise the subdivider on matters regarding the land-use planning and design of the proposal in respect to the community plan and other city regulations and requirements which should be reflected in the tentative map. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.040.040 Waiver of preliminary map filing or conference.
     The planning director may at his or her discretion, waive the requirement of preliminary map filing, review and/or conference, where no significant benefit to the applicant or other useful purpose may be achieved. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

Chapter 16.050 TENTATIVE MAP PROCEDURE
16.050.010 Filing.
     Prior to the filing of any parcel map or final map for the division of lands in the city, the subdivider shall file with the planning department a tentative map prepared in the manner set forth in Chapter 16.090 with the number of prints to be determined by the planning director as may be necessary for proper review of the proposed land division and an Environmental Information Form pursuant to CEQA. A tentative map shall be processed in accordance with the Map Act and the provisions of this title, and shall have been approved or conditionally approved prior to the submission of final map or parcel map for a division, of land, except as otherwise herein provided. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.050.015 Concurrent processing of residential tentative subdivision maps and design review.
     Other than the exemptions as noted below, the filing of any residential tentative subdivision map shall require the concurrent filing and processing by the community development department of a design review application pursuant to Chapter 17.820 of the Brentwood Municipal Code, referred to as design and site development review:

     A.    Residential tentative subdivision maps creating fifteen lots or less, and

     B.     Residential tentative subdivision maps creating lots which are all greater than fifteen thousand square feet. (Ord. 733 § 1, 2002)

 

16.050.020 Filing fee.
     At the time of filing of a tentative map the subdivider shall pay the tentative map filing fee as set forth in the current city fee schedule. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.050.030 Procedure.
     A.    Preliminary Review. The planning director shall, within ten working days from the time an application for a tentative map and all accompanying data has been received, examine the map and accompanying data and if it is in full compliance with the provisions of all laws and this chapter, shall accept the map for filing as of the date the map was received.

     B.     Agency Referral. Following acceptance for filing, the planning director shall forward copies of the tentative map and other pertinent accompanying data to the interested public agencies which may in turn forward to the planning director their findings and recommendations thereon.

     C.     Set Hearing. Following the acceptance of a tentative map for filing or following the completion of any necessary environmental documentation in compliance with CEQA the planning director shall schedule said map for public hearing by the planning commission within the time limits set forth in subsection F of this section.

     D.    Subdivision Conference. Within twenty working days from acceptance of a tentative map, for filing, the planning director shall schedule a subdivision conference to be held prior to the date on which the map is scheduled for planning commission action. Written notice of such conference shall be given to the subdivider and all interested agencies. At such conference all recommendations made by various agencies and departments shall be discussed. Any requests for exception to the various conditions to be considered by the planning commission shall be filed, in writing, with the planning director not later than the second working day following the subdivision conference.

     E.     Report to Planning Commission. The tentative map, any environmental documents, the results of the subdivision conference and the planning director’s report shall be transmitted to the planning commission. A copy of any report or recommendation of the planning director on a tentative map shall be available to the subdivider at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map by the planning commission.

     F.     Time Limit for Review. The commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny a tentative map and shall report its decision to the subdivider within fifty days from the date of acceptance of a map for filing unless such time is extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the commission. The time limits as described above shall commence after certification of an EIR by the city council, negative declaration, or determination that the project is exempt by CEQA. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.050.040 Planning commission action.
     Within the time limits specified, the planning commission shall either approve, deny or conditionally approve the tentative map as follows:

     A.    In considering the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map the commission shall first examine the draft EIR and certify its adequacy and conformity with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act after which it must find that the proposed subdivision together with the provisions for its design and improvements is consistent with the community development plan and any applicable specific plans of the city of Brentwood.

     B.     A tentative map shall be denied by the planning commission if it makes one or more of the following findings.

     1.     That the proposed map is not consistent with the community development plan and any applicable specific plans;

     2.     That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with the community development plan and any applicable specific plans;

     3.     That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;

     4.     That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

     5.     That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements is likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and unavoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat unless an Environmental Impact Report was prepared with respect to the project and a finding was made pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 21081 of the Public Resources Code that specific economic, social, or other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures or project alternatives identified in the Environmental Impact Report;

     6.     That the design of the subdivision or type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems;

     7.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the city may approve a map it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is hereby granted to the city to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision.

     C.     In the event of disapproval, the subdivider shall be furnished with a statement of the reason and authority for such disapproval.

     D.    In the event of conditional approval, the subdivider shall be furnished with a statement of conditions and changes necessary for incorporation in the final map. (Ord. 471 § 3 , 1990)

 

16.050.050 Effect of action.
     A.    Approval or conditional approval shall be effective on the date of planning commission action provided, however, action of the planning commission may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 16.170.

     B.     An approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall expire twenty-four months from the date of its approval or conditional approval except as otherwise provided by Section 66452.6 of the Map Act.

     C.     The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or parcel map shall be filed for any portion of the real property included within such tentative map without first processing a new tentative map.

     D.    Upon written application of the subdivider filed prior to the expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map, the time at which such map expires may be extended by the planning commission for a period or periods not exceeding an additional twelve months per approval and not exceeding a total of thirty-six months.

     E.     However, if the subdivider is to expend one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars or more to construct, improve, or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the property boundaries, excluding any street abutting the boundary of the property to be subdivided and which are reasonably related to the development of the property, the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall be extended to thirty-six months.

     F.     Pending planning commission action on a requested extension, the tentative map shall be automatically extended sixty days or until action is taken, whichever occurs first.

     G.    In granting an extension, new conditions may be imposed and existing conditions may be revised. If the commission denies a subdivider’s application for extension, the subdivider may appeal to the city council pursuant to Chapter 16.170.

     H.    Modification of a tentative map after approval or conditional approval shall not extend the time limits imposed by this section. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.050.060 Vesting tentative map.
     For purposes of preserving development rights in effect at the time of tentative map approval or conditional approval a subdivider may request the city to confer vesting approval on a tentative map. Such vesting approval shall be subject to the same procedure as any other tentative map except in the following respects:

     A.    Vesting approval shall only be granted to subdivisions for residential purposes.

     B.     A tentative map proposed for vesting approval shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”

     C.     In addition to the information required pursuant to Section 16.090.020 the subdivider shall supply the following information:

     1.     Height, size, and location of buildings;

     2.     Sewer, water, storm drain and road details;

     3.     Information on the uses to which the buildings will be put;

     4.     Detailed grading plans;

     5.     Geological or soils studies;

     6.     Flood control information indicating impact on downstream system and proposed improvements;

     7.     Architectural plans;

     8.     A design and site development review application for project which shall be processed concurrently.

     D.    Except as otherwise provided in Section 66474.2 and 66498.1 of the Map Act, a vesting tentative map shall entitle the subdivider to proceed with development in compliance with the ordinance, policies, and standards in effect at the time of tentative map approval or conditional approval. Except specifications for improvements which are in effect at the time of improvement plan submittal.

     E.     Notwithstanding subsection D, a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined:

     1.     A failure to do so should place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both.

     2.     The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law.

     F.     Vesting rights shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map.

     G.    If the final map is approved, vesting rights shall last for the following periods of time:

     1.     An initial time period of twelve months. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.

     2.     The initial time period set forth in paragraph G-1 shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty days, from the date a complete application is filed.

     3.     Vesting rights shall last not more than two years beyond the recording of the final map or, in the case of a phased development, one year beyond the recording of the last phase final map. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.050.070 Waiver of tentative parcel map.
     A.    Purpose. It shall be the purpose of this chapter to implement and supplement the Subdivision Map Act through the adoption of local procedures and regulations for the subdivision of land through tentative parcel maps.

     B.     Applicability. A property owner/subdivider may file an application for a waiver of the requirements for a tentative parcel map and the community development director, in consultation with the city engineer, may waive the requirements for a tentative parcel map, for any of the following divisions of property (Government Code Section 66428):

     1.     A division of real property, or interests therein, created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees; or

     2.     A division of property resulting from conveyance of land, or interest therein, to or from a governmental agency, including the city, or a public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as a school site, public building sites, or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc., unless a showing is made in individual cases that public policy necessitates a parcel map. “Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency” includes a fee interest, a leasehold interest, an easement or a license; or

     3.     Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, as defined by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, that are created by short-term leases; or

     4.     Subdivisions of land in which one of the following may apply:

     a.     All required public improvements are existing, or

     b.     Public improvements are not necessary as determined by the city engineer, or

     c.     Public improvements may be deferred by agreement, so long as said deferred improvements are not immediately required for public health and safety or for the orderly development of the surrounding area, as determined by the city engineer (Government Code Section 66411.1).

     5.     This section does not apply to airspace subdivision for the purpose of residential condominium conversion per Chapter 17.740.

     C.     Findings. Upon the filing of an application by the property owner/subdivider, the community development director, in consultation with the city engineer, pursuant to Government Code Section 66428(b), may waive the tentative parcel map requirements when they so find that the proposed division of land complies with all requirements as to:

     1.     Zoning and land use; and

     2.     Area; and

     3.     The city’s standard engineering specifications for improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability; and

     4.     Environmental protection pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act.

     D.    Requirements and Conditions. A waiver of a tentative parcel map shall be required to conform to the city’s, and all other jurisdictional agencies, ordinances, laws and policies relating to:

     1.     Payment of fees and land dedication as identified in this code, the city’s development fee program and other policies as established by the city and all other jurisdictional agencies relating to payment of fees, division of land and development; and

     2.     Standard conditions of approval for parcel maps and any property specific requirements that may be conditioned; and

     3.     Deferral of conditioned improvements pursuant to Section 16.166.020; and

     4.     Environmental Review. Concurrently with an application for a tentative parcel map waiver under this section, an environmental information form pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”), shall be submitted to the city for review and certification; and

     5.     Submittal of sufficient information, as identified by city council authorized procedures manual, relating to the proposed subdivision and use of property.

     E.     Procedure.

     1.     The community development director shall, within fourteen days from the time an application for a tentative parcel map waiver and all accompanying data has been received, examine the waiver and accompanying data and if it is in full compliance with the provisions of all laws and this chapter, shall accept the waiver for filing.

     2.     Following acceptance for filing, the community development director shall forward copies of the waiver and other pertinent data to interested public agencies and city departments which may in turn forward to the community development director their findings and recommendations thereon.

     3.     Following acceptance of the tentative parcel map waiver for filing and following completion of any necessary environmental documentation in compliance with CEQA, the community development director shall hold an administrative hearing within thirty days regarding the proposed subdivision, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Said hearing shall be publicly noticed, as provided in Government Code Section 64451.3, and held no sooner than ten days following the date of notification.

     a.     If deemed necessary for any reason, as determined by the community development director and/or the city engineer, a waiver application may be scheduled for consideration by the planning commission (pursuant to Section 16.050.040) rather than consideration by administrative hearing.

     4.     Upon holding the administrative hearing, and considering input from any interested party, the community development director in consultation with the city engineer, may:

     a.     Approve the tentative parcel map waiver; or

     b.     Conditionally approve the tentative parcel map waiver; or

     c.     Refer the tentative parcel map waiver to the planning commission for consideration; or

     d.     Deny the tentative parcel map waiver including a statement of the reason and authority for disapproval.

     5.     Property owner/subdivider shall be notified in writing, of the decision of the community development director, in consultation with the city engineer, within fourteen days following the administrative hearing.

     6.     Upon approval, a parcel map may be submitted pursuant to Chapter 16.060.

     F.     Appeal: An appeal of a decision made under this section may be submitted pursuant to Chapter 16.170.

     G.    Independent of Parcel Map Waiver. Waiver of a tentative parcel map does not imply waiver of the requirements for a parcel map pursuant to Chapter 16.100. (Ord. 862 § 1, 2009)

Chapter 16.060 PARCEL MAP PROCEDURE
16.060.010 Filing.
     Following tentative map approval a subdivider may file with the city a parcel map for any of the following subdivisions:

     A.    The subdivision is to create four or less parcels, exclusive of any portion of the parcel designated as a remainder pursuant to Section 66424.6 of the Map Act.

     B.     The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the city; or

     C.     Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or

     D.    The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the city as to street alignments and widths; or

     E.     Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.060.020 Filing fee.
     At the time of filing of a parcel map the subdivider shall pay the fee for plan checking and processing in the amount set forth in the current city fee schedule. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.060.030 Procedure.
     A.    City Engineer Review. Following receipt of a parcel map the city engineer shall review the map and if it is in compliance with the Map Act and local ordinance, and if the conditions of tentative map approval have been met, he shall certify the parcel map. The time limits for action or approval of a tentative map and parcel map for which a tentative map is not required shall be no larger than the time limits contained in Section 16.050.030(F).

     B.     Improvement Plans Approval Required. Review of a parcel map and certification shall not proceed until the improvement plans for the subdivision have been submitted to the city engineer and approved.

     C.     Appeal. In the event that the subdivider is dissatisfied with any determination of the city engineer either as to whether a proposed subdivision qualifies as a parcel map or as to any requirements or conditions which the city engineer seeks to impose, the subdivider may appeal such determination pursuant to Chapter 16.170. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.060.040 Effect of action.
     A.    Following certification of a parcel map by the city engineer the subdivider may submit the map to the Contra Costa County recorder’s office for recordation.

     B.     Failure to file a parcel map with the county recorder within sixty days from the date of certification of such map shall terminate all proceedings after which any subdivision of the same land shall require the filing of a new map.

     C.     Approval by the city engineer shall include authority to accept or reject dedications and offers of dedication made by statement on the map. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.060.050 Waiver of parcel map.
     A.    Purpose. It shall be the purpose of this chapter to implement and supplement the Subdivision Map Act through the adoption of local procedures and regulations for the subdivision of land through parcel maps.

 

     B.     Applicability. A property owner/ subdivider may file an application for a waiver of the requirements for a parcel map and the community development director and city engineer may waive the requirements for a parcel map for any of the following divisions of property (Government Code Section 66428):

     1.     A division of real property or interests therein created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees; or

     2.     A division of property resulting from conveyance of land or interest therein to or from a governmental agency, including the city, or a public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as a school site, public building sites, or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc., unless a showing is made in individual cases that public policy necessitates a parcel map. “Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency” includes a fee interest, a leasehold interest, an easement or a license; or

     3.     Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, as defined by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, that are created by short-term leases.

     C.     Findings. Upon request of the property owner/subdivider, the community development director and city engineer, pursuant to Government Code Section 66428(b), may waive the parcel map requirements when they so find that the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to:

     1.     Zoning and land use; and

     2.     Area; and

     3.     The city’s standard engineering specifications for improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability and environmental protection.

     D.    Requirements and Conditions. A waiver of a parcel map shall be required to conform to the city’s, and all other jurisdictional agencies, ordinances, laws and policies relating to:

     1.     Payment of fees and land dedication as identified in this code, the city’s development fee program and other policies as established by the city and all other jurisdictional agencies relating to payment of fees, division of land and development; and

     2.     Any property specific requirements that may be conditioned for division of land; and

     3.     Deferral of conditioned improvements pursuant to Section  16.166.020; and

     4.     Environmental Review pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act.

     E.     Certificate of Compliance. Upon waiving the parcel map requirement, the city engineer shall cause to be recorded with the Contra Costa County recorder’s office, a certificate of compliance for the land to be divided. at a minimum, the certificate shall contain:

     1.     A plat map showing the parcels;

     2.     Legal descriptions of the divided parcels; and

     3.     Any conditions to be fulfilled and implemented prior to subsequent permit issuance or other approval for development of the parcels. (Ord. 862 § 2, 2009)

Chapter 16.070 FINAL MAP PROCEDURE
16.070.010 Filing.
     Following tentative map approval and with the time limits set forth in Section 16.050.050 a subdivider may file with the city a final map which shall be in substantial conformance with the tentative map as approved or conditionally approved by the city and with the Map Act. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.070.020 Filing fee.
     At the time of filing a final map the subdivider shall pay the fee for plan checking and processing in the amount set forth in the current city fee schedule. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.070.030 Procedure.
     A.    City Engineer Review. Following receipt of a final map the city engineer shall review the map and required documents submitted. If he determines that the surveys are correct and that such map is technically correct and substantially conforms to the approved tentative map and the required documents are in order, he shall certify on such map and submit the same to the city clerk for transmittal to the city council. If he shall find that full conformity has not been made, he shall so advise the subdivider and afford him or her an opportunity to make the necessary change.

     B.     Improvement Plans Approval Required. Review of a final map, certification and approval shall not proceed until the improvement plans for the subdivision have been submitted and reviewed by and approved by the city engineer.

     C.     Grounds for Final Map Denial. The city shall disapprove a map for failure to meet or perform any of the requirements or conditions imposed by the Map Act or this title; provided that a final map shall be disapproved only for failure to meet or perform requirements or conditions which were applicable to the subdivision at the time of approval of the tentative map; and provided further that such disapproval shall be accompanied by a finding identifying the requirements or conditions which have not been met or performed. Denial of the map shall not be required when the failure of the map is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which, in the determination of the local agency, does not materially affect the validity of the map. (Ord. 759 § 2, 2003; Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

Chapter 16.080 PRELIMINARY MAP, FORM AND CONTENTS
16.080.010 Form of preliminary map.
     A preliminary map shall be in a form acceptable to the planning director and shall contain the information specified in Section 16.080.020. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.080.020 Contents of preliminary maps.
     Preliminary maps shall contain the following information and supporting documentation:

     A.    The names and addresses of:

     1.     The legal owner(s) of the property.

     2.     The subdivider, and

     3.     The civil engineer or land surveyor preparing the map;

     B.     The boundary lines and dimensions of the entire parcel upon which the subdivision is proposed;

     C.     The location of all adjacent property lines, and the names and addresses of the owners of record of all adjoining undeveloped properties;

     D.    The locations, names, and widths of all adjoining streets and rights-of-way;

     E.     The widths, approximate locations and deed references of all existing easements or rights-of-way on or appurtenant to the property;

     F.     The approximate location and direction of flow of all watercourses and the approximate location of all areas subject to instability, inundation or pounding;

     G.    A topographic contour map accurately showing the existing terrain, within and to a pertinent distance around the property, buildings, trees, roadways, culverts, aerial and underground utilities, wells, springs, irrigation ditches, and all existing structures and improvements in their correct location. Elevations shall be in accordance with U.S.G.S. 1929 sea level datum;

     H.    The date, north point and scale;

     I.      The areas proposed for development in sketch form to show proposed improvements, land uses and access, streets, significant public facilities, approximate finish grades, and other information which may be necessary to depict the development contemplated;

     J.      A preliminary title report or title report on the subject property. No older than six months at the time of submittal. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

Chapter 16.090 TENTATIVE MAP, FORM AND CONTENTS
16.090.010 Form of tentative maps.
     A.    Tentative maps shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the planning director and shall be prepared by or under the direction of a licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer and shall meet all requirements for tentative maps provided by the Map Act and this title.

     B.     Tentative maps shall be clearly and legibly drawn on one sheet, at not less than twenty-four inches in width and not more than forty-two inches in length.

     C.     Tentative maps shall be drawn to an engineer’s scale at a scale large enough to show all information clearly but not less than one inch to one hundred feet.

     D.    In the event the size of the subdivision results in the need for the tentative map to be on more than one sheet, a map not exceeding the dimension set forth in subsection B of this section shall be submitted showing the entire subdivision on which is indicated the boundary of the subdivision, existing and proposed streets, street names, major existing geographical features, the proposed lot numbers and other information as may be necessary to describe the project.

     E.     Elevations shall be based on U.S. Geologic Survey 1929 sea level datum.

     F.     The contour interval shall not be greater than one foot if the ground slope is five percent or less, nor greater that two feet if the ground slope is between five percent and ten percent, and at any lesser interval as long as the contour lines measure no less than one hundred fifty feet apart (ground distance). (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.090.020 Contents of tentative maps.
     Tentative maps shall set forth the following information:

     A.    Topographic contour and planimetric mapping accurately showing the existing terrain, within and extending a minimum of two hundred feet outside the perimeter of the property, including existing drainage channels and water-courses, irrigation ditches and culverts and the direction of flow thereof; pipes and structures, wells, springs, slide areas, trees, roads; underground, surface and aerial utilities and structures; and, the locations and names of all adjacent streets and underground improvements and facilities therein;

     B.     The title, which shall be placed at the lower right-hand corner of the map which shall contain the subdivision number assigned by the county recorder and may contain a subdivision name (subject to approval by the planning commission), and shall be dated to reflect the current map status;

     C.     The names, addresses and phone numbers of the legal owner of the property, the subdivider, and the surveyor or civil engineer who prepared the tentative map; signature and seal of the surveyor or civil engineer who prepared the tentative map; indicating the date of preparation;

     D.    Certificates for execution by the planning director indicating (1) acceptability of the map form and content for filing, and (2) the approval and date thereof by the commission;

     E.     The north arrow, scale and contour interval for maps;

     F.     A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining and nearby subdivisions, towns, creeks, railroads, schools, shopping and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision relative to community development;

     G.    The limits and dimensions, owners of record, purpose and deed references of existing easements and rights-of-way on, adjacent or appurtenant to the property;

     H.    The property lines of abutting properties, the lot and subdivision numbers of existing abutting lots, and any existing improvements or conditions which may affect or be significantly affected by the proposed development;

     I.      The names and addresses of owners-of-record of all contiguous undeveloped property, and deed references thereof;

     J.      The approximate boundary lines of existing land use zones and taxing jurisdictions on, near or affecting the property;

     K.    The proposed lot and street layout with scaled lot-line dimensions and with each lot numbered consecutively within the entire proposed subdivision;

     L.     Proposed and existing street names, width of streets and rights-of-way, traveled way, approximate grade, and radii of curvature along property lines. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the planning director;

     M.    Typical geometric cross-sections for streets showing pavement widths, curbs, sidewalks, grading in marginal strips, slopes of cuts and fills, and other applicable improvements proposed;

     N.    The location, easement widths, approximate grade, direction of flow, and type of all proposed on-site and off-site storm drainage and sanitary sewer systems;

     O.    The location, easement widths and type of all proposed major on-site and off-site water facilities and systems;

     P.     Proposed school, park, recreation and other public or private use areas other than single-family residential;

     Q.    The identity of all trees which will remain after the finished grading of the subdivision;

     R.     Any required data which is impossible or impractical to place on the tentative map shall be included with the data required in Section 16.090.030. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.090.030 Data to accompany tentative map.
     The tentative map shall also be accompanied by the following supplemental data which shall be submitted at the time the map is filed:

     A.    A preliminary site development plan delineating grading (lot pad elevations and grades, cut and fill slopes) and the proposed streets, storm and sanitary sewer improvements, including approximate finish grades and elevations;

     B.     A written statement and tabulation of general information which shall contain:

     1.     The existing use or uses of the property;

     2.     A description of the proposed subdivision including the number of lots, their average and minimum and maximum size, the nature of each segment of development proposed and the intended time schedule and sequence therefor; the overall and incremental density of dwelling units in proposed residential areas;

     3.     The source and methods of sewage and water supply to serve the development;

     4.     The proposed plan for draining or correcting areas subject to flooding or inundation by stormwaters flowing into, on or from the subdivision;

     5.     A description of the organizational and legal structure, format, function, extent of responsibility, and principles, of associations, management organizations, and other devices proposed;

     6.     Any other characteristics or improvements proposed or contemplated;

     C.     A preliminary report of title on the subject property. No more than six months old at the time of submittal;

     D.    A draft environmental impact report or other environmental document(s) as required by CEQA;

     E.     When a tentative map is to be filed on an area which is part of a larger single ownership or where contiguous property is affected by or rendered potentially developable by virtue of the proposed development, the planning director may require a sketch plan of possible future development on all or part of said contiguous properties to be submitted at the time of tentative map filing;

     F.     A preliminary soils report, prepared by a soils engineer or engineering geologist registered in this state, and based upon adequate test borings. Submittal of a soils report may be waived by the city engineer for subdivision of four or less lots provided that:

     1.     He has determined, based on his or her knowledge as to soils qualities of the site, that no preliminary soils report is necessary; or

     2.     He has determined, based on his or her knowledge as to soil qualities of the site, that a soil investigation of each lot should be required in conjunction with issuance of a building permit;

     G.    Any additional information required by Section 16.090.620        which is not included on the tentative map. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.090.040 Vesting tentative map.
     See Section 16.050.060 for additional information required for a vesting tentative map. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

Chapter 16.100 PARCEL MAPS, FORM AND CONTENTS
16.100.010 Form and contents.
     A.    Parcel maps shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, shall show the location of streets and property lines bounding the property, and shall conform to all of the provisions of Article 3 of the Map Act and the additional provisions of this title.

     B.     Parcel maps shall be drawn to an engineer scale of not less than one inch to one hundred feet.

     C.     Submittal of a parcel map shall consist of the original tracing(s), duplicate print(s) on linen, duplicate tracing (s) and a set of print(s). For the approved improvement plans, if applicable, the subdivider shall submit the original tracings or duplicate tracings and three sets of prints. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.100.020 Data to accompany parcel maps.
     A.    Deeds for any dedication or offers of dedication when required by the city engineer. All such deeds shall be recorded concurrently with, or prior to, the parcel map being filed for recordation, and, shall be signed by the same parties and in the same manner as set forth for dedications by a final map as provided by the Map Act and this title.

     B.     Where public improvements are required, improvement plans, engineering calculations and cost estimates shall be submitted with the parcel map.

     C.     A preliminary title report not more than six months old at the time of submittal.

     D.    If applicable, the subdivision improvement bonds, agreements and instruments of conveyance.

     E.     Evidence that all outstanding bonded indebtedness upon the land was paid off prior to the parcel map being filed.

     F.     A subdivision agreement in a form approved by the city. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

Chapter 16.110 FINAL MAPS, FORM AND CONTENTS
16.110.010 Form and contents.
     A.    Final maps shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil or licensed surveyor, shall be based upon a survey and shall conform to all of the provisions of Article 2 of Chapter 2 of the Map Act and the additional provisions of this title.

     B.     Final maps shall be drawn to an engineer’s scale of not less than one inch to one hundred feet. The size of each sheet shall be eighteen by twenty-six inches.

     C.     Submittal of a final map shall consist of the original tracing(s), duplicate print(s) on linen, duplicate tracing(s) and a set of print(s). For the approved improvement plans, if applicable, the subdivider shall submit the original tracings or duplicate tracings and three sets of prints. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.110.020 Data to accompany final maps.
     A.    A preliminary title report not more than six months old at the time of submittal;

     B.     If applicable, the subdivision improvement bonds, all agreements and instruments of conveyance;

     C.     Evidence that all outstanding bonded indebtedness upon the land was paid off prior to the final map being filed;

     D.    A subdivision agreement in a form approved by the city;

     E.     Improvement plans, engineering calculations and cost estimates for required improvements;

     F.     The formation of an assessment district, if necessary. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

Chapter 16.120 LAND DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURE
16.120.010 Citation and authority.
     This chapter is adopted to supplement and implement the Map Act and local ordinances pertaining to development to provide needed public improvements. This chapter may be cited as the “Land Development Ordinance of the City of Brentwood.” (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.120.020 Purpose of chapter.
     The purpose of this chapter is to officially define certain policies, requirements, and procedures for the development of property in the city, in order to:

     A.    Establish minimum standards for the improvement of streets and easements of the city as a condition precedent to acceptance of dedications thereof;

     B.     Cause the installation of utilities and public service facilities necessary to properly serve the property developed;

     C.     Provide for the current financing of such facilities;

     D.    Provide for the collection of charges for the use of certain facilities from property owners benefited by such installations;

     E.     Spread the cost of required public improvements upon the property benefited in the manner contemplated by law;

     F.     Prevent the dissipation or improper use of the city’s general operating and maintenance funds in providing these improvements or in maintaining faulty installations;

     G.    Protect the living standards, public safety, and common welfare of the general public;

     H.    To facilitate and insure for the public benefit the acquisition of minimum street widths as they are established and as they are modified from time to time;

     I.      To require the dedication and installation of improvements necessary to accomplish the purpose of the community development plan. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.120.030 Applicability of provisions.
     The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the development of any subdivision or other land development as defined in this title, except as provided in Section 16.120.040. Prior to the development of any land in the city, the developer thereof shall conform to and comply with the requirements, rules and regulations of this chapter, and any other applicable federal or state law or statute or city ordinance. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.120.040 Exemptions.
     A.    Minor Improvements. In the case of either design review or planning review prior to the issuance of a building permit, where the improvement contemplated by the developer is less than fifty percent of the improvements already on the same parcel, such improvement is hereby defined as a minor improvement for the purposes of this section, and hence, exempt from the requirements of this title. However, in the case where failure to construct or reconstruct improvements could cause a health or safety hazard or in any case where more than one building permit is applied for over a three-year period for improvements on the same parcel of land and the combined improvements are greater than fifty percent of the improvements already on the parcel prior to the issuance of the first such permit, the requirements of this chapter shall be applied to said parcel. The planning director shall determine the applicability of this chapter in conformance with the above guidelines.

     B.     Prior Agreements. This chapter shall have no affect on development agreements previously entered into by the city, which agreements shall continue in full force and effect. Where such agreements provide that all development requirements are met by said agreements, additional requirements shall not be applied, except where there is further subdivision or other development not contemplated by the original agreement. No such prior agreement shall be considered as setting precedent. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.120.050 Procedure.
     Approval of development shall be in conformance with the following:

     A.    Time of Application. The time of application for development approval shall be with the action first below listed, except where the agency or officer charged with application of the requirements, for good and sufficient reason, determines that it is in the best interests of the city to defer application of all or a portion of the requirements until some later listed action:

     1.     Subdivision, either major or minor;

     2.     Planned urbanization procedure;

     3.     Design and site development review procedure;

     4.     Conditional use permit procedure;

     5.     Planning review prior to the issuance of a building permit.

     B.     Permits—General provisions. The city has established both standards and requirements that must be met for the development of land or improvement projects. The obtaining of the proper permit(s) is required prior to the commencement of any improvement project or development. Such permit(s) may include, but are not limited to:

     1.     Building;

     2.     Sewer connection;

     3.     Encroachment;

     4.     Grading;

     5.     Use;

     6.     Business license;

     7.     Water connection;

     8.     Army Corps of Engineers;

     9.     Contra Costa County flood control;

     10.   Fish and game.

     C.     Application for Permits. Prior to the commencement of any improvement project or development, the developer or property owner shall contact the city engineer to inform him or her of the work contemplated. The appropriate staff person (upon submittal of all required information and compliance with all standards and policies relating to the particular permit(s), shall then issue the proper permit(s) required. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.120.060 Filing and city review.
     A.    The developer shall submit five complete sets of prints of the improvement plans to the city engineer for review and said plan submittal shall be accompanied by the plan checking fee in accordance with the current fee schedule of the city. The city engineer shall review the plans and return one set to the developer with the required revisions, if any marked thereon.

     B.     When the plans are found to be complete and satisfactory to the city engineer, the developer shall submit original drawings for approved signature by the city engineer and planning director.

     C.     Improvement plans shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer and acted on by the city engineer within sixty working days of their submittal except as follows:

     1.     At least fifteen working days must be provided for processing any resubmitted improvement plan.

     2.     The sixty-working-day period does not include any days during which the improvement plan has been returned to the developer for correction, has been subject to review by other than the local agency or, following that review, has been returned to the applicant for correction.

     3.     Any time limits may be extended by mutual consent of the developer and the city. However, a routine waiver of time limits may not be required as a condition of accepting the improvement plan.

     D.    Should the city determine that it is unable to meet the above time limits, the city at the developer’s request may hire a private entity to provide the services needed to meet the deadline. The developer may be charged an amount equal to the additional costs. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.120.070 Form of improvement plans.
     A.    The improvement plans shall be prepared by or under the direction of a civil engineer licensed by the state and shall show the complete plans, profiles and details for all streets and appurtenances, storm drainage, water systems and fire hydrants, sewers, utilities, grading and all other improvements proposed or necessary, on and off-site.

     B.     Plans and profiles shall be submitted on uniform size sheets twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches overall dimension. A one-and-one-half-inch border shall be provided along the twenty-four-inch left-hand side of the sheet, and a one-inch border on the other three sides, with a title block in the lower right to clearly identify the nature of the plan. The scales for various portions of the drawings and the north point where applicable, shall be shown on all sheets.

     C.     References shall be made to applicable city standard details and plans, in-lieu of duplicating the drawings thereof. Plans shall be drawn to professional drafting standards and to appropriate scales to clearly show intent, without crowding or possibility of misinterpretation. All plans, lettering, and details shall be drafted at sufficient scale to permit full legibility when photographically reduced to one-half original drawing size.

     D.    If the plans include three or more sheets, a key map, at one inch equals three hundred feet or one inch equals six hundred feet scale showing streets and street names, lots and lot numbers, and the area thereof covered by each sheet of the plans, shall be included on the first sheet of the plans. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.120.080 Content of improvement plans.
     A.    Plans shall show complete plan, profile and detail for all street work, sanitary sewer systems, including valves and fire hydrants, storm drainage conduits, inlets, channels and structures; retaining walls, earthwork, bridges, the location of underground and aerial utilities, appurtenances and structures which may affect or be affect by the horizontal and vertical location of other facilities; street monuments, curb, gutters, sidewalks, landscaping; fences, gates and driveways and paths in conjunction with subdivision improvements; and, any and all other improvements which may be required to complete the work and coordinate the process of construction.

     B.     When required by the city engineer plans shall show cross-sections, taken at intervals, locations, and to a scale as determined by him or her, to be submitted with the improvement plans, accurately showing original grounds and finished grades throughout the full width of the improvement area and beyond as he deems necessary, on or off-site.

     C.     All storm drainage, sanitary sewer, water and street systems shall be designed and sized to accommodate such additional flows, volumes or loads as may be contributed by the existing or future development of lands adjacent to or beyond the limits of the subdivision.

     D.    At the time of submittal for checking, plans shall be accompanied by a complete bond estimate, engineering calculations for storm drainage and sanitary sewage systems, and for any other facilities or structures deemed necessary by the city engineer to evaluate and check the improvement plans. Said bond estimate and calculations and each sheet of the improvement plans shall bear the signature and seal of the engineer who personally prepared or supervised the preparation thereof.

     E.     A preliminary soils report, prepared by a civil engineer registered in this state, and based upon adequate test borings and submitted at the time of improvement plan submission, shall be required, and may be required, as determined by the city engineer, for subdivisions for which a parcel map is required in accordance with the following:

     1.     If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected would lead to structural defects, a full soils investigation and report for all or any portion of the subdivision may be required. Such soils investigation shall be done by a civil engineer registered in this state, who shall recommend the corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to all structures proposed in the area where such soils and soil related problems exist.

     2.     The council may approve the parcel or final map for a subdivision, or portion thereof where such soils problems exist if it finds, upon the recommendations of the city engineer, that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed, and as a condition of the issuance of any building permit, may require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each structure.

     3.     Where a preliminary soils report, soils report or geologic report has been required for a subdivision, the grading plans or development plans which provide the design for earthwork therefor shall bear the signature of the soils engineer who performed the investigation; and the as-built plans shall bear his or her certification that the work was performed in accordance with those plans.

     4.     The preliminary soils report may be submitted to the city engineer for review. The city engineer may review the report and may require additional information or reject the report if it is found to be incomplete, inaccurate, or unsatisfactory.

     F.     All improvement plans and final maps shall meet the requirements of the Brentwood engineering design standards, standard plans and standard specifications. All requirements stated above shall supersede the requirements stated in Sections 16.120.060, 16.120.070 and 16.120.080. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.120.090 Public facilities installation.
     A.    At the time of development all public facilities shall be constructed and any existing deficiencies shall be corrected. This includes both required on- and off-site public facilities and any deficiencies on-site, abutting the parcel or parcels involved or required off-site to provide service to the proposed development or for the continued safety, health and well-being of the public upon completion of the development or redevelopment.

     B.     Actual construction or reconstruction of improvements may be bonded and construction or reconstruction deferred for up to eighteen months but in no case shall improvements be deferred beyond the time of issuance of an occupancy permit in the case of new development or more than six months in the case of existing development unless specific extension of time is granted by the city council.

     C.     All costs shall be the sole responsibility of the developer except as provided in Chapter 16.130 and Section 16.120.100. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.120.100 Reimbursement.
     A.    Reimbursement of Developer Costs. Except where the construction of public facility(s) is by means of assessment district proceedings and when the city finds that due to required oversizing beyond what is required for the development or other reason, such public facility(s) when so constructed will potentially serve any property of any person other than the person paying the cost of construction thereof, then partial reimbursement of the cost of such construction from premises deriving direct connection benefit may be affected as follows:

     1.     Any person proposing to construct any public facility may apply in writing to the city engineer prior to commencement of reimbursement.

     2.     If the city engineer finds that such facility may reasonably be expected to benefit the property of any person other than the person proposing to construct such facility, he may recommend in writing to the city manager that a reimbursement agreement be approved for the applicant.

     3.     If the city manager concurs with the city engineer’s recommendation, he or she may, in writing recommend to the city council that such applicant is entitled to partial reimbursement of his or her construction costs. The council may then authorize the issuance to such applicant of certificate of entitlement to reimbursement in compliance with this title.

     4.     Thereafter partial reimbursement shall be made to such applicant of the cost of those portions of any on and off-site public facilities required to be constructed as part of and by said development and which are greater or in excess of the minimum size or capacity required to serve that particular development as follows:

     a.     Payment shall be made of a portion of such funds as are thereafter paid to the city for reimbursements and until such date as the cost of such facilities (less credits made for connections by said applicants or his or her successors in interest) is fully reimbursed or until no more than ten years have elapsed from the date of completion of construction of such facilities, whichever date is earlier.

     b.     The amount of reimbursement shall not exceed the increment or unit of reimbursement established by resolution of the city council pursuant to this chapter.

     5.     In each such case, the cost of such facilities shall be determined by the city engineer after submission to him or her of an itemized statement of all of the costs of construction thereof. In the event of disagreement between the city engineer and the applicant, the applicant may appeal as provided herein.

     6.     In any case where the applicant for a certificate of entitlement to reimbursement is other than an individual, the city reserves the right to require that a payee be named in such certificate to act for and on behalf of all persons interested in the reimbursement.

     7.     There shall be no provision for interest or allowance for inflation reflected in reimbursement amounts.

     B.     Reimbursement of City Costs:

     1.     City Contributions:

     a.     Whenever any property or parcel not under development is directly benefited by the installation of any of the required facilities, utilities, rights-of-way or public works improvements, the city may advance the costs of same and defer the collection of such charges until such time as said property is developed.

     b.     All charges shall be satisfied before any parcel, map, tract maps, building permit or service connection for such property is granted or accepted by the city.

     c.     Engineering diagrams showing property benefited and the amounts of such deferred charges shall be furnished to the public works and finance departments of the city.

     d.     Charges shall be based on actual costs as determined by the city engineer.

     2.     Charges for Existing Improvements.

     a.     Whenever existing facilities, utilities or other public works improvements have been installed without cost to a property, the developer of such property must pay the city an amount which represents the reasonable cost of such improvements as determined by the city engineer as of the time the property is developed.

     b.     Said amount must be paid before service connections of any kind are made to such property.

     c.     In addition to the charges mentioned in this paragraph, the developer shall also install all “on-site” service facilities up to the utility connection points. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.120.110 Standards, design and construction.
     A.    General Provisions. All design and construction shall be done in full conformance with applicable federal and state laws and local ordinance and resolutions. The planning commission or city engineer may set standards and policies of design and construction.

     B.     Standards of Design. Design standards shall be as set forth in the community development plan, zoning ordinance, engineering design standards, this chapter, the facilities master plans as approved by the city engineer or by specific resolutions setting standards.

     C.     Standards of Construction. Construction standards shall be as set forth in the city standards and special details and specifications as approved by the city engineer. The city engineer shall review all plans for public improvements and no construction of public improvements shall occur prior to approval of plans by the city engineer.

     D.    Inspection of Improvements. All improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of, and to the satisfaction of the city engineer. Cost of inspection shall be borne by the developer.

     E.     Completion of Improvements—Filing and Release of Bond.

     1.     As required by Section 66499 of the Map Act, no improvements shall be approved, nor any permit issued or any subdivision map approved prior to filing with the city clerk a surety bond approved by the city attorney in such an amount as estimated by the developer to be adequate to complete all of the improvements required to be done by the developer and as approved by the city engineer. A separate bond shall be submitted for labor and materials which meets the requirements as stated above.

     2.     Surety bonds shall be executed by the developer, as principal, and a corporation authorized to so act under the laws of the state, as surety, and shall be payable to the city and be conditioned upon the faithful performance of any and all work required to be done by the developer. Such bond shall be further conditioned to the effect that should the developer fail to complete all work required to be done by him or her within a specified time and to maintain the same for a period of twelve months after completion and acceptance by the council, the city may, at its option, cause all uncompleted required work to be done, and the parties executing the bond shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs thereof.

     3.     In lieu of a surety bond, the city may, upon request of a developer, accept recorded special assessment liens upon the developer’s property to acquire or construct the subject improvements (such recorded liens to be established by legal proceedings of the city pursuant to the Municipal Improvement Act of 1913), or the developer may post cash, an instrument of credit, or other security as provided in the Subdivision Map Act.

     4.     Surety bonds may be reduced to ten percent of the amount required pursuant to this subsection at such time as the improvements are accepted by the city council. Any bonds shall be released at the end of a twelve-month warranty period provided all deficiencies have been corrected by the developer. (Ord. 541 § 1, 1994; Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.120.120 Undergrounding—Electric, communication, street lighting and advanced technology systems.
     A.    General Provisions.

     1.     Utility distribution facilities, including, but not limited to, electric, communication, street lighting and advanced technology systems installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any development, shall be required to be placed underground. “Advanced technology systems” shall be defined as all necessary appurtenances, equipment and facilities required for the provision of Internet, computer, fiber optic, cable television, telephone, and other communication services within the public right-of-way and upon private property. The design, installation, inspection and testing requirements for city acceptance of such system shall meet the minimum requirements as outlined in the city of Brentwood standard plans and specifications as approved by the city engineer. The developer shall also dedicate to the city that portion of the system within the public right-of-way and shall dedicate to the property owner the portion of the system within the private property.

     2.     All existing facilities except transmission facilities either along abutting streets or within a development shall also be underground at the time of development. “Along abutting streets” means on the same side of the abutting street as the property being developed, not the other side of the street.

     3.     The developer is responsible for complying with all requirements of this subsection, and shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation of such facilities.

     4.     The city council, following the consideration by the planning commission, may waive undergrounding requirements if unusual topographical, soil or any other unusual problems make such underground installations unreasonable or impractical in accordance with the following:

     a.     If the requirement to underground utilities is waived, the city council may require the recordation of an improvement agreement, requiring the property owner and any subsequent owner of the subject property to join an underground utility assessment district, reimbursement district or similar improvement district, when such a district is formed, and to guarantee participation in such district by posting an improvement bond and recording a lien on subject property.

     b.     The affected developer or any utility company may submit information supporting a request for such waivers.

     c.     No waiver shall be granted in any undergrounding district previously established.

     B.     Electric, Communication, Street Lighting and Advanced Technology Systems. All costs of placing existing or new facilities, required to be undergrounded by the developer, shall be paid for by the developer subject to the current California Public Utility Commission rules and regulations.

     C.     Advanced Technology Systems.

     1.     The developer shall design, install, test and dedicate to the city two advanced technology system conduits, size to be determined, within the public right-of-way. The developer shall install, in one of the conduits, a fiber optic system designed to serve the subject development for use by the city of Brentwood or one of its licensed franchisee. The fiber optic system shall be installed in accordance with the citywide advance technology master plan and approved by the city engineer. The second conduit shall remain empty and shall be reserved to serve the subject development for the use of a city licensed franchisee not wishing to utilize the city’s fiber optic system. Both conduits shall be installed to each lot line. The developer shall bear all design, construction, inspection, and testing costs associated with these underground requirements. Furthermore, the developer shall design, install, test and dedicate to the city all necessary components of the advanced technology system as depicted on the citywide advanced technology master plan.

     2.     The developer shall design, install, test and dedicate to the property owner two advanced technology system conduits, size to be determined, to connect the public advanced technology system to the individual home or building. The developer shall install, in one of the conduits, a fiber optic system designed to serve the subject property. The fiber optic system shall be installed in accordance with the citywide advance technology master plan and approved by the city engineer. The second conduit shall remain empty and shall be reserved to serve the subject property for the use of a city licensed franchisee not wishing to utilize the city’s fiber optic system. The developer shall bear all design, construction, inspection and testing costs associated with these underground requirements.

     3.     The cable television or advanced technology company franchisee that elects to install facilities in the city’s vacant conduit shall provide plans and specifications to the developer and the city of Brentwood. The licensed franchisee shall also inspect the facilities and certify to the city prior to final approval of the development that the cable television facilities or advanced technology systems are properly installed and serviceable. The design and installation shall meet the minimum criteria as outlined in the city of Brentwood standard plans and specifications. (Ord. 609, 1999; Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.120.130 Variances.
     A.    Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and effects inconsistent with the general purpose of this chapter may result from the strict application of certain provisions thereof, the city council may grant a variance subject to the following findings:

     1.     That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the particular developed land or development site;

     2.     That the granting of a variance shall not, under the circumstances of the particular case, materially adversely affect the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort or general welfare of the persons living on or in the neighborhood of the developed land or development site, and the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in such neighborhood.

     B.     In the event that the city council makes the findings prescribed above and grants a variance, the approval of such variance shall be subject to such terms and conditions as imposed by the city council, if any. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

Chapter 16.130 FACILITY FEES AND CHARGES*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1020. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 16.130.010 Purpose.
     In order to implement the goals and objectives of the master facilities element of the city of Brentwood’s general plan, and to mitigate the impacts upon public facilities caused by new development in the city, a number of public improvements must be constructed. The city council has determined that revised development impact fees are needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for the new development projects’ fair share of the costs of these improvements. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 16.130.020 Facility fees.
     A.    A schedule of facility impact fees is established for the issuance of all building permits for development in the city of Brentwood. The city council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of each fee, list of specific public improvements to be financed, describe the reasonable relationship between each fee and the various types of new developments and set forth time for payment of the fee.

     B.     Unless otherwise specified in the fee resolution, each development fee shall be paid by each developer prior to issuance of a building permit. If no building permit is required for new development subject to this title, the fee must be paid prior to issuance of an occupancy permit or other final permit to use the property.

     C.     The city council shall review this fee on an annual basis to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably attributed to the impacts of development projects and whether the public facilities described in the resolution continue to be needed. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 16.130.030 Limited use of fees.
     A.    The revenues raised by payment of these facility fees shall be placed in separate and special accounts, and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on each account, shall be used solely to:

     1.     Pay for the city’s future construction of each category of facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 16.130.020 above, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed facilities in the resolution constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or

     2.     Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length, or capacity. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 16.130.040 Developer construction of facilities—Reimbursement agreement.
     A.    Whenever a developer is required as a condition of approval of a development permit, or permitted in the city’s discretion, to construct a public facility described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 16.130.020, which facility is determined by the city to have supplemental size, length, or capacity over that needed for the impacts of that development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and a credit against the fee, which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this title on the development project, may be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not include the portion of the improvement needed to provide services or mitigate the need for the facility or the burdens created by the development. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 16.130.050 Supplemental fees.
     A.    From time to time, a developer may propose a project, the impact of which upon public facilities is significantly greater than that used to calculate the fees. The city council or the planning director may make such a determination on a case-by-case basis and impose a supplemental fee for a project upon making the necessary findings pursuant to Government Code Section 66001.

     B.     The determination shall be made based upon the application for a development permit, or upon the application for a building permit if no development permit is required, and any additional information requested by the city council or the planning director. The city council or the planning director may require the developer to submit engineering data, calculations or other project information which, in its judgment, is necessary to make a determination.

     C.     If five years after collection, any portion of a fee collected pursuant to this title is unexpended or uncommitted, the city shall review the fee and the purpose for which it was charged, and make a determination and finding as to the continued need for the fee and the reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it is intended. This review and findings shall be made once each fiscal year in any year that there are unexpended or uncommitted fees.

     D.    If the appropriate finding cannot be made, the city shall refund the fees to the then owner of record of the project on which the fee was imposed pursuant to Government Code Section 66001(d) and Section 66001(e). (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 16.130.060 Credits based on replacement of existing structures.
     The city council may establish, by resolution, a schedule of credits against development fees established pursuant to this title, based upon the replacement of existing legal structures with new structures. Any credits will be given only to the extent that the city council can make a find that: (1) the new development does not make demands on infrastructure in addition to that imposed by the structures being replaced, and (2) the owner of the previous structures paid the applicable development fee, if any, at the time of its construction. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 16.130.070 Fee adjustments.
     A.    A developer of any project subject to the fees imposed pursuant to this chapter that desires an adjustment or waiver of such fees shall follow the protest procedure contained in Government Code Section 66020 (as may be amended), and within the time frame set forth in subsection (d) thereof (as may be amended) or risk the loss of the developer’s legal ability to request such adjustment or waiver. In no event shall the city waive its right to rely on other applicable limitations periods, including without limitation those set forth in Government Code Section 66022 (as may be amended).

     B.     A developer may apply to the city engineer for an adjustment to fees based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship between the burdens imposed by the development project and the amount of the fees to be charged or the type of facilities to be financed.

     C.     The application shall be made in writing and must identify the reasons why the city’s development fees should be adjusted. At a minimum, the reasons should explain why a reasonable relationship between the use of the applicable fees and the type of development project on which the fees are imposed is lacking and why a reasonable relationship between the need for the public facility and the type of development project on which the fees are imposed is lacking.

     D.    The application shall be filed with the city clerk no later than the deadline for filing protests as mentioned in subsection A of this section. The city engineer may require the payment of a processing fee to offset the costs incurred by city staff to handle the application through the city engineer’s office, and through the city council where applicable. The city engineer may require the use of an application form.

     E.     The city engineer shall make a written determination on the application. The city engineer may recommend, and the city manager may authorize an adjustment so long as the adjustment does not exceed ten thousand dollars per project. Recommendations by the city engineer for adjustments in excess of ten thousand dollars will be forwarded to the city council for final determination. The method and timing of implementing the adjustment is subject to the discretion of the city engineer, or city council where applicable.

     F.     Any adjustment granted is limited to the project as proposed. If there is any change in the project, the fee adjustment is suspended so that the city engineer, or city council where appropriate, may re-evaluate whether the adjustment is still appropriate. The city engineer, or city council, shall render his or her determination upon such re-evaluation in writing.

     G.    Unless otherwise recommended for city council determination, any decision of the city engineer hereunder is subject to appeal to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.170 of this code.

     H.    This section does not abrogate the authority of the city council to determine matters such as the application of development fees to particular projects, the deferral of fees, or requests for redevelopment agency assistance. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1998; Ord. 546, 1994)

Chapter 16.140 DEDICATIONS
16.140.010 Dedications generally.
     A.    As a condition of approval of any map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, local transit facilities, bike paths, public utility easements, and other public easements as required. In addition, the subdivider shall install or agree to install all on and off-site public and private street improvements, bike paths, local transit facilities, drainage facilities, utilities and fences as required.

     B.     All dedications or offers of dedication shall be subject to the applicable provision of Article 3 of the Map Act and the additional provision of this title.

     C.     The local agency to which property is dedicated in fee for public purposes, or for making public improvements or constructing public facilities, other than for open space, parks, or schools, shall record a certificate with the county recorder, pursuant to Section 66477.5 of the Map Act. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.140.020 Dedication—Bicycle paths.
     Whenever a subdivider is required to dedicate roadways to the public, he shall also be required to dedicate such additional land as may be necessary and feasible to provide bicycle paths for the use and safety of the residents of the subdivision, if the subdivision, as shown on the final map thereof, contains two hundred or more parcels. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.140.030 Dedication—Transit facilities.
     There shall be a dedication or irrevocable offer of dedication of land within a subdivision for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar items which directly benefit the residents of a subdivision where the circumstance set forth in the following subsections A, B, and C are found to exist.

     A.    The subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for two hundred dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density shown on the adopted general plan or contains one hundred acres or more.

     B.     That transit services are or will within a reasonable time period be made available to the subdivision.

     C.     The map is not for a condominium project or stock cooperative which consists of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old and no new dwelling units are to be added. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.140.040 Dedication—Solar access.
     Not required at this time. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.140.050 Dedication—Access rights.
     There shall be required with the dedication or offer of dedication of streets a waiver of direct access rights to any such street from any property shown on a final or parcel map as abutting thereon and if the dedication is accepted, any such waiver shall become effective in accordance with its provisions. Such required waivers may be, but are not limited to the following situations:

     A.    At the end of a stub street where it abuts a parcel which is not a part of a subdivision;

     B.     Along the frontage of a street developed by a subdivider where the property owner adjacent to the frontage has not contributed to the construction of the street;

     C.     Along thoroughfares and other streets where access to the street is to be prohibited. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.140.060 Dedication—School sites.
     There shall be required the dedication of such land as the city shall deem to be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon such elementary schools as are necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate public school service. Such dedication shall be subject to the regulations and limitations set forth in Section 66478 of the Map Act. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.140.070 Dedication—Public access to public resources.
     There shall be required of any subdivision contiguous to be a public waterway, river or stream which does not have available reasonable public access by fee or easement from a public highway to the portion of the bank of the river or stream bordering or lying within the proposed subdivision, the dedications of “reasonable public access” to and/or a public easement along that portion of the bank of the river or stream bordering or lying within the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following:

     A.    “Reasonable public access” shall be determined by the city giving consideration to the following:

     1.     That access may be by highway, foot trail, bike trail, horse trail, or any other means of travel;

     2.     The size of the subdivision;

     3.     The type of riverbank and the various appropriate recreational, educational, and scientific uses, including, but not limited to, hiking, fishing, horseback riding, scientific collection, and teaching;

     4.     The likelihood of trespass on private property and reasonable means of avoiding such trespasses.

     B.     The reasonableness and extent of public easements shall be determined by the city giving consideration to the following:

     1.     The extent, width and character of the public easement shall be reasonably defined to achieve reasonable public use of the public waterway, river or stream consistent with public safety;

     2.     That the easement may be for a foot trail, bicycle trail, or horse trail;

     3.     The size of the subdivision;

     4.     The type of riverbank and the various appropriate recreational, educational and scientific uses including, but not limited to, hiking, horseback riding, fishing, scientific collection and teaching;

     5.     The likelihood trespass on private property and reasonable means of avoiding such trespasses;

     6.     Any public access route or routes and any easement along the bank of a public waterway river or stream provided by the subdivider shall be expressly designated on the tentative or final map in which such map shall expressly designate the governmental entity to which such route or routes are dedicated and its acceptance of such dedication.

     C.     Nothing in this section shall require the city to disapprove either a tentative or final map solely on the basis that the reasonable public access otherwise required by this article is not provided through or across the subdivision itself, if the city makes a finding that such reasonable public access is otherwise available within a reasonable distance from the subdivision and such finding is set forth on the face of the tentative or final map.

     D.    The Definition of a Public Waterway. A public waterway, Marsh Creek and its tributaries, river or stream for the purposes of this section means those waterways, rivers and streams defined in Sections 100 through 106 of the Harbors and Navigation Code, any stream declared to be a public highway for fishing pursuant to Sections 25660 through 25662 of the Government Code, the rivers listed in Section 1505 of the Fish and Game Code as spawning areas, all waterways, rivers and streams downstream from any state or federal salmon or steelhead fish hatcheries and any other waterway deemed by the city to meet the purpose of this section. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

Chapter 16.150 DEDICATION, PARK LAND OR FEES-IN-LIEU
16.150.010 General requirements.
     As a condition of approval of any parcel map or final subdivision map for residential purposes, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in-lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the city, for park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.150.020 Dedication of land.
     A.    Where a park and/or recreational facility has been designated in the community development plan or determined by the planning commission or council to be required and is to be located in whole or in part within a proposed subdivision of more than fifty parcels the subdivider shall dedicate land for park purposes in an amount prescribed in Section 16.150.050 and may be required to reserve additional land for city acquisition pursuant to Chapter 16.160.

     B.     When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed as a site for a park in the community development plan, or is required as a condition of approval of a tentative map or development plan, such portion shall be dedicated and a fee-in-lieu shall be paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant hereto.

     C.     When a major part of the local park or recreational site has already been acquired by the city and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site, such remaining portion shall be dedicated and a fee-in-lieu shall be paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant hereto. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.150.030 Fees-in-lieu.
     In the case of a subdivision of fifty or less parcels or where required pursuant to Section 16.150.020B and C a fee-in-lieu of land dedication shall be paid in an amount determined based on the formula set forth in Section 16.140.050 and prescribed by separate city ordinance. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.150.040 Procedure.
     A.    The amount of land to be dedicated and reserved within a subdivision and its location shall be determined by the planning commission as a condition of tentative map or development plan approval.

     B.     Land to be dedicated shall be suitable for park or other recreational purposes to serve the immediate and future needs of residents in the area.

     C.     Fees-in-lieu shall be used to acquire land reserved pursuant to Chapter 16.160 and other park land and for the improvement of the existing park and recreational facility or for the improvement of other local parks and recreational facilities in the area serving the subdivision. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.150.050 Park dedication formula.
     A.    The amount of land to be dedicated for park purposes and the basis for calculating the fee-in-lieu shall be based on the average number of persons/ dwelling unit X .0050 as set forth in subsection B of this section.

     B.     The following table based on the above formula is to be followed:

 

Typical Unit Category

Average Persons/DU

Average Requirements/DU

Single-family

4.0 & up

.0200 acre

Single-family

3.5 - 3.9

.0185 acre

Single-family

3.0 - 3.4

.0160 acre

Single-family or Multi-family

2.5 - 2.9

.0135 acre

Multi-family

2.0 - 2.4

.0110 acre

Multi-family

below 2.0

.0100 acre

 

     C.     Determination as to the typical unit categories shall be made by the planning officer based on the tentative map submittal. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

Chapter 16.160 PUBLIC FACILITY RESERVATIONS
16.160.010 Reservations generally.
     As a condition of approval of any map the developer shall reserve such land as may be deemed by the city to be needed for parks, fire stations, recreational facilities, libraries, or other public uses. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.160.020 Conditions for reservations.
     The city shall impose a requirement for such a regulation subject to the following conditions:

     A.    The need and general location for the facility is based upon an adopted specific plan or the community plan and contains policies and standards for those uses, and the required reservations are in accordance with those policies and standards;

     B.     The reserved area is of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner;

     C.     The amount of land reserved will not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible;

     D.    The reserved area conforms to an adopted specific plan or the community plan and is in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period; in such event, the subdivider shall make those changes as are necessary to permit the reserved area to be developed for the intended purpose consistent with good subdividing practices;

     E.     The city or other public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved has at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map entered into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless such period of time is extended by mutual agreement;

     F.     The purchase price of the parcel shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such reserved area;

     G.    If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into such a binding agreement within the time specified the reservation of such area shall automatically terminate. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

Chapter 16.165 CITY MANAGER APPROVAL OF FINAL MAP AND SUBDIVISION AGREEMENTS
16.165.010 City manager’s approval of final maps.
     The city clerk shall notify the legislative body at its next regular meeting after the city manager receives the map that the city manager is reviewing the map for final approval; the city manager shall approve or disapprove the final map within ten days following the meeting of the legislative body that was preceded by the notice required by this subsection. (Ord. 759 § 1, 2003)

 

16.165.020 Appeal.
     The city manager’s action may be appealed to the city council, under the procedures set forth in Chapter 17.880. (Ord. 976 § 6, 2016; Ord. 759 § 1, 2003)

 

16.165.030 City clerk’s notice.
     The city clerk shall provide notice of any pending approval or disapproval by the city manager, which notice shall be attached and posted with the city council’s regular agenda and shall be mailed to interested parties who request notice. (Ord. 759 § 1, 2003)

 

16.165.040 Periodic review.
     The city council shall review the delegation of authority to the city manager every three years from the effective date of this chapter, or as soon thereafter as is practical. (Ord. 759 § 1, 2003)

 

16.165.050 Conformity.
     Except as specifically authorized by this subsection, the processing of final maps shall conform to all procedural requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 759 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 16.166 SUBDIVISION AGREEMENTS
16.166.010 Subdivision agreements.
     The city manager is authorized to execute subdivision agreements, as permitted by Government Code Section 66462(d), in accordance with city standard subdivision agreements. The city manager’s action approving or disapproving a subdivision agreement may be appealed to the city council, under procedures set forth in Chapter 17.880. The city council shall review the authority granted to the city manager by this subsection every three years from the effective date of this chapter, or as soon thereafter as is practical. (Ord. 976 § 7, 2016; Ord. 759 § 1, 2003)

 

16.166.020 Deferred improvement agreement.
     A.    Deferral of Parcel Map Improvements. Pursuant to Government Code Section 66411.1, fulfillment of improvements required as a conditional approval of a parcel map may be deferred until: (1) a permit or development approval is issued by the city; (2) required by an agreement between property owner/subdivider and the city; or (3) until such time as determined by the city engineer that the improvements are necessary for:

     1.     Public health and safety; and/or

     2.     A necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area.

     B.     Deferral Agreement Required. When parcel map conditioned improvements are to be deferred, an agreement shall be executed between the property owner/subdivider and the city identifying the improvements to be deferred and the timing for construction of said improvements.

     C.     City Engineer Approval. Concurrently with review and certification of the parcel map, the city engineer is authorized to execute deferred improvement agreements in accordance with city attorney approved deferral agreements. The city engineer’s action may be appealed as provided in Chapter 16.170.

     D.    Recordation of Deferred Improvement Agreement. Upon approval, a deferred improvement agreement shall be submitted to the Contra Costa County recorder’s office for concurrent recordation with the associated parcel map. (Ord. 862 § 3, 2009)

Chapter 16.168 HABITAT CONSERVATION PLAN (HCP)/NATURAL COMMUNITY CONSERVATION PLAN (NCCP) IMPLEMENTATION
16.168.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to implement the East Contra Costa County Habitat HCP/NCCP and help establish a comprehensive framework to protect and conserve species, wetlands, natural communities and ecosystems in East Contra Costa County, while improving and streamlining the environmental permitting process for impacts of future development on rare, threatened and endangered species. (Ord. 850 § 2, 2007)

 

16.168.020 Definitions.
     The following terms shall have the meaning set forth herein:

     “Affected development project” means all development projects within the city’s land use jurisdiction except for the development projects listed in Section 16.168.030 of this chapter.

     “Covered species” means those species of plants and animals whose conservation and management are provided for by the HCP/NCCP for which limited take is authorized pursuant to the state and federal permits.

     “Development fee” means the fee described in Chapter 9.3.1 of the HCP/NCCP and imposed on development projects pursuant to Section 16.168.070 of this chapter.

     “Development fee zones” means the three areas depicted as Zones I, II and III on the map attached hereto as Exhibit A and in the detailed map data gathered as part of the HCP/NCCP used to create Exhibit A, both of which are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the community development department.

     “Development project” means any project undertaken for the purpose of development, including a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction, but not a permit to operate.

     “Director” means the director of the community development department or designee.

     “HCP/NCCP” means the East Contra Costa County Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Community Conservation Plan, approved by the city council on January 23, 2007, as may be revised from time to time and on file with the community development department.

     “HCP/NCCP implementation fees” means the development fee and the wetland mitigation fee.

     “Implementing agreement” means the January 22, 2007 implementing agreement for the East Contra Costa County Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Community Conservation Plan by and between East Contra Costa County Habitat Conservancy, county of Contra Costa, city of Pittsburg, city of Clayton, city of Oakley, city of Brentwood, Contra Costa County flood control and water conservation district, East Bay regional park district, United States Fish and Wildlife Service, and California Department of Fish and Game.

     “Implementing entity” means the East Contra Costa County Habitat Conservancy, a joint exercise of powers agency formed by Contra Costa County and the cities of Brentwood, Clayton, Oakley and Pittsburg to oversee the implementation of the HCP/NCCP.

 

     “Jurisdictional wetlands and waters” means state- and federally-regulated wetlands and other water bodies that cannot be filled or altered without permits from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.), from the State Water Resources Control Board under either Section 401 of the Clean Water Act or the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Act (California Water Code, Section 13000 et seq.), or from the California Department of Fish and Game under Section 1602 of the California Fish and Game Code, as further explained in Chapter 1.3.5 of the HCP/NCCP.

     “Project applicant” means a property owner, or duly designated agent of the property owner, who has submitted to the city a request for approval of a development project on the property.

     “Public facilities” includes public improvements, public services and community amenities.

     “State and federal permits” means the permit issued by the California Department of Fish and Game to the County and other local agencies on August 6, 2007 authorizing take of covered species pursuant to the HCP/NCCP and the Natural Community Conservation Planning Act (permit number 2835-2007-01-03) and the permit issued by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service to the County and other local agencies on July 25, 2007 authorizing incidental take of covered species pursuant to the HCP/NCCP and the federal Endangered Species Act (permit number TE160958-0), as those documents may be amended from time to time.

     “Take” includes the definitions provided by the federal Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended (16 U.S.C. Section 1531 et seq.) (“FESA”) and its implementing regulations with regard to activities subject to that Act, the California Fish and Game Code with regard to activities subject to the California Endangered Species Act (Fish and Game Code, Section 2050 et seq.) and the Natural Community Conservation Planning Act (Fish and Game Code, Section 2800 et seq.). Specifically, take is defined in FESA to mean “to harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect, or to attempt to engage in any such conduct” (16 U.S.C. Section 1532(18)) and in the Fish and Game Code Section 86 as “to hunt, pursue, catch, capture, or kill pursuant to the California Endangered Species Act.”

     “Urban development area” or “UDA” means the areas designated for urban development that are either (1) within the area designated as the “initial urban development area” as generally depicted on Figure 2.3 of the HCP/NCCP, incorporated herein by reference, or (2) areas added to or removed from the initial urban development area according to the procedures set forth in Section 3.50 of the implementing agreement.

     “Wetland mitigation fee” means the fee described in Chapter 9.3.1 of the HCP/NCCP and imposed on development projects pursuant to Section 16.168.070(B) of this chapter. (Ord. 850 § 2, 2007)

 

16.168.030 Applicability.
     A.    This chapter shall apply to all development projects, within the city’s land use jurisdiction and within the UDA as the boundaries of these areas may change pursuant to the law or this chapter, except for the following:

     1.     Any development project that will permanently disturb less than one acre. The “acreage of land permanently disturbed” by a project, as that term is defined in Chapter 9.3.1 of the HCP/NCCP, shall be determined by the director.

     2.     Any development project that the director determines is contained entirely within an area mapped as urban, turf, landfill and/or aqueduct land cover types in the HCP/NCCP, as generally depicted on Exhibit A and in the map data used to create Exhibit A.

     3.     Any development project of a type not covered by the HCP/NCCP within the urban development area, as set forth in Chapter 2.3.1 of the HCP/NCCP.

     4.     Any development project with vested rights pursuant to an agreement by and between the project applicant and the city existing as of the effective date of this chapter.

     5.     Any development project exempt under any provision of law.

     6.     Any development project where the city determines based on evidence submitted by the project applicant that application of the chapter would deprive the project applicant of all reasonable economic use of the property in violation of federal or state constitutional prohibitions against the taking of property without just compensation.

     B.     This chapter establishes application procedures whereby project applicants of affected development projects may receive authorization for the incidental take of certain covered species listed as threatened or endangered under state and federal law and identified in the HCP/NCCP, subject to the applicant’s compliance with all terms and conditions required by the HCP/NCCP, the implementing agreement, and this chapter. (Ord. 850 § 2, 2007)

 

16.168.040 Responsibility for administration.
     The director shall administer and apply the provisions of this chapter for the city. (Ord. 850 § 2, 2007)

 

16.168.050 HCP/NCCP take authorization application procedures.
     A.    The city shall require project applicants for any and all affected development projects to submit an application for take authorization to the director for review simultaneously with the submittal of the request for approval of a development project. The director may require that the application be submitted using a standard application form. At a minimum, the application for take authorization must include the following information to be determined complete:

     1.     Description of the affected development project, including detailed information on the project footprint, extent of construction and extent of any ongoing maintenance activities subject to the HCP/NCCP.

     2.     One or more reports documenting the methods and results of planning surveys and the methods of applicable preconstruction surveys and construction monitoring, in accordance with Chapter 6 of the HCP/NCCP.

     3.     Evidence of compliance or planned compliance with avoidance and minimization measures, in accordance with Chapter 6 of the HCP/NCCP.

     4.     Quantification of anticipated direct and indirect impacts on land cover types and habitat for species covered by the HCP/NCCP, consistent with Chapters 6.2 and 9.3.1 of the HCP/NCCP.

     5.     Estimate of HCP/NCCP implementation fees due and/or documentation of proposed land dedication and/or proposed habitat restoration or creation, consistent with Section 16.168.070 of this chapter.

     6.     HCP/NCCP application administration fee.

     B.     The city may grant take authorization to a project applicant only upon satisfaction of all of the following:

     1.     The application for take authorization is deemed complete.

     2.     The project applicant has been required to comply with all terms and conditions of the Implementing Agreement, the HCP/NCCP, and the state and federal permits that apply to the project. Such terms and conditions include but are not limited to the following:

     a.     Payment of the required HCP/NCCP implementation fees and/or approval of an offer of land dedication and/or habitat restoration or creation by the city, pursuant to the requirements of Section 16.168.080 of this chapter.

     b.     Compliance with all relevant surveys, monitoring, avoidance, minimization, and conservation measures determined by the director to apply to this project, pursuant to Chapter 6 of the HCP/NCCP.

     3.     The city makes a determination that extension of take authorization is consistent with the HCP/NCCP, Implementing Agreement, the state and federal permits and all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.

     C.     The director shall review HCP/NCCP take authorization applications for completeness and verify that the appropriate HCP/NCCP implementation fee amount, where applicable, has been collected prior to site disturbance or the issuance of the first construction permit. (Ord. 850 § 2, 2007)

 

16.168.060 Requirements for affected development projects.
     To help fund the acquisition, management and monitoring of lands for the benefit of covered species, natural communities, biological diversity, ecosystem function, and all other implementation and administration requirements of the HCP/NCCP by the implementing entity, the city shall condition the approval of any and all affected development projects, pursuant to Section 16.168.030 of this chapter, upon the collection of the applicable development fee and, if applicable, wetland mitigation fee, unless an alternative described in Section 16.168.080 is approved or required. (Ord. 850 § 2, 2007)

 

16.168.070 HCP/NCCP implementation fees.
     A.    Development Fee.

     1.     The development fee shall be imposed upon and collected for each acre of land permanently disturbed.

     2.     The director shall determine in which of the three development fee zones the affected development project is located, pursuant to Exhibit A and the map data used to create Exhibit A.

     3.     The development fee for each affected development project shall be calculated by multiplying the fee for the applicable development fee zone by the acreage of land permanently disturbed by the project, as determined by the director pursuant to Chapter 9.3.1 of the HCP/NCCP. The development fee amount shall be based on the fee established by city council fee resolution in place at the time of actual payment of development fee to the city.

     4.     Upon or before the issuance of a grading permit or, if no grading permit is issued, upon or before issuance of the first construction permit, the project applicant shall either (1) pay the entire development fee or, (2) with the prior written approval of the city, pay at least sixty-seven percent of the development fee and execute an agreement with the city, in a form approved by the city attorney, to provide additional funding payments through assessments on the subject parcels or other mechanisms, provided that assessments or other funding mechanisms are legally authorized for this purpose, pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 9.3.1 of the HCP/NCCP.

     5.     The development fee amount applicable to an affected development project shall be the development fee amount in effect at the time a grading permit is issued or, if no grading permit is issued, at the time the first construction permit is issued for the project. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a project applicant may request to pay the development fee in a calendar year prior to the calendar year in which the grading permit or first construction permit is issued. Such request may be granted by the director only in accordance with Section 13.2.2.1 of the implementing agreement and Chapter 9.3.1 of the HCP/NCCP. If such request is granted, the applicable development fee shall be the development fee in effect during the calendar year in which the fee is to be paid, including any adjustments made pursuant to this chapter.

     B.     Wetland Mitigation Fee.

     1.     In addition to a development fee, a wetland mitigation fee shall be imposed upon and collected from any and all affected development projects that will fill, dredge, or remove jurisdictional wetlands and waters or riparian woodland or scrub, and from any and all affected development projects that have been granted an exception to the stream setback established pursuant to Conservation Measure 1.7 of the HCP/NCCP.

     2.     The director shall determine which of the land cover types will be impacted by an affected development project and the corresponding fee amounts in accordance with Chapter 9.3.1 of the HCP/NCCP and the wetland mitigation fee amount established by city council fee resolution. The wetland mitigation fee applicable to an affected development project that has been granted an exception to the stream setback shall be determined by the director, based on the acreage of setback encroachment, in accordance with Chapter 9.3.1 of the HCP/NCCP and the wetland mitigation fee amount established by city council fee resolution.

     3.     Upon or before the issuance of a grading permit or, if no grading permit is issued, upon or before issuance of the first construction permit, the project applicant shall pay the wetland mitigation fee determined for the affected development project. The wetland mitigation fee amount applicable to an affected development project shall be the wetland mitigation fee amount in effect at the time a grading permit is issued or, if no grading permit is issued, at the time the first construction permit issued for the project. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a project applicant may request to pay the wetland mitigation fee in a calendar year prior to the calendar year in which the grading permit or first construction permit is issued. Such request may be granted by the director only in accordance with Section 13.2.2.1 of the implementing agreement and Chapter 9.3.1 of the HCP/NCCP. If such request is granted, the applicable wetland mitigation fee shall be the wetland mitigation fee in effect during the calendar year in which the fee is to be paid, including any adjustments made pursuant to this chapter.

     C.     The development fee and wetland mitigation fee shall each be adjusted automatically for inflation or deflation in accordance with the requirements of the HCP/NCCP and city council fee resolution. All development fees and wetland mitigation fees collected hereunder shall be transmitted to the county auditor-controller or a successor accounting entity established by the Governing Board of the East Contra Costa County Habitat Conservancy at least quarterly, within thirty days of the end of the quarter within which the fee was collected, for deposit into a separate account or fund, and for investment, accounting and expenditure in accordance with the provisions of the Mitigation Fee Act.

     D.    Administration Fee.

     1.     Each HCP/NCCP application shall be charged an HCP/NCCP administration fee to review each application request and collect and process the applicable development fee and wetland mitigation fees. Payment of the HCP/NCCP administration fee shall be required at the time of HCP/NCCP application submittal. The amount of the HCP/NCCP administration fee shall be established by city council fee resolution.

     2.     All HCP/NCCP implementation fees collected shall be transmitted to the city finance director and dispersed to the HCP/NCCP conservancy at least quarterly in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the California Mitigation Fee Act. (Ord. 850 § 2, 2007)

 

16.168.080 Land and other options in lieu of fee.
     A.    Dedications.

     1.     On a case-by-case basis, and upon a voluntary offer by the project applicant, the city may accept a dedication of land in lieu of some or all of the development fee that would otherwise be imposed upon a development project. Any offer of dedication may be considered for acceptance only if the land dedication is considered by the director to be consistent with the HCP/NCCP and implementing agreement. The director shall determine the amount of the development fee for which such dedication would substitute in accordance with Section 13.2.2.2 of the implementing agreement and Chapters 8.6.7 and 9.3.1 of the HCP/NCCP.

     2.     If required to comply with the Stay Ahead provision set forth in Section 8.6.1 of the HCP/NCCP and Section 9.2 of the implementation agreement, the city may require that some or all affected development projects offer a dedication of land in lieu of some or all of the development fee that would otherwise be imposed.

     B.     Creation/Restoration of Habitat. On a case-by-case basis, and upon a voluntary offer by the project applicant, the city may accept the restoration or creation of jurisdictional wetlands and waters of riparian woodland/scrub in lieu of some or all of the wetland mitigation fee that would otherwise be imposed on an affected development project. The offer of restoration or creation of jurisdictional wetlands and waters or riparian woodland/scrub in lieu of some or all of a portion of the wetland mitigation fee may be considered for acceptance only if such restoration or creation is determined by the director to be consistent with the HCP/NCCP and implementing agreement. The director shall determine the amount of wetland mitigation fee for which such restoration or creation would substitute in accordance with Conservation Measure 2.1 and 2.2 and Chapter 9.3.1 of the HCP/NCCP.

     C.     Separate Take Authorization. On a case-by-case basis, an applicant that possesses separate and final approval from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and/or California Department of Fish and Game for incidental take of all federally or state listed species that may be adversely affected by the development project may apply to the city to pay a fee, the amount to be negotiated by the project applicant with the city, to support the conservation of habitat and open space under the HCP/NCCP instead of the HCP/NCCP implementation fees. If the director determines that the mitigation and conservation requirements under the separate approval are equivalent to or exceed what would be required under this ordinance, then the city may determine that no further fees are required for purposes of complying with the HCP/NCCP, in which case the HCP/NCCP implementation fees described herein shall not be required of the project. (Ord. 850 § 2, 2007)

 

16.168.090 Enforcement.
     A.    The city shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter by civil, criminal, and/or administrative action and/or any other proceeding or method permitted by law.

     B.     Failure of any official or agency to fulfill the requirements of this chapter shall not excuse any applicant from the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 850 § 2, 2007)

 

EXHIBIT A TO CITY COUNCIL ORDINANCE NO. 8504

Development Fee Zones in the Brentwood Area

Chapter 16.170 APPEALS
16.170.010 Appeals.
     A person may appeal the decision of the city engineer, community development director, planning manager, or city manager in the administration of this title by following the procedures set forth in Chapter 17.880, Appeals and Calls for Review. (Ord. 976 § 8, 2016; Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

Chapter 16.180 ENFORCEMENT
16.180.010 Prohibition on sale or lease.
     A.    No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map is required by this title, until such map thereof in full compliance with the provisions of this title has been filed for record by the recorder of the county.

     B.     No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a parcel map is required by this title, until such map thereof in full compliance with the provisions of this title has been filed for record by the recorder of the county.

     C.     Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final map or parcel map is required by this title shall not be made by parcel or block number, initial or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed for record by the recorder of the county.

     D.    This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established.

     E.     Nothing contained in subsections A and B shall be deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease, or finance real property or to construct improvements thereon where such sale, lease or financing, or the commencement of such construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final map or parcel map, as required under this title.

     F.     Nothing in this section shall in any way modify or affect the provisions of Section 11018.2 of the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

 

16.180.020 Violation a misdemeanor.
     Any person who violates any provision of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1990)

Title 17 ZONING 

Note
Article I. General Provisions
Article II. Zoning Maps
Article III. Residential Zoning Regulations
Article IV. Office and Commercial Zoning Regulations
Article V. Industrial/Commercial Zoning Regulations
Article VI. Public and Semipublic Facility Zoning Regulations
Article VII. Agricultural and Open Space Zoning Regulations
Article VIII. Planned Development Zoning Regulations
Article IX. Supplementary Regulations
Article X. Supplementary Regulations—Continued
Article XI. Administrative Procedure and Permits Regulations

Article I. General Provisions

Chapter 17.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS
17.010.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this article shall be known as the “general provisions” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the general provisions is to establish the purpose and applicability of the zoning ordinance and to provide for the interpretation and definition of its provisions. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.010.002 Applicability of provisions.
     These provisions shall apply to the entire zoning title. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.010.003 Title of zoning ordinance.
     The provisions of Title 17 shall be known as the “zoning ordinance of the city of Brentwood” and may be referred to herein by such title or as “the zoning regulations,” “the ordinance,” “the zoning title” or as “this title.” (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.010.004 Authority for ordinance.
     Title 17 is adopted pursuant to Title 7 Division 1 of the Government Code of the state of California, the Planning and Zoning Law, which law vests the city with the responsibility of regulatory land use and requires the adoption of an ordinance for this purpose. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.010.005 Purpose of zoning ordinance.
     The general purposes of the zoning ordinance are to protect and promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, and to achieve the following objectives:

     A.    To promote the achievement of the goals and policies of the Brentwood community development plan and all other more specific city plans and policies elaborated in the context thereof;

     B.     To advance Brentwood’s position as a regional center of commerce, culture, recreation and residential living;

     C.     To protect each area and neighborhood of the community from the intrusion of incompatible uses and to provide opportunities for establishments to concentrate for efficient operation in a mutually beneficial relationship to each other and to share services;

     D.    To foster the development of high-quality neighborhoods in a variety of dwelling types and at a wide range of population densities, with full residential amenities and provision for sunlight, fresh air and usable open space;

     E.     To stabilize expectations regarding future development of Brentwood, thereby providing a basis for wise decisions with respect to such development;

     F.     To promote the safe, fast and efficient movement of people and goods, and the provision of adequate off-street parking facilities;

     G.    To promote the growth and productivity of the Brentwood economy;

     H.    To achieve excellence and originality of design in all future developments and to preserve the natural beauty of Brentwood’s setting in the east county region;

     I.      To secure equity among individuals in the utilization of their property. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.010.006 Applicability of the zoning ordinance.
     A.    The zoning ordinance shall apply, to the extent permissible under other laws, to all property within the city of Brentwood and currently dedicated rights-of-way, whether such property is in private or public ownership.

     B.     Whenever any provision of the zoning ordinance and any other provision of law, ordinance or resolution of any kind imposes overlapping or contradictory regulations or contains restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, that provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control, except as expressly provided otherwise in this title.

     C.     The zoning ordinance shall not abrogate, annul or impair any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties, except that where this title imposes a greater restriction or higher standard than that required by such agreement, this title shall control.

     D.    Except as otherwise allowed by the nonconforming use regulations or as authorized pursuant to the variance procedure or other special zoning approval, no activities or facilities shall be established, substituted, expanded, constructed, altered, moved, painted, maintained or otherwise changed, and no lot lines shall be created or changed, except in conformity with this zoning title. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.010.007 Provisions considered to be minimum requirements.
     In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be considered the minimum requirements necessary to accomplish the purpose set forth in Section 17.010.004. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.020 TEXTUAL INTERPRETATION
17.020.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The purpose of these provisions is to establish the general rules of construction as they apply to the textual provisions of this title. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.020.002 Particular instances.
     The particular shall control the general. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.020.003 Captions and illustrations not to control.
     In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of any provision and any caption or illustration, or any illustrative material not part of this title but physically attached thereto in order to facilitate understanding, the text shall control. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.020.004 Tenses.
     Words used in the present tense include the future, and words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural and singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.020.005 Conjunctions.
     Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:

     A.    “And” indicates that all connected items or provisions shall apply.

     B.     “Or” or “and/or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in any combination.

     C.     “Either...or” indicates that the connected items or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.020.006 References applying to the city of Brentwood.
     All public officials, bodies and agencies to which reference is made are those of the city of Brentwood unless otherwise indicated. The word “city” means the city of Brentwood and/or the public official having responsibility for the subject action. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.020.007 Conditionally permitted.
     The words “conditionally permitted” mean permitted subject to the granting of a use permit pursuant to the conditional use permit procedure and subject to all other applicable regulations. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.020.008 Permitted.
     The words “permitted” or “directly permitted” mean permitted without the requirement of a use permit, but subject to all applicable regulations. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.020.009 Shall and may.
     The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is discretionary. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.020.010 Building height.
     For purposes of this title, when a maximum building height is identified, a building shall not exceed the maximum number of stories identified and the building shall not exceed the maximum dimension identified, as measured from the finish grade of the lot to the highest point of the building, excluding a chimney. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 17.030 DEFINITIONS
17.030.010 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “Zoning Ordinance Definitions” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to promote understanding, consistency and precision in the interpretation of the zoning regulations. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.030.020 Applicability of provisions.
     The meaning and construction of words and phrases as hereinafter set forth shall apply throughout this title, except where the context of such words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 17.030.030 Definitions.
     Accessory dwelling unit means an additional dwelling unit constructed or adapted within, onto or detached from an existing dwelling unit on a single-family residential lot. A secondary housing unit must have complete independent living facilities for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, and be developed in accordance with Section 17.100.005. Any reference to secondary housing unit in any city document means an accessory dwelling unit.

     Accessory use means a use which is incidental to and customarily associated with a specified principal use, and which meets the applicable conditions set forth in the accessory use regulations of this title.

     Activity, land use, et al., means the actual or permitted residential, commercial, industrial or other use or uses of a property or any portion thereof.

     Adult Entertainment. See Section 17.690.003 for definition of phrase and related words and phrases.

     Agriculture means farms, orchards, greenhouses, nurseries and similar facilities engaged in the production of crops or plants, vines and trees, bulbs and seeds and in animal husbandry. Agriculture includes facilities for the initial processing, packing and storage of agricultural products and roadside stands for the sale of produce grown in the Brentwood area.

     Alley means a dedicated public way intended primarily to provide vehicular access to abutting properties.

     Alteration means any enlargement, addition, relocation, repair, remodeling, change in number of dwelling units or rooming units, development of or change in an open area, development of or change in a sign by painting or otherwise, or other change in a facility, but excluding painting, except as provided above for signs, and excluding ordinary maintenance for which no building permit is required, and demolition or removal.

     Amusement park means any business established including such uses as, but not limited to, rides, games, shows, circuses, carnivals and similar uses involving outdoor as well as enclosed entertainment or entertainment devices.

     Animal Husbandry. See Section 17.670.003 for definition of phrase and related words and phrases.

     Bicycle path means a path, trail, route, way or lane designated for use by bicycles and other non-motorized vehicles. Public paths shall include only those for which rights-of-way are dedicated or deeded to and accepted by the city.

     Building means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.

     Building, accessory means any building which is detached from the principal building on the property, is intended for the conduct of uses secondary to the principal use of the property and is generally smaller than the principal building on the property.

     City means the city of Brentwood and any one or more public officials, bodies, commissions or agencies of the city having jurisdiction over the particular matter referred to.

     Community care facilities means any facility, place or building licensed by the state of California, and defined in accordance with regulations enacted with Title 22, Division 6 of the California Administration Code and the California Health and Safety Code which is maintained and operated to provide nonmedical residential care, day care or homefinding agency services for children, adults, or children and adults, including, but not limited to, the developmentally disabled, physically handicapped, mentally disordered, or incompetent persons, and includes any residential facility, day facility and homefinding agency. Community care facilities are further defined below.

     1.     Residential facility means any family home, group home, social rehabilitation facility or similar facility, for twenty-four-hour nonmedical care to persons in need of personal services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance or training essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual. A residential facility includes:

     a.     Small family home—children means the residence of the licensee in which care and supervision are provided for not more than six children, exclusive of members of the licensee’s family or the residential facility’s staff. A residence fitting the category of “small family home—children” is considered a residential use of the property, and shall be subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.

     b.     Small family home—adults means a residence in which care and supervision are provided for not more than six adults, exclusive of members of the property owner or licensee’s family or the residential facility’s staff. A residence fitting the category of “small family home—adults” is considered a residential use of property, and shall be subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.

     c.     Large family home—children means the residence of the licensee which is licensed to provide care and supervision for seven through twelve children, exclusive of members of the licensee’s family or the residential facility’s staff.

     d.     Large family home—adults means a residence which is licensed to provide care and supervision for seven through fifteen adults, exclusive of the property owner or members of licensee’s family or the residential facility’s staff.

     e.     Group home—children means a residential home of any capacity that provides services in a group setting to children who need care and supervision.

     f.      Group home—adults means a residential home of any capacity that provides services in a group setting to adults who need or desire care and supervision.

     g.     Social rehabilitation center—small means a facility that provides services in a group setting for not more than six persons to adults who currently or potentially are capable of meeting their life support needs independently, but who temporarily need assistance, guidance or counseling.

     h.     Social rehabilitation center—large means a facility that provides services in a group setting for seven or more persons to adults who currently or potentially are capable of meeting their life support needs independently, but who temporarily need assistance, guidance or counseling.

     2.     Adult day facility means any family day home, day care center, social rehabilitation center or similar facility determined by the state, which provides on less than a twenty-four-hour basis, nonmedical care to adults in need of personal services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance or training essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual. A day facility includes:

     a.     Small family day home—adults means the family residence of the licensee in which care and supervision are provided for not more than six adults during a portion of the day, exclusive of members of the licensee’s family.

     b.     Large family day home—adults means the family residence of the licensee which is licensed to provide care and supervision during a portion of the day for seven through fifteen adults, exclusive of members of the licensee’s family.

     c.     Day care center—adults means a facility of any capacity that provides care and other services in a group setting to adults during a portion of the day.

     d.     Social rehabilitation center—small means a facility that provides services in a group setting for not more than six persons during a portion of the day to adults who currently or potentially are capable of meeting their life support needs independently, but who temporarily need assistance, guidance or counseling.

     e.     Social rehabilitation center—large means a facility that provides services in a group setting for seven or more persons during a portion of the day to adults who currently or potentially are capable of meeting their life support needs independently, but who temporarily need assistance, guidance or counseling.

     3.     Child day facility means any family day home, day care center, or similar facility, which provides care, protection and supervision to a child or children for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away.

     a.     Family day care—small means a facility regularly providing care, protection and supervision to a child or a maximum of six children including the licensee’s own children under age twelve in the care giver’s own home, for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away.

     b.     Family day care—large means a facility regularly providing care, protection and supervision for seven to twelve children (including licensee’s and assistant care giver’s own children under age twelve), in the care giver’s own home, for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away.

     c.     Day care center—children means a facility of any capacity that provides care and other services in a group setting during a portion of the day for children and licensed as such by the state of California.

     4.     Homefinding agency means any individual or organization engaged in finding homes or other facilities for placement of persons of any age for temporary or permanent care, or adoption and includes provision of continuing social services to such persons.

     5.     Small residential care facility as utilized within the city of Brentwood zoning ordinance includes any small family home—adults, social rehabilitation center—small, small family day home—adults or family day care—small.

     6.     Large residential care facility as utilized within the city of Brentwood zoning ordinance includes any large family home—adults, group home—children, group home—adults, social rehabilitation center—large, day care center—adults or day care center—children.

     Condominium. A condominium is defined, in accordance with Civil Code Section 783, to be an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property.

     Condominium Conversion, Residential. A condominium conversion means the conversion or subdivision of a single ownership parcel of existing improved residential real property typically containing five or more units, or of an existing mobile home park, into a form of ownership for residential purposes involving the right of exclusive occupancy or separate ownership of individual units or mobile home spaces, including, but not limited to, condominiums, community apartments, stock cooperatives or townhouses.

     Corner lot means a lot bounded on two or more adjacent sides by public rights-of-way or private ways, or by portions thereof, having an angle of intersection of one hundred thirty-five degrees or less.

     Court means an area enclosed by three or more walls on the same lot, which area is open to the sky and unobstructed except for the facilities allowed therein by the yard regulations of this title.

     Dwelling means any building or portion thereof or a mobilehome or trailer designed for and/or used exclusively as the residence of one or more families as defined in this section.

     1.     Dwelling, single-family means a detached building designed for and/or used exclusively for residence purposes by one family.

     2.     Dwelling, single-family attached means a building designed for and/or used exclusively for residence purposes by one family and joined structurally along a common wall and property line to another like dwelling unit.

     3.     Dwelling, multiple means a building or portion thereof designed for and/or used exclusively for residence purposes by two or more families living independently of one another to include the terms duplex, triplex and apartment.

     4.     Dwelling group means a group of two or more detached buildings used for dwelling purposes located on a parcel of land in one ownership and having any yard or court in common.

     5.     Dwelling unit means any building or portion of a building or a mobile home or trailer having one or more rooms and only one kitchen or kitchenette and designed and/or used for occupancy by one family.

     Earthen berm means a mound or embankment of earth, together with necessary retaining structures.

     Emergency shelter means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.

     Entitlement means any variance, permit, rezoning, building permit or other city approval granted under the municipal code of the city of Brentwood.

     Facility, development, construction means any man-made buildings or structures or other features existing or proposed to be placed on a property or any portion thereof to include grading, landscaping and surfacing of any kind.

     Family means the functional equivalent of a traditional family, whose members are an interactive group of persons jointly occupying a single dwelling unit including the joint use of and responsibility for common areas, sharing household activities and responsibilities such as meals, chores, household maintenance, and expenses. If the dwelling unit is rented, this means that all adult residents have chosen to jointly occupy the entire premises of the dwelling unit, under a single written lease for the entire dwelling, with joint use and responsibility of the premises, and the makeup of the household occupying the unit is determined by the residents of the unit rather than by the landlord or property manager.

     Financial institution means banks, savings and loans, and similar businesses which offer a wide range of services including the deposit and withdrawal of money, loans, and other financial transactions. Check cashing services, pawnshops, automatic teller machines and other similar uses which conduct limited types of financial transactions are not defined as financial institutions.

     Finished grade means the finished surface of the ground after grading for development.

     Floor area means the total of the gross horizontal areas of all floors, including usable basements and cellars, below the roof and within the outer surfaces of the main walls of principal or accessory buildings, or the centerlines of party walls separating such buildings or portions thereof, or within lines drawn parallel to and two feet within the roof line of any building or portion thereof without walls. Floor area excludes the following:

     1.     Areas used for off-street parking spaces or loading areas, accessways and maneuvering aisles related thereto.

     2.     Areas which qualify as usable open space under the usable open space standards of this title.

     3.     In the case of nonresidential facilities: arcades, porticoes and similar open areas which are located at or near street level, which are accessible to the general public and which are not designed or used as sales, display, storage, services or production areas.

     Frontage means a front lot line, also the length thereof abutting a street.

     Front lot line means on an interior lot, any abutting street line; on a corner lot, the shorter of any adjacent two abutting street lines, or portions thereof, which intersect at an angle of not less than forty-five degrees but not more than one hundred thirty-five degrees. However, if such street lines, or portions thereof, are equal in length, the owner or developer of the lot may select either as the front lot line. If adjacent street lines, or portions thereof, of a corner lot intersect at an angle of less than forty-five degrees, both such street lines or portions thereof shall be deemed front lot lines.

     Health studios means any businesses including, but not limited to, gymnasiums, health clubs, spas or salons, tanning salons, athletic clubs, weightlifting centers, racquetball, tennis, swim or similar sports or athletic clubs, which are established for the purpose of providing exercising programs, sport activity programs and similar programs typically associated with such businesses.

     Home Occupation. See Section 17.840.003 for definition of phrase.

     Hotel means an establishment providing lodging accommodations for a fee for transient guests, for stays fewer than thirty days, with access to rooms or units primarily from interior lobbies, courts or halls.

     Interim uses mean the use of property with a nonpermanent facility for a period of time greater than twelve months and less than thirty-six months. Such interim uses include, but are not limited to storage yard, subdivision signs, office and subdivision signs, temporary or portable offices and similar uses.

     Interior lot means any lot other than a corner lot.

     Interior side lot line means any side lot line which is not a street line.

     Kitchen/kitchenette means any room or portion thereof containing facilities designed or used for the preparation of food, including, but not limited to, stoves, ranges or hotplates.

     Landscaping and Screening. See Section 17.630.003 for definition of phrase and related words and phrases.

     Liquor sales means any business required to obtain an alcoholic beverage license from the California State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control for the purpose of selling alcoholic beverages for consumption either on the site of sale or off-site.

     Living unit means a dwelling unit or a rooming unit.

     Lot means a parcel of contiguous land which is or may be developed or utilized, under one ownership, as a unit site for a use or group of uses.

     Lot area means the area of a lot measured horizontally between bounding lot lines.

     Lot line means any boundary of a lot.

     Manufactured homes, mobile homes or modular homes means single-family housing units, which are commonly referred to as mobile homes, manufactured homes or modular homes, and which are certified under the National Mobilehome Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and which are to be placed on a foundation system, pursuant to Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code or constructed in accordance with the appropriate Uniform Building Code, Plumbing Code, Electrical Code, etc., that has been adopted and is in effect within the city of Brentwood.

     Mobile Home Park. See Section 17.710.003 for definition of phrase and related words and phrases.

     Motel means a building or group of attached or detached buildings providing lodging accommodations for a fee for transient guests, for stays of fewer than thirty days, with access to rooms or units through an exterior door. Motels are distinguished from hotels primarily in that the former provide direct independent access to, and adjoining parking for, each room or unit, and do not provide twenty-four-hour guest services.

     Nonconforming Use/Facility/Activity. See Section 17.610.003 for definition of phrase and related words and phrases.

     Off-Street Parking/Loading. See Section 17.620.003 for definition of phrases and related words and phrases.

     Oil and Gas Production. See Section 17.680.002 for definition of phrase and related words and phrases.

     Pedestrian walkway means a path, trail route, way or lane designated for pedestrian traffic only and not intended for use as a way for motor-driven vehicles. Public walkways shall include only those for which rights-of-way are dedicated to and accepted by the city.

     Principal use means the activity which fulfills a primary function of an establishment, institution, household or other entity, and the main buildings or other facilities which are designed for or occupied by such activity.

     Public dancing means any dance with either live or mechanically provided music, held on a regular basis. Public dance shall not include dances sponsored by charitable nonprofit organizations wherein any profits realized are intended for a charitable cause.

     Rear lot line means the lot line or lines approximately opposite the front lot line.

     Restaurant means an establishment, including, but not limited to, full service sit down or fast food restaurants, cafés, delis, sandwich shops, coffee shops, juice bars, taverns or bars, where food and/or drink are commonly ordered, prepared, served and eaten within the restaurant building, and which may also include some portion of outdoor seating areas, and/or off premises consumption.

     Restaurant—Carry out means an establishment which by design or physical layout, or by service or packaging procedures permits the purchase of prepared foods and/or drinks intended to be consumed off the premises; and where the consumption of food and/or drinks on the premises, whether or not in a motor vehicle, is not permitted. This use type is considered as “general retail sales” in terms of parking required per Section 17.620.012(J)(2) of the municipal code, and therefore is a permitted use in those zones allowing retail sales.

     Side lot line means any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

     Sign. See Section 17.640.004 for definition of word and related words and phrases.

     Storage means the placement of material objects on a site for any period in excess of seven consecutive days.

     Story means a portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it; provided, that the following shall not be deemed a story:

     1.     A basement or cellar if the finished floor level directly above it is not more than six feet above the average adjoining elevation of the finished grade;

     2.     An attic or similar space under a gable, hip or gambrel roof.

     Street means a dedicated public way intended to provide for through traffic and primary vehicle access to abutting properties.

     Street line means a lot line dividing a lot from an abutting street.

     Structure means that which is built or constructed or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. For purposes of this title “structure” shall not include a “building.”

     Structure, accessory means any structure which is intended for the conduct of uses secondary to the principal use of the property or intended for ornamental purposes to include, but not be limited to, concrete works, walls, fences, minor shelters, machinery, garden features, pools and works of a similar nature.

     Supportive housing means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing is considered a residential use and is subject only to the restrictions and standards that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type (e.g., single-family residence(s) or multifamily development) in the same zone.

     Target population means persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Development Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.

     Tattoo parlor means any establishment that places an indelible mark or figure upon the body by insertion of pigment on or under the skin or by the production of scars.

     Transitional housing and transitional housing development mean buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. Transitional housing is considered a residential use and is subject only to the restrictions and standards that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type (e.g., single-family residence(s) or multifamily development) in the same zone.

     Yard or setback means an open area between a wall or other facility and the nearest lot line and measured perpendicular from the line, on a horizontal plane, to the wall of the facility.

     Yard, front means a yard measured perpendicular into a lot from its front lot line or lines, and extending the full width of the lot between its side lot lines.

     Yard, nonstreet frontage means an interior side or rear yard.

     Yard, rear means a yard measured perpendicularly into a lot from its rear lot line or lines and extending the full width of the lot between its side lot lines.

     Yard, required means that portion of a yard that meets or is required to meet the minimum dimensions for such a yard in the zone in which it is located. In the case of a lot where there is no rear lot line from which a required minimum rear yard depth may be measured there shall be provided, exclusive of any front yard or side yard adjacent to a street, an area having the area and dimensions equivalent to that required for a rear yard on a rectangular lot of the same area and in the same zone.

     Yard, side means a yard measured perpendicularly into a lot from one or more of its side lot lines, and extending between the required front yard and rear yard, or the front or rear lot lines in cases where no front yard or rear yard is required.

     Yard, street frontage means a front yard or side yard adjacent to a street. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 991 § 3, 2017; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 859 § B, 2008; Ord. 736, 2003; Ord. 560 § 4, 1995; Ord. 468 §§ 2, 3, 1990; Ord. 408, 1987)

Article II. Zoning Maps
Chapter 17.060 ZONES AND ZONING MAP(S)
17.060.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this article shall be known as the “zoning map(s)” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purposes of this chapter are as follows:

     1.     To prescribe in map and/or text form the boundaries of zones referred to, established or amended by this title;

     2.     To promote precision and consistency in the interpretation of boundaries, and boundaries between each zone. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.060.002 Applicability of provisions.
     The provisions of the zoning map(s) shall apply to all property within the city of Brentwood, dedicated freeways, streets, alleys, paths and to such unincorporated territory adjoining the city of Brentwood as shall be necessary in order to ensure continuity of regulation in the vent of subsequent annexation. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.060.003 Zones enumerated.
     In order to accomplish the purposes herein set forth, the city of Brentwood is divided into the zones set out in the following table, within each of which certain uses of land and buildings are restricted or prohibited, and within which certain combinations of regulations are applied with reference to building site dimensions, yard dimensions and other matters, all as set forth in this title:

     A.    Residential zones as follows:

     1.     RE (ranchette estate) zone,

     2.     R-1-E (single-family residential estate) zone,

     3.     R-1 (single-family residential) zone,

     4.     R-2 (moderate density multifamily residential) zone,

     5.     R-3 (high density multifamily residential) zone;

     B.     Office and commercial zones as follows:

     1.     CO (administration/professional/ commercial office) zone,

     2.     COB (commercial office/business) zone,

     3.     COR (commercial office/residential) zone,

     4.     CR (commercial/residential) zone,

     5.     C-1 (neighborhood commercial) zone,

     6.     C-2 (general commercial) zone,

     7.     C-3 (thoroughfare commercial) zone;

     C.     Industrial and commercial zones as follows:

     1.     IC (industrial/commercial) zones,

     2.     PEC (planned employment center) zone;

     D.    Agriculture and open space zones as follows:

     1.     A-10 (agricultural conservation) zone,

     2.     A-20 (intensive agricultural) zone,

     3.     AP (agricultural preserve) zone,

     4.     OS (open space) zone;

     E.     Public and semipublic facility zones as follows:

     1.     PF (public facility) zone,

     2.     SPF (semipublic facility) zone. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.060.004 Zoning map(s).
     The zoning map(s) shall consist of the zoning map or maps of the city of Brentwood which show the zones being parts of this title under the provisions of this title. Such map(s) and all data shown thereon are adopted and made a part of this title as subsections A through M of this section. Such map or maps, properly attested, shall be and shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.060.005 Zoning boundaries.
     Boundaries and descriptions of the zones referred to in this title shall be shown on the zoning map(s), including all subsequent changes and additions thereto. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.060.006 Interpretation of zoning map(s) boundaries.
     Generally the maps shall govern the location of zoning boundaries; however, if uncertainty exists the following rules shall govern the city’s interpretation.

     A.    When Written Description Exists. Whenever the location of the boundary or other feature appearing on a map included in the zoning maps is indicated in a legal description or other written statement on file with the city, the location shall be interpreted precisely as described in such statement.

     B.     When Location Approximates Lot Line or Other Line. Whenever no applicable legal description or other written statement exists, and the location of the boundary or other feature included in the zoning maps approximates an edge or centerline, as the case may be, of a street, alley, path, right-of-way or city boundary which was in existence when the boundary or other feature was established, the location of the boundary or other feature shall be interpreted to follow such edge or centerline. Whenever the location of such boundary or other feature approximates a predominant alignment within the block of lot lines or lines bounding parcels shown on a recorded subdivision plat or record of survey, which lot lines or parcel lines were in existence when such boundary or other feature was established, it shall be interpreted to follow such predominant alignment; provided, that such alignment is not more than thirty feet as measured perpendicularly at any point, from the apparent location which may be determined by using the scale on the map.

     C.     When Subsections A and B are Inoperative. Whenever the situations described in subsections A and B of this section are not applicable, the location of the boundary or other feature included in the zoning map shall be determined through use of the scale on the map. Should any further uncertainty exist, the location shall be interpreted by the planning officer. Such interpretation shall be subject to appeal pursuant to the administrative appeal procedure of Chapter 17.880.

     D.    Lots Divided by Zone Boundaries. Whenever it is found, after applying the rules set forth in this section, that a lot is divided by a boundary between zones, the planning commission shall determine which regulations shall apply to such lots. The actual location of the zone boundary itself shall not be deemed to be changed by the commission’s determination. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.060.007 Zoning—Vacated or unzoned property.
     Land which has been or is hereafter included in the vacation or disposal of any street, alley, path or any unzoned public property which has been or is hereafter annexed to the city of Brentwood, shall in the absence of rezoning action to the contrary, be deemed to be included in the same zone as the lots which it abuts. In case opposite sides of such lands are in different zones, the boundary between such zones shall be deemed to be the center of the land. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.060.008 Zoning—Annexations.
     Prior to the annexation to the city of any property and pursuant to Chapter 17.870, the sponsor of any annexations shall file an application for prezoning of the property to be annexed and the city shall establish the zoning which will be in effect on the effective date of the annexation. Such zoning shall be in conformance with the city’s general plan. (Ord. 408, 1987)

Article III. Residential Zoning Regulations

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 17.100 RESIDENTIAL ZONES—GENERAL REGULATIONS
17.100.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this article shall be known as the “residential zoning regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purposes of the residential zones and the regulations applying to these zones are as follows:

     1.     To provide appropriately located areas for a variety of residential neighborhoods to meet the housing needs of the Brentwood community;

     2.     To provide for a range of housing types and housing alternatives for all economic segments of the community;

     3.     To encourage the provision of attractive and stimulating surroundings that will make Brentwood’s residential areas enjoyable places to live;

     4.     To protect residential areas from the intrusion of incompatible uses or activities which may impair the livability of a neighborhood. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.100.002 Applicability of provisions.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the RE, R-1-E, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zones unless expressly provided otherwise, and are supplementary to the residential zoning regulations of this title. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.100.003 Design and site development review required.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required pursuant to Chapter 17.820 for each new housing unit, including a single-family dwelling, duplex, triplex, townhouse, multiple residential dwelling or mobile home.

     B.     The city council may, through resolution, delegate to the planning department, design and site development review for certain types or categories of residential projects.

     C.     Prior to the granting of design and site development review by the planning department, written notification of the pending application shall be given to the planning commission. If any member of the planning commission requests, within five days of receipt of the notification, that a pending application be considered by the commission, such application shall be scheduled at the next regularly scheduled meeting. (Ord. 469 § 2, 1990; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.100.004 Design criteria—Single-family residence.
     A.    All housing units shall have a minimum overall width and depth of twenty feet.

     B.     Exterior building material shall be of the type customarily used on conventional housing and shall be compatible with the existing homes in the immediate neighborhood. Recommended siding material includes all types of board; plywood a minimum of one-half inch thick class 303 or 303-6 only with approved stain or paint application, and the use of hot dipped galvanized nails only; stucco; brick, stone, cultured stone; shake or shingle which has been pressure treated at the mill.

     C.     The architectural style of the structure shall be complimentary to and compatible with the architectural style of the existing homes in the immediate neighborhood.

     D.    All siding material shall extend to a maximum of ten inches from the finish grade of the lot.

     E.     All roofing material shall be of the type customarily used on conventional housing and shall be compatible with the existing homes in the immediate neighborhood. Recommended roofing material includes all types of tile; composition which is a thick butt architectural; and cedar shake or shingle which has been pressure treated at the mill.

     F.     All roofs shall have a minimum twelve-inch eave overhang and shall have a pitch of not less than a four-inch vertical rise for each twelve-inch horizontal run.

     G.    All materials shall be installed in accordance with the Uniform Building Code (UBC) and manufacturer’s specifications.

     H.    All housing units shall have an enclosed two-car garage having an inside clear width of eighteen feet and depth of twenty feet. Garages shall be constructed with material identical to or compatible with the external material of the housing unit. Garage doors shall have a minimum width of sixteen feet except where two doors are provided, in which case the doors shall have a minimum width of eight feet. A garage facing a street shall be set back not less than twenty feet measured from the property line to the center of the garage door.

     I.      The floor elevation of the housing unit shall be a maximum of twenty-four inches above the finish grade of the lot or be compatible with the immediate neighborhood.

     J.      All housing units shall comply with the minimum setback standards established for the single-family residential zone in which the unit is located.

     K.    Front yards and unfenced side yards adjacent to a street shall be landscaped in conformance with the standards set forth in Sections 17.630.008(H) through (N). Landscaping shall be installed within eighteen months of occupancy of that housing unit. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 17.100.005 Accessory dwelling units.
     An accessory dwelling unit is an attached or detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities. It includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling. (See Government Code Section 65852.2.) An accessory dwelling unit is ministerially permitted subject to all of the following:

     A.    General Requirements for All Accessory Dwelling Units.

     1.     Application. The applicant must file an application for an accessory dwelling unit with the community development department and pay the fees currently in effect at the time the application is deemed complete.

     2.     Zoning. The lot must:

     a.     Be zoned for residential use;

     b.     Comply with the required minimum lot area (including the open space, rear-yard requirements of Section 17.660.004); and

     c.     Be improved with (or in conjunction with) a single-family residence.

     There may be no more than one accessory dwelling unit per parcel.

     3.     Sewer and Water. The lot on which the accessory dwelling unit is to be placed must be able to provide adequate sewer and water services for both the existing primary dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling unit as determined by the city engineer. Approval by the Contra Costa County Health Department is required if a private sewage disposal system or well system is being used.

     4.     Recorded Restrictions. The owner must record an approved form of deed restriction setting forth both of the following:

     a.     The primary residence and the accessory dwelling unit are on a single lot; the units cannot be sold separately in violation of the Subdivision Map Act. (See Title 18.)

     b.     If the primary dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit is rented separately, the property owner must reside in the other unit.

     B.     Site Development and Design Criteria for All Accessory Dwelling Units.

     1.     Design. The accessory dwelling unit must be designed in accordance with the criteria set forth in Chapter 17.820 (Design and Site Development Review). The accessory dwelling unit must be clearly subordinate to the primary dwelling unit on the parcel by size, location and appearance and must be constructed with materials and exterior finish consistent with the primary unit.

     2.     Type of Unit. An accessory dwelling unit may be attached to the primary dwelling, located within the living area of the primary dwelling, or detached from the primary dwelling.

     3.     Parking. One additional standard size, covered or uncovered, off-street parking space must be provided for the accessory dwelling unit (in addition to the parking requirements for the existing primary dwelling unit). The required parking space(s) must be in compliance with the city’s parking ordinance (Section 17.620.007(A)).

     4.     Building and Fire Code. The accessory dwelling unit must comply with all building and fire code requirements. (See Title 15.) The accessory dwelling unit must have a permanent foundation. The city will require fire sprinklers for an accessory unit whenever they are also required for the primary unit.

     5.     Utilities for a Detached Unit. A detached accessory dwelling unit may not have water and wastewater utility connections as an extension from the primary dwelling unit, except for: (a) accessory dwelling units established within a legal, existing detached structure with existing water and wastewater connections; and (b) county health department approved septic systems. Utility services may be extended from the private utility lateral, between the public utility main and the primary dwelling unit, or may be a separate connection to the public utility main. Applicants must follow the application procedures and pay all applicable charges, including any applicable security deposit, application fee, service connection charge, meter charge, service line charge, existing facilities charge, and any other charges as set forth in the cost allocation plan.

     6.     Setback and Height. An accessory dwelling unit must meet all setback and height restrictions of the zoning district in which it is to be located. However:

     a.     A detached accessory dwelling unit may not exceed a maximum height of fifteen feet, or be located any closer than five feet to a property line (measured to the closest point of the structure);

     b.     No setback is required for an existing garage that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit, as long as the footprint of the garage is not increased;

     c.     A five-foot setback from side and rear lot lines is required for an accessory dwelling unit constructed above a garage; and

     d.     The distance between the primary and accessory dwelling units must be sufficient for fire safety, under Chapters 15.04 and 15.06.

     7.     Floor Area.

     a.     Attached Accessory Dwelling Unit. The floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit may not exceed fifty percent of the existing living area of the primary unit, up to a maximum of one thousand two hundred square feet.

     b.     Detached Accessory Dwelling Unit. The total floor area for a detached accessory dwelling unit is based on lot size and may not exceed either the following dimensions or thirty percent of the primary dwelling unit floor area (excluding garage and carport):

 

Lot size (square footage)

Accessory dwelling unit Maximum square footage

Less than 6,000

400

6,001 to 10,000

800

10,001 to 20,000

1,000

20,001 and greater

1,200

 

     8.     Exception. Notwithstanding the standards in subsections (B)(1) through (7), the city will ministerially approve an application for a building permit to create within a single-family residential zone one accessory dwelling unit if the unit is contained within the existing space of a single-family residence or accessory structure and: (a) the unit has independent exterior access from the primary residence; and (b) the side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire safety, in the opinion of the chief building official.

     C.     Conditional Use Permit. If an application for an accessory dwelling unit does not meet all of the requirements listed under subsections A and B of this section, the applicant may file an application for a conditional use permit to seek approval of the unit.

     D.    Fees. Development impact fees for an accessory dwelling unit are as outlined in the city’s adopted master fee program as amended from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 991 § 1, 2017; Ord. 769 § 2(B) (Exh. A), 2004)

 

17.100.006 Minimum zoning size.
     Any residential zone proposed shall have a minimum size as follows:

     A.    Rezone: twenty acres;

     B.     R-1-E zone: ten acres;

     C.     R-1 zone: five acres;

     D.    R-2 zone: two acres;

     E.     R-3 zone: one acre. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.100.007 Nonconforming lots.
     See Section 17.610.014. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.100.008 Density bonuses and other incentives.
     Density bonuses or other incentives for housing shall be permitted in any R zone district pursuant to Chapter 17.720. (Ord. 448 § 3, 1989; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.110 RE (RANCHETTE ESTATE) ZONE
17.110.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The purpose of the RE (ranchette estate) zone is to provide semirural residential areas to serve as a buffer or transition between higher density urban residential development and productive agricultural uses or adjacent urban communities. The RE zone provides areas where single-family residences and facilities for limited numbers of livestock and small farming operations may be located. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.110.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the RE zone:

     A.    One single-family dwelling per parcel including manufactured homes;

     B.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     C.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     D.    Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     E.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     F.     Small family residential care facilities are permitted by right. Family home day care, large subject to the conditions stated in Ordinance No. 560, are permitted by right in all single-family residential zones subject to the following conditions:

     1.     That a use permit be issued administratively by the zoning administrator, subject to compliance with the zoning standards of the city;

     2.     A one hundred dollar fee be collected;

     3.     The three hundred-foot radius notification process shall apply to all new large family home day care processed after the effective date of Ordinance No. 560. The notification shall be not less than ten days prior to the date of the zoning administrator’s decision. The notice shall inform the owners of their rights to an administrative hearing;

     4.     The notification process shall not apply to the issuance of an administrative use permit to the following existing large family home day care properties that have been determined to be in compliance with the zoning standards of the city: APNs 017-300-009, 012-200-010, 012-290-026, 017-280-049, 017-340-033, 019-160-025; and

     5.     Actions of the zoning administrator may be appealed pursuant to the appeal process in Chapter 17.880 of the zoning ordinance;

     G.    Agriculture, animal husbandry and limited animal husbandry subject to Chapter 17.670;

     H.    The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     I.      Signs subject to Chapter 17.640. (Ord. 560 § 4, 1995; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.110.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses require special consideration and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005;

     B.     Public facilities including parks, playgrounds, public schools and other public buildings;

     C.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     D.    Community buildings, clubs and activities of quasi-public, social, fraternal or recreational character such as golf, tennis and swimming clubs intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residential project;

     E.     Large residential care facilities;

     F.     Mobile home parks provided density does not exceed that specified in the general plan for the property on which the mobile home park is proposed and subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.710;

     G.    Dog fancier’s license in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.670.009. (Ord. 560 § 4, 1995; Ord. 507 § 2, 1992; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.110.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the RE zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: one acre;

     B.     Minimum lot width: one hundred forty feet except as provided in subsection Fl of this section;

     C.     Minimum front yard: twenty feet;

     D.    Minimum side yards: twenty feet except as provided in subsection F2 of this section;

     E.     Minimum rear yard: forty feet;

     F.     Exceptions.

     1.     Cul-de-sac lots shall have a width of not less than one hundred forty feet measured thirty feet from the front property line and not less than sixty-foot width at the front property lines;

     2.     Corner lots shall maintain a side yard on the street side of twenty-five feet;

     G.    Maximum Building Height Limit. No accessory or main building shall exceed a height of two stories and thirty-five feet. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.110.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004.

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004H.

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.120 R-1-E (SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ESTATE) ZONE
17.120.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The purpose of the R-1-E (single-family residential estate) zone is to provide for large single-family residential parcels in an identifiable, suburban residential neighborhood. The R-1-E zone provides areas where single-family residences and common facilities for large livestock may be located if planned and provided for within the design of the subdivision and approved by the city. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.120.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the R-1-E zone:

     A.    Those uses which are permitted uses within the RE (ranchette estate) zone except animal husbandry and limited animal husbandry;

     B.     Single-family dwelling units not exceeding a density of two dwelling units per gross acre. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.120.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses require special consideration and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Those conditionally permitted uses within the RE (ranchette estate) zone;

     B.     Residential projects with a density exceeding two dwelling units per gross acre, however, no project shall exceed the maximum density of three dwelling units per gross acre;

     C.     Limited animal husbandry, if planned and provided for within the design of the subdivision. If parcels are less than one acre in size the livestock shall be housed in a common area. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.120.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the R-1-E zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area for permitted uses: fourteen thousand five hundred square feet; minimum lot area for conditionally permitted uses: ten thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: one hundred feet except as provided in subsection F2 of this section;

     C.     Minimum front yard: twenty feet;

     D.    Minimum side yards: ten feet, the sum of both sides: twenty-five (25) feet, except as provided in subsection F3 of this section;

     E.     Minimum rear yard: thirty feet;

     F.     Exceptions.

     1.     Any subdivision approved after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall have a one acre maximum lot size and shall have an average lot size of one-half acre,

     2.     Cul-de-sac lots shall have a width of not less than one hundred feet measured thirty feet from the front property line and no less than forty-foot width at the front property line,

     3.     Corner lots shall maintain a side yard on the street side of fifteen feet;

     G.    Maximum Building Height. No main building shall exceed the height of two stories and thirty feet and accessory buildings shall not exceed one story and fifteen feet except that barns, utilized within those subdivisions designed for large livestock may be constructed to a height of thirty-five feet if approved in accordance with the conditional use permit procedures. (Ord. 500 § 2, 1991; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.120.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004.

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004H.

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.130 R-1 (SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL) ZONE
17.130.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The purpose of the R-1 (single-family residential) zone is to provide areas for three-and-one-half dwelling units per gross acre and areas of different lot sizes through the use of the R-1-6, R-1-8, R-1-10 and R-1-12 subzones and the specific regulations for each subzone as specified in this chapter. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.130.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the R-1 zone:

     A.    Those uses which are permitted uses within the R-1-E (single-family residential estate) zone;

     B.     Single-family dwelling units not exceeding a density of three-and-one-half dwelling units per gross acre. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.130.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses require special consideration and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Those conditionally permitted uses within the R-1-E (ranchette estate) zone;

     B.     Residential projects with a density exceeding three-and-one-half dwelling units per gross acre, however, no project shall exceed the maximum density of six dwelling units per gross acre;

     C.     Subdivisions having a reduced lot size, patio houses, row houses, apartments and similar housing developments provided as follows:

     1.     The entire parcel or a group of parcels are master planned,

     2.     Any increases in density are offset by lessor densities or greater lot sizes within the development or through the provision of permanent open space so that the overall density is within the range of 1.1 to six dwelling units per gross acre. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.130.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the R-1 zone and subzones:

     A.    Minimum lot area: for each subzone as follows:

     1.     R-1-6 zone: six thousand square feet,

     2.     R-l-8 zone: eight thousand square feet,

     3.     R-1-10 zone: ten thousand square feet,

     4.     R-1-12 zone: twelve thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: for each subzone as follows except as provided for in H-1:

     1.     R-1-6 zone: sixty feet,

     2.     R-1-8 zone: seventy feet,

     3.     R-1-10 zone: eighty feet,

     4.     R-1-12 zone: ninety feet;

     C.     Maximum lot depth: one hundred fifty feet;

     D.    Minimum front yard: twenty feet;

     E.     Minimum lot frontage: one-half the required lot width;

     F.     Minimum side yards: for each subzone as follows except as provided for in H-2 and H-3:

     1.     R-1-6 zone: minimum—five feet, sum of both sides—fifteen feet,

     2.     R-1-8 zone: minimum—seven feet, sum of both sides—twenty feet,

     3.     R-1-10 zone: minimum—nine feet, sum of both sides—twenty-five feet,

     4.     R-1-12 zone: minimum—twelve feet, sum of both sides—thirty feet;

     G.    Minimum rear yard: twenty feet;

     H.    Exceptions.

     1.     The lot width for lots on culs-de-sac, curvilinear streets, etc. shall be measured thirty feet from the front property line,

     2.     Lots having no direct vehicular access to the rear yard from a public street or alley shall provide such by maintaining a side yard having a width with unobstructed vertical and horizontal clearance of ten feet,

     3.     Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet;

     I.      Maximum Building Height Limit. No main building shall exceed the height of two stories and thirty feet. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.130.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004.

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004H.

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.140 R-2 (MODERATE DENSITY MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL) ZONE
17.140.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The purpose of the R-2 (moderate density multifamily residential) zone is to encourage the development of more affordable and innovative housing primarily for duplexes, triplexes, townhouses and single-family attached or detached homes on smaller lots. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.140.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the R-2 zone:

     A.    Single-family dwellings including manufactured homes;

     B.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     C.     Duplex, triplex, apartments and other small multi-family structures; townhouses and single-family attached homes; all not exceeding a density of nine dwellings per gross acre;

     D.    Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     E.     Temporary uses related to the primary use subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Section 17.850;

     F.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     G.    Small family residential care facilities are permitted by right. Family home day care, large subject to the conditions stated in Ordinance No. 560, are permitted by right in all single-family residential zones subject to the following conditions:

     1.     That a use permit be issued administratively by the zoning administrator, subject to compliance with the zoning standards of the city; and

     2.     A one hundred dollar fee be collected; and

     3.     The three hundred-foot radius notification process shall apply to all new large family home day care processed after the effective date of Ordinance No. 560. The notification shall be not less than ten days prior to the date of the zoning administrator’s decision. The notice shall inform the owners of their rights to an administrative hearing; and

     4.     The notification process shall not apply to the issuance of an administrative use permit to the following existing large family home day care properties that have been determined to be in compliance with the zoning standards of the city: APNs 017-300-009, 012-200-010, 012-290-026, 017-280-049, 017-340-033, 019-160-025; and

     5.     Actions of the zoning administrator may be appealed pursuant to the appeal process in Chapter 17.880 of the zoning ordinance;

     H.    Agriculture, animal husbandry and limited animal husbandry subject to Chapter 17.670;

     I.      The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     J.      Signs subject to Chapter 17.640. (Ord. 560 § 4,1995; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.140.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses require special consideration and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Public facilities including parks, playgrounds, public schools and other public buildings;

     B.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     C.     Community buildings, clubs and activities of quasi-public, social, fraternal or recreational character such as golf, tennis and swimming clubs intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residential project;

     D.    Large residential care facilities;

     E.     Residential projects with a density exceeding nine dwelling units per gross acre, however, no project shall exceed the minimum density of twelve dwelling units per gross acre;

     F.     Mobile home parks provided the density does not exceed that specified in the general plan for the property on which the mobile home park is proposed and subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.710;

     G.    Dog fancier’s license in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.670.009. (Ord. 560 § 4, 1995; Ord. 507 § 3, 1992; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.140.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters—Apartments.
     The following regulations shall apply to the building of apartments in the R-2 zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: six thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: fifty feet;

     C.     Minimum front yard: fifteen feet;

     D.    Minimum side yards: five feet, sum of both sides; fifteen feet;

     E.     Minimum rear yard: twenty feet;

     F.     Corner lots shall maintain a side yard on the street side of ten feet;

     G.    Maximum Allowable Density.

     1.     The minimum net lot area per dwelling unit shall be two thousand five hundred square feet for those lots having a net area of twelve thousand square feet or less,

     2.     The minimum net lot area per dwelling unit shall be three thousand square feet for those lots having a net area of twelve thousand to thirty thousand square feet,

     3.     The maximum density for lots greater than thirty thousand one square feet shall be nine dwellings per gross acre,

     4.     Greater densities, not to exceed twelve dwellings per gross acre, may be approved subject to a conditional use permit and based upon how well the project conforms to the policies and standards of the city. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.140.005 Regulations for lot area, density, yards and related matters— Single-family dwellings.
     The following regulations shall apply to the building of attached or detached single-family dwellings in the R-2 zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: three thousand seven hundred fifty square feet;

     B.     Average lot area per subdivision: four thousand square feet;

     C.     Minimum lot width: thirty-seven-and-one-half feet;

     D.    Average lot width per subdivision: forty feet;

     E.     Minimum front yard: twenty feet;

     F.     Minimum side yard: zero feet, total of the side yards must be twelve feet;

     G.    Minimum rear yard: twenty feet;

     H.    Minimum street frontage, cul-de-sac lots: twenty-five feet;

     I.      Corner lots shall maintain a side yard on the street side of twelve feet. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.140.006 Regulations for height, coverage and dwellings per building— Apartments and attached single-family dwellings.
     The following regulations shall apply to the building of apartments and attached single-family dwellings in the R-2 zone;

     A.    Allowable Dwellings Per Building. The maximum number of dwelling units within an individual building shall not exceed six.

     B.     Maximum Lot Coverage. The main building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than forty percent of the lot area.

     C.     Maximum building height limit:

     1.     Main building: two stories not to exceed thirty feet;

     2.     Accessory building: one story not to exceed fifteen feet. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.140.007 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004.

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004H.

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     F.     Usable Open Space. Residential projects shall provide and maintain private and shared open space as follows:

     1.     A minimum of six hundred square feet of usable open space shall be provided for each dwelling unit on a lot.

     2.     A minimum of seventy-five percent of the dwelling units on a lot shall be provided with private usable open space as follows:

     a.     Private usable open space shall be directly accessible from the unit served and available only to that unit.

     b.     Ground level private usable open space shall have a minimum area of one hundred square feet and a minimum dimension of eight feet, furthermore, no more than fifty percent of that area may be covered by a roof or second story balcony or deck.

     c.     Aboveground level private usable open space shall have a minimum area of sixty square feet and a minimum dimension of six feet. Furthermore, no more than fifty percent of that area may be covered by a roof, balcony or deck.

     3.     Shared usable open space shall be available and accessible to all occupants of the residential project for purposes of active and/or passive outdoor recreation, exclusive of driveways, areas for off-street parking and services, and exclusive of the required front yard setback. All shared usable open space shall be at ground level and shall have a minimum dimension of twelve feet and shall not be covered by any roof, balcony or other such covering. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.150 R-3 (HIGH DENSITY MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL) ZONE
17.150.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The purpose of the R-3 (high density multifamily residential) zone is to provide appropriate areas for apartments or condominiums in close proximity to the central business district. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.150.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the R-3 zone:

     A.    Those uses which are permitted uses within the R-2 (moderate density multifamily residential) zone;

     B.     Apartments, condominiums, townhouses and attached single-family homes;

     C.     Duplex, triplex, townhouses, apartments and other multifamily structures not exceeding a density of sixteen dwelling units per gross acre. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.150.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses require special consideration and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Those conditionally permitted uses within the R-2 (moderate density multifamily residential) zone;

     B.     Residential projects with a density exceeding sixteen dwelling units per gross acre, however, no project shall exceed the maximum density of twenty dwelling units per gross acre. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.150.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the R-3 zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: six thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: seventy-five feet;

     C.     Minimum front yard: ten feet;

     D.    Minimum side yards: five feet, sum of both sides: fifteen feet;

     E.     Minimum rear yard: twenty feet;

     F.     Corner lots shall maintain a side yard on the street side of ten feet;

     G.    Maximum Allowable Density.

     1.     The minimum net lot area per dwelling unit shall be one thousand five hundred square feet for those lots having a net area of twelve thousand square feet or less,

     2.     The minimum net lot area per dwelling unit shall be two thousand square feet for those lots having a net area of twelve thousand to thirty thousand square feet,

     3.     The maximum density for lots greater than thirty thousand square feet shall be sixteen dwelling units per gross acre,

     4.     Greater densities, not to exceed twenty dwelling units per gross acre, may be approved subject to a conditional use permit and based upon how well the project conforms to the policies and standards of the city;

     H.    Maximum Lot Coverage. The main building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than forty percent of the lot area;

     I.      Maximum building height limit: three stories not to exceed thirty-six feet. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.150.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004.

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004H.

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     F.     Usable Open Space. Residential projects shall provide and maintain private and shared open space as follows:

     1.     A minimum of five hundred square feet of usable open space shall be provided for each dwelling unit on a lot.

     2.     A minimum of seventy-five percent of the dwelling units on a lot shall be provided with private usable open space as follows:

     a.     Private usable open space shall be directly accessible from the unit served and available only to that unit.

     b.     Ground level private usable open space shall have a minimum area of one hundred square feet and a minimum dimension of eight feet, furthermore, no more than fifty percent of that area may be covered by a roof or second story balcony or deck.

     c.     Aboveground level private usable open space shall have a minimum area of sixty square feet and a minimum dimension of six feet, furthermore, no more than fifty percent of that area may be covered by a roof, balcony or deck.

     3.     Shared usable open space shall be available and accessible to all occupants of the residential project for purposes of active and/or passive outdoor recreation, exclusive of driveways, areas for off-street parking and services, and exclusive of the required front yard setback as follows:

     a.     A minimum of seventy-five percent of the shared usable open space shall be at ground level, the remainder may be located above ground on a balcony or roof deck.

     b.     Ground level shared usable open space shall have a minimum dimension of twelve feet and shall not be covered by any roof, balcony or other such covering.

     c.     Aboveground level shared usable open space shall have a minimum dimension of ten feet and minimum area of two hundred square feet, which shall be unobstructed and shall not serve as access to any residential unit. A maximum of twenty-five percent of the aboveground level shared open space may be covered. (Ord. 408, 1987)

Article IV. Office and Commercial Zoning Regulations
Chapter 17.200 OFFICE AND COMMERCIAL ZONES—GENERAL REGULATIONS
17.200.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this article shall be known as the “office and commercial zoning regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of office and commercial zones and the regulations applying to these zones include the following:

     1.     To provide appropriately located areas for professional offices, retail stores, service establishments, amusement establishments and other such offices and businesses offering various ranges of commodities and services to meet the needs of the Brentwood community;

     2.     To encourage the provision of attractive and stimulating surroundings that make Brentwood’s office and retail areas enjoyable places in which to shop, work, walk and relax;

     3.     To provide opportunities for retail establishments and offices to cluster for the convenience of the public and for efficient business operation in mutually beneficial relationships to each other;

     4.     To protect retail areas from the intrusion of incompatible activities which might impair an area’s appearance or functioning as a retail shopping area;

     5.     To protect retail properties, shoppers and other uses of retail areas from noise, vibration, smoke, odor, dust, dirt, heat, glare and heavy truck traffic, and from fire, explosion and other hazards;

     6.     To promote the differentiation and specialization among various types of shopping areas in order to promote the goals and purposes of the commercial element of the Brentwood general plan. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.200.002 Applicability of provisions.
     These regulations shall apply to the CO, COB, COR, CR, C-1, C-2 and C-3 zones unless expressly provided otherwise, and are supplementary to the office and commercial zoning regulations of this title. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.200.003 Development standards.
     The following development standards are applicable to the office and commercial zones unless expressly provided for otherwise within the regulations of each individual zone:

     A.    Zone Wall. Whenever a commercial zone abuts a residential zone or other noncommercial zone a masonry zone wall shall be constructed on the common property line separating the two zones in accordance with the following:

     1.     The wall shall have a minimum height of six feet except the maximum height in a required street frontage yard shall not exceed forty-two inches.

     2.     The height of the zone wall shall be measured from the average finish grade; if there is a difference in elevation to finish grade on each side of the wall, the height shall be measured from the top of a retaining wall or the higher of the two finish grades whichever is greater.

     3.     If the zone wall exceeds six feet in height, either berms or landscaping, and variations in setback shall be required, subject to design review.

     4.     If the commercial zone is separated from the residential zone by a public alleyway, the zone wall may be eliminated subject to design review approval.

     B.     Refuse Disposal Enclosure. All commercial facilities shall provide masonry refuse disposal enclosures to city standards and specifications.

     C.     Off-street Parking and Loading Facilities. All commercial facilities shall provide off-street parking and loading facilities in accordance with Chapter 17.620.

     D.    Illumination of Parking Facilities and Structures. All commercial facilities shall provide adequate lighting or illumination of parking facilities and structures in accordance with Chapter 17.620.

     E.     Open Storage or Display. Open storage and/or outdoor display of merchandise is prohibited in the commercial zones unless expressly provided for in an individual zone.

     F.     Advertising Signs. All signs are subject to the regulations of Chapter 17.640 and subject to design review.

     G.    Landscaping and Screening. All commercial facilities shall provide landscaping and screening in accordance with Chapter 17.630 of this title which is subject to design review.

     H.    Yards. All required yards shall be utilized for landscaping only, except for access drives to the property.

     I.      Security Measures. All commercial facilities shall provide security measures in accordance with city standards and subject to design review.

     J.      Energy Conservation. All commercial facilities shall, to the greatest extent possible, incorporate energy conservation measures in conformance with city standards and subject to design review.

     K.    Design and Site Development Review. All commercial facilities shall comply with Chapter 17.820.

     L.     Building and Roofing Materials. All commercial facilities should utilize those materials which have been recommended as acceptable material, subject to design review, and maintained on file within the planning department of the city of Brentwood. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.200.004 Performance standards.
     The following performance standards are applicable to the office and commercial zones unless expressly provided for otherwise within the regulations of each individual zone:

     A.    Noise.

     1.     At the property line, the maximum sound pressure level radiated in each standard octave band by any use or facility, other than transportation facilities or temporary construction work, shall not exceed the values for octave bands lying within the several frequency limits given in Table 1 of this section, after applying the corrections shown in Table 2 of this section.

     2.     The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer conforming to the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association.

     3.     American Standards Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, Z224.3-1994, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, NY and American Standard Specification for an Octave-Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, Z224.10-1953, or latest approved revision thereof, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, NY shall be used.

 

TABLE 1

 

Frequency Ranges Containing Standard Octave Bands in Cycles per Second

Octave Band Sound Pressure Level in Decibels re 0.0002 dyne/cm2

20—300

60

300—2400

40

Above 2,400

35

 

     If the noise is not smooth and continuous and is not radiated between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m., one or more of the corrections in Table 2 of this section shall be applied to the octave band levels given in Table 1 of this section.

 

TABLE 2

 

Type or Location of Operation or Character of Noise

Correction in Decibels

Daytime operation only

5

Noise source operated less than:

 

20% of any one-hour period or

5

5% of any one-hour period

10

Noise of impulsive character, hammering, etc.

-5

Noise of periodic character, hum, screech, etc.

-5

 

     B.     Heat, Glare and Humidity.

     1.     Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed-building in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.

     2.     Any operation or activity producing glare shall be performed within a completely enclosed building and be conducted so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half foot-candle when measured at the lot line. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded and flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled so as not to cause a nuisance a cross lot lines.

     3.     Any use producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat, shall be carried on in such a manner that steam, humidity or heat is not perceptible at any lot line.

     C.     Vibration. Any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any point along the property line of the subject use, earth-borne vibrations which are discernible without the use of instruments is prohibited.

     D.    Fire, Safety and Explosion. All uses shall provide adequate safety devices against fire, explosion and other hazards and adequate firefighting and fire-suppression equipment in compliance with applicable fire prevention and building codes.

     E.     Soundproofing. Minimum soundproofing shall be required in buildings affected by noise generated by major thoroughfares, state highways, the railroad and other major generators of noise.

     F.     Solid and Liquid Waste.

     1.     No discharge at any point into public sewer, stream or bay or into the ground shall be permitted, except in accord with the standards approved by the state Department of Health, or standards specified in applicable local ordinances for similar uses of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements.

     2.     No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any property in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the property by natural causes or forces.

     3.     Any wastes which might be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers.

     G.    Electrical and Radioactive Radiation. No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radio activity at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.

     H.    Air Pollution. All uses shall comply with regulations of the San Francisco Bay area air pollution control district.

     1.     Smoke. For the purpose of determining the density or equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines in Circular No. 7718 (August, 1955) shall be employed. The emission of smoke from any chimney, stack, vent, opening or combustion process shall not exceed Ringlemann No. 1.

     2.     Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the property line of the subject use.

     3.     Toxic and Noxious Matter. No use shall be permitted which creates any emission which endangers human health, can cause the damage to animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause soiling at any point beyond the boundaries of the site. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.200.005 Minimum zoning size.
     Any office and commercial zone proposed shall have a minimum size as follows:

     A.    CO zone: five acres;

     B.     COB zone: one acre;

     C.     COR zone: one-half acre;

     D.    CR zone: five acres;

     E.     C-1 zone: five acres;

     F.     C-2 zone: ten acres;

     G.    C-3 zone: two acres. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.200.006 Nonconforming lots.
     See Section 17.610.014. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.210 CO (ADMINISTRATIVE/PROFESSIONAL COMMERCIAL OFFICE) ZONE
17.210.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The CO (administrative/professional commercial office) zone is predominantly an office zone for tenants with a professional, institutional, general commercial, or medical orientation.

     Limited nonoffice uses may be permitted by a conditional use permit if the use is clearly incidental to and supportive of the primary uses. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.210.002 Permitted uses.
     The following administrative and professional office uses are permitted in the CO zone:

     A.    Business and professional offices such as architects, attorneys, accountants, engineers, insurance agencies, real estate, medical, dental, optical and other professional and general business offices;

     B.     Financial institutions;

     C.     Addressing and mailing service, blueprinting and photostating service (other than a printer or lithographer), drafting service, messenger service, stenographic service, telegraph office, answering service, private postal box service, travel agency and similar services typically associated with administrative and professional offices;

     D.    Public and quasi-public offices such as government offices, library, employment office, utility offices and similar uses;

     E.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 728, 2002; Ord. 468 § 4, 1990; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.210.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted only on the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Public and quasi-public uses appropriate to and compatible with the area such as hospitals medical or dental laboratory, outpatient care facility, convalescent hospitals, business and technical schools;

     B.     Health club, reducing studio, recreational club and similar uses;

     C.     Funeral services, mortuary, crematorium, drug store or pharmacy associated with medical uses, drive-in or drive-thru use related to a permitted use in the zone;

     D.    Café or delicatessen intended to primarily serve employees, clients or visitors of the office district;

     E.     Other uses that the zoning administrator determines, because of type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 878 § 2, 2010; Ord. 728, 2002; Ord. 468 § 5, 1990; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.210.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the CO zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: ten thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: one hundred feet;

     C.     Minimum street frontage yard: ten feet except where there is a residentially zoned parcel within the same block, the minimum setback shall be seventy-five percent of the minimum setback for the residential zone, but not less than ten feet;

     D.    Minimum nonstreet frontage yards: ten feet except where residentially zoned property is abutting the CO zone the minimum setback shall be twenty feet. If a public alleyway is separating the two zones, the width of the alleyway may be included as part of the minimum setback, however, in no case shall the setback be less than ten feet;

     E.     Maximum Building Height.

     1.     If the CO zone abuts any residential zone, the maximum height of the structure shall be one story not to exceed twenty feet,

     2.     A two-story structure, not exceeding thirty feet may be permitted abutting a residential zone subject to conditional use permit approval,

     3.     If the CO zone does not abut a residential zone, the maximum height shall be two stories not to exceed thirty feet,

     4.     Structures greater than two stories or thirty feet and not abutting a residential zone may be permitted subject to conditional use permit approval. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.210.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620.

     B.     Development Standards. The uses within the CO zone shall comply with Section 17.200.003.

     C.     Performance Standards. The uses within the CO zone shall comply with Section 17.200.004. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.220 COB (COMMERCIAL OFFICE/BUSINESS) ZONE
17.220.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The COB (commercial office/business) zone is a mixed use zone permitting a limited amount of retail or personal service uses not normally allowed in professional/administrative office zones. This zone is intended to allow ground floor commercial with upper floor offices in the downtown or to allow small scale commercial to serve workers in major office complexes. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.220.002 Permitted users.
     The following office and commercial uses are permitted in the COB zone:

     A.    Those permitted uses within the CO zone (Section 17.210.002);

     B.     Commercial uses or services such as beauty shop, barber shop, photo studio, convenience retail uses or services such as a bakery, pastry shop, book store, candy or ice cream store, stationery store, drug store or pharmacy, shoe store and shoe repair, apparel and accessory store, and similar small shops or boutiques;

     C.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.220.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted only on the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Funeral services, mortuary, crematorium, medical or dental laboratory, outpatient care facility, health club, reducing studio, recreational club or similar uses;

     B.     Restaurant, on-sale or off-sale liquor, laundromat, laundry or dry cleaning facility, drive-in or drive-thru establishment associated with a permitted use in the zone;

     C.     Churches as temporary uses to be located in existing buildings;

     D.    Other uses that the zoning administrator determines, because of type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 878 § 3, 2010; Ord. 728, 2002; Ord. 515, 1992; Ord. 468 § 6, 1990; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.220.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the COB zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: ten thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum street frontage yard: five feet;

     C.     Minimum nonstreet frontage yard: none;

     D.    Maximum Building Height.

     1.     The maximum building height shall be three stories not to exceed forty feet,

     2.     Structures greater than three stories or forty feet may be permitted subject to conditional use permit approval. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.220.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620.

     B.     Development Standards. The uses within the COB zone shall comply with Section 17.200.003.

     C.     Performance Standards. The uses within the COB zone shall comply with Section 17.200.004. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.230 COR (COMMERCIAL OFFICE RESIDENTIAL) ZONE
17.230.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The COR (commercial office residential) zone is a mixed use zone allowing administrative and professional offices in conjunction with residential uses. This mix of uses may be separate buildings on one site or separate areas in a building (such as ground floor professional/administrative offices with apartments above). The primary use of the site shall be devoted to office usage and residential densities may be within any of the residential density ranges of the general plan land use element. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.230.002 Permitted uses.
     The following administrative and professional office uses, are permitted in the COR zone:

     A.    Those administrative and office uses permitted in the CO (commercial office) zone (Section 17.210.002);

     B.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.230.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted only on the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Those uses identified as conditionally permitted uses in the CO (commercial office) zone (Section 17.210.003);

     B.     Churches, temples, synagogues and care facilities;

     C.     Residential uses on up to forty-nine percent of the land area or up to forty-nine percent of the building area and within any of the residential density ranges of the general plan land use element provided the entire parcel or a group of parcels are master planned;

     D.    Other uses that the zoning administrator determines, because of type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 878 § 4, 2010; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.230.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the COR zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: seven thousand five hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: fifty feet;

     C.     Minimum street frontage yard: ten feet except where there is a residentially zoned parcel within the same block, the minimum setback shall be seventy-five percent of the minimum setback for the residential zone but not less than ten feet;

     D.    Minimum nonstreet frontage yard: ten feet except where residentially zoned property is abutting the COR zone the minimum setback shall be twenty feet;

     E.     Maximum Building Height.

     1.     If the COR zone abuts any residential zone, the maximum height of the commercial office floors shall be one story not to exceed twenty feet or two stories not to exceed thirty feet if the second floor is exclusively a residential floor,

     2.     A two-story structure, not exceeding thirty feet may be approved abutting a residential zone subject to conditional use permit approval,

     3.     If the COR zone does not abut a residential zone, the maximum permitted height shall be two stories not to exceed thirty feet,

     4.     A three-story structure not exceeding forty feet and not abutting a residential zone may be approved subject to conditional use permit approval. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.230.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620.

     B.     Development Standards. The commercial office uses within the COR zone shall comply with Section 17.200.003, except when a mixed-use residential/office development is approved, a zone wall separating the uses within the development need not be required.

     C.     Performance Standards. The commercial office uses within the COR zone shall comply with Section 17.200.004.

     D.    Motion Picture Theaters. Until the downtown specific plan, now in preparation, is adopted, new motion picture theaters will not be permitted in any zone in the city. With adoption of the plan, the city council will determine the most appropriate location(s) for such theaters. (Ord. 772 § 3, 2004; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.240 CR (COMMERCIAL RESIDENTIAL) ZONE
17.240.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The CR (commercial residential) zone is a mixed-use zone allowing commercial as the primary use and residential as a permitted, optional secondary use. This mix of uses may be separate buildings on one site or separate areas in a building (such as appropriate ground floor shops and offices with apartments above). Densities may be within any of the residential density ranges of the general plan land use element. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.240.002 Permitted uses.
     The following commercial and office uses are permitted in the CR zone:

     A.    Commercial uses or services such as beauty shop, barber shop, shoe repair, laundromat, convenience retail uses such as café, bakery, pastry shop, book store, candy or ice cream store, apparel and accessory store, stationery store, drug store or pharmacy, food store and similar establishments;

     B.     Business and professional offices such as architects, attorneys, accountants, engineers, insurance agency, real estate and similar professional and general business offices;

     C.     Financial institution;

     D.    Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 728, 2002; Ord. 468 § 7, 1990; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.240.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted only on the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Medical or dental laboratories, medical or dental office or clinic, funeral services and crematorium;

     B.     Liquor establishments, health club, reducing studio, recreational club, drive-in or drive-thru establishments related to a permitted use;

     C.     Residential uses on up to forty-nine percent of the land area or up to forty-nine percent of the building area and within any of the residential density ranges of the general plan land use element provided the entire parcel or a group of parcels are master planned developments;

     D.    Other uses that the zoning administrator determines, because of type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 878 § 5, 2010; Ord. 728, 2002; Ord. 468 § 8, 1990; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.240.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the CR zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: one acre except that a master planned project may be subdivided into parcels having a minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum street front yard: ten feet;

     C.     Minimum nonstreet frontage yard: ten feet;

     D.    Maximum Building Height.

     1.     The maximum height of a structure in the CR zone shall be two stories not to exceed thirty feet,

     2.     A three-story structure, not exceeding forty feet may be permitted subject to conditional use permit approval. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.240.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620.

     B.     Development Standards. The commercial uses within the CR zone shall comply with Section 17.200.003, except when a mixed use, residential/commercial development is approved, a zone wall separating the uses within the development need not be required.

 

     C.     Performance Standards. The commercial uses within the CR zone shall comply with Section 17.200.004. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.250 C-1 (NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL) ZONE
17.250.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The C-1 (neighborhood commercial) zone is intended to provide neighborhood convenience centers which are typically a five to ten acre shopping center with a supermarket as the prime tenant. The neighborhood convenience center generally is intended to serve the day-to-day needs of the surrounding neighbors within a one-mile radius. (Ord. 743 Exh. A, 2003; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.250.002 Permitted uses.
     The following convenience commercial uses are permitted in the C-1 zone:

     A.    Convenience retail uses such as a bakery, pastry shop, bookstore, candy store, florist, newsstand, stationery/gift shop, ice cream parlor, supermarket, drugstore and similar uses;

     B.     Service uses such as laundromat, laundry or dry cleaning pickup station, shoe repair, beauty and barber shop;

     C.     Financial institutions;

     D.    Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 743 Exh. A, 2003; Ord. 728, 2002; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.250.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted only on the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Auto service station, nonmechanical carwash, restaurant or café restricted to sit-down facility only, on-sale or off-sale liquor establishments;

     B.     Convenience banking center, automatic teller machine, excluding a full service bank, drive-in or drive-thru establishments relating to permitted uses in the zone, excluding a drive-in or drive-thru restaurant;

     C.     Nursery, child care, day care center, meeting hall or a fraternal hall, community center, health club facilities;

     D.    Other uses that the zoning administrator determines, because of type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 743 Exh. A, 2003; Ord. 728, 2002; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.250.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the C-1 zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: five acres except that a master planned shopping center may be subdivided into parcels having a minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet and a minimum lot width of one hundred fifty feet;

     B.     Minimum street frontage: three hundred feet except in the event of subdivision pursuant to subsection A where frontage is not required provided perpetual access is provided by easements;

     C.     Minimum street frontage yards: ten feet which, except for driveway approaches, shall be landscaped pursuant to Section 17.630;

     D.    Minimum nonstreet frontage yards: fifty feet, which shall be screened if required pursuant to Chapter 17.630;

     E.     Maximum Building Height. The maximum height of all structures in the C-1 zone shall be two stories not to exceed thirty feet. (Ord. 743 Exh. A, 2003; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.250.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620.

     B.     Development Standards. The uses within the C-1 zone shall comply with Section 17.200.003.

     C.     Performance Standards. The uses within the C-1 zone shall comply with Section 17.200.004. (Ord. 743 Exh. A, 2003; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.260 C-2 (GENERAL COMMERCIAL) ZONE
17.260.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The C-2 (general commercial) zone is intended to serve the general shopping needs of the Brentwood community as well as other nearby communities. This zoning district will allow retail stores and service uses to serve the general needs of the community. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.260.002 Permitted uses.
     The following general retail and service uses are permitted in the C-2 zone:

     A.    General retail sales excluding uses with outdoor storage or display, professional office uses; veterinarian or pet store, excluding kennels;

     B.     Service uses including, but not limited to, addressing and mailing service; appliance, television and radio repair; barber or beauty shop; butcher, meat market, including frozen food locker; shoe repair, laundromat, dry cleaners and similar uses;

     C.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator;

     D.    Financial institutions. (Ord. 728, 2002; Ord. 468 § 9, 1990; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.260.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted only on the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Auto service station, tire shop, repair shop, machine shop, auto seat and upholstery shop; billiard hall; bowling alleys; cardroom gaming; dancehall; laboratory—medical, dental, optical; meeting room—lodge, fraternal hall, community facility; medical or dental office; hospital; restaurant or café, on or off-sale liquor establishments; recreation services such as bowling alley, skating rink and similar uses;

     B.     All drive-in, drive-thru establishments, building materials, garden supply, outdoor sales or display;

     C.     Other uses that the zoning administrator determines, because of type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances that require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 728, 2002; Ord. 468 § 10, 1990; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.260.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the C-2 zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: seven thousand five hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: fifty feet;

     C.     Minimum street frontage yard: none except where there is a residentially zoned parcel within the same block, the minimum shall be seventy-five percent of the minimum front yard setback for the residential zone, but not less than five feet;

     D.    Minimum nonstreet frontage: none except where residentially zoned property is abutting the C-2 zone, the minimum rear yard setback shall be twenty feet. If a public alleyway is separating the two zones, the width of the alleyway may be included as part of the minimum rear yard setback, however, in no case shall the rear yard be less than ten feet;

     E.     Maximum Building Height.

     1.     The maximum height of a structure in the C-2 zone shall be two stories not to exceed thirty feet,

     2.     Structures greater than two stories or thirty feet may be permitted subject to conditional use permit approval. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.260.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620.

     B.     Development Standards. The uses within the C-2 zone shall comply with Section 17.200.003.

 

     C.     Performance Standards. The uses within the C-2 zone shall comply with Section 17.200.004. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.270 C-3 (THOROUGHFARE COMMERCIAL) ZONE
17.270.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The C-3 (thoroughfare commercial) zone is a commercial zone for retail and service businesses that are typically related to highways and major thoroughfares. Such uses generally do not lend themselves to be located in general commercial or neighborhood convenience centers, but are encouraged in orderly clusters in suitable locations adjacent to highways and major thoroughfares where special consideration will be given to on-site and off-site traffic and circulation, impact on adjacent land uses, etc. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.270.002 Permitted uses.
     The following thoroughfare commercial uses are permitted in the C-3 zone:

     A.    Those uses which are permitted uses within the C-2 zone, however, supermarkets and drugstores will be discouraged within the C-3 zone unless they are part of a full-service shopping center;

     B.     Hotel, auto rental or leasing agency, auto sales, boat sales, parts and accessory store, bowling alleys and similar recreational uses, camper or recreational vehicle sales, mobile or manufactured housing sales, home improvement center with or without lumber sales, garden supply store or nursery and similar uses involving outdoor sales subject to design controls;

     C.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.270.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted only on the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Auto service station, auto tire shop, auto repair including engine, transmission, brakes, etc., auto body repair and painting, carwash, laundry or dry cleaning plant, bakery—wholesale; all on-sale and off-sale liquor facilities; billiard hall; card or gaming room, adult entertainment; dancehall; new and used equipment rental; meeting room—lodge, fraternal hall, community facility; hospital; truck and trailer rental, campground or recreation vehicle park, vocational or trade school;

     B.     All drive-in, drive-thru establishments;

     C.     Other uses that the zoning administrator determines, because of the type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances that require special consideration and conditioning through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 728, 2002; Ord. 468 § 11, 1990; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.270.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     A.    Minimum parcel size: one acre except lots approved as part of an approved master development plan may be reduced to a minimum of twenty thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum street frontage: one hundred feet;

     C.     Minimum street frontage yards: ten feet, except where there is a residentially zoned parcel fronting on the street within the same block, the minimum setback shall be seventy-five percent of the minimum setback for the residential zone, but not less than ten feet;

     D.    Minimum Non-Street Frontage Yards.

     1.     None for those properties within the C-3 zone between Chestnut and Fir Streets abutting Brentwood Blvd. except where the C-3 zone abuts a residential zone, the setback shall be fifteen feet for three story or forty-foot high structures. Additional setback may be required for structures over three stories or forty feet as a condition of conditional use permit approval;

     2.     All other C-3 properties except those described in subdivision (1) of this subsection shall have a setback of none except where the C-3 zone abuts a residential zone, the setback shall be ten feet for structures up to two stories or thirty feet and fifteen feet for three story or forty-foot high structures. Additional setback may be required for structures over three stories or forty feet as a condition of conditional use permit approval;

     E.     Maximum Building Height.

     1.     The maximum building height permitted in the C-3 zone shall be three stories not to exceed forty feet,

     2.     Structures greater than three stories or forty feet may be permitted subject to conditional use permit approval. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 487 § 2, 1991; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.270.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620.

     B.     Development Standards. The uses within the C-3 zone shall comply with Section 17.200.003.

     C.     Performance Standards. The uses within the C-3 zone shall comply with Section 17.200.004. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.280 DT (DOWNTOWN) ZONE
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ords. 468, 488, 651, 772, 783 and 807.

 

17.280.001 Purpose and intent.
     The purpose and intent for the adoption of the DT (downtown) zone is to encourage new development in the downtown; to carefully consider the impacts of new commercial development on the viability on the downtown, to facilitate the expansion of existing businesses and the attraction of new businesses that will draw additional shoppers to the downtown; to develop a design plan for the downtown to create a feeling of unity and destination so that buildings complement each other; and to encourage business organizations to sponsor retail events to bring shoppers to the downtown area on a regular basis. (Ord. 818, 2005)

 

17.280.002 Downtown specific plan.
     The downtown specific plan establishes the primary means of regulating land use and development within the specific plan area. It also establishes the primary means of planning city actions and investments in support of the growth of the downtown. The regulations contained within the downtown specific plan replace land use and development regulations previously contained within the city of Brentwood’s zoning ordinance for this district. In the instance of conflicting regulations with other municipal planning documents containing policies for land use and development in the downtown specific plan area, the downtown specific plan document shall control. The downtown specific plan document does not replace or augment regulations pertaining to issues of building safety codes or other nonplanning-related codes. All applications for new constructions, substantial modifications to existing buildings, and for changes in land use, shall be reviewed for conformance with the policies contained in the downtown specific plan. (Ord. 818, 2005)

 

17.280.003 Availability.
     A copy of the downtown specific plan is on file with the city clerk’s office. (Ord. 818, 2005)

 

Chapter 17.290 BB (BRENTWOOD BOULEVARD) ZONE
17.290.001 Purpose and intent.
     The purpose and intent of the BB zone is to transform the auto-oriented former State Route 4 corridor into a more traditional boulevard with distinctive, unique, front-facing buildings as reflected in the Brentwood Boulevard specific plan (BBSP). The BBSP also promotes comfortable walkways and generous landscaping to provide an active, inviting, and attractive location for residents, workers, and visitors. Brentwood Boulevard within the boundaries of the BB zone is a distinguished portion of the city that extends between the city limits at Delta Road on the north and the downtown at Second Street on the south. The BBSP provides for a cohesive arrangement of uses, building types, frontage treatments, and street designs that function as integral parts of a single urban structure. Taken together, the expectation is that the structure over time will result in an area comprised of an attractive and desirable streetscape environment along which well-designed buildings are located behind generous amounts of continuous landscaping and open space. The result is a prominent setting for new development and a framework for new neighborhood and workplace districts along one of the city’s most visible corridors. (Ord. 901 § 2, 2012)

 

17.290.002 Applicability of provisions.
     These regulations shall apply to all properties zoned BB within the city. (Ord. 901 § 2, 2012)

 

17.290.003 Brentwood Boulevard specific plan.
     The Brentwood Boulevard specific plan (BBSP) establishes the primary means of regulating land use and development within the BB zone. It also establishes the primary means of planning city actions and investments in support of the growth and redevelopment of Brentwood Boulevard. The regulations contained within the BBSP replace land use and development regulations previously contained within this title for applicable properties. In the instance of conflicting regulations with other municipal planning documents containing policies for land use and development in the BB zone, the BBSP and this chapter shall control. The BBSP and this chapter do not replace or augment regulations pertaining to issues of building safety codes or other non-planning related codes. All applications for new construction, substantial modifications to existing buildings, and for changes in land use, shall be reviewed for conformance with the BBSP. (Ord. 901 § 2, 2012)

 

17.290.004 Availability.
     A copy of the BBSP is on file with the city clerk’s office, the community development department, and is accessible via the city’s website. (Ord. 901 § 2, 2012)

 

Chapter 17.295 PA-1 (PRIORITY AREA ONE) ZONE
17.295.001 Purpose and intent.
     The purpose and intent of the PA-1 zone is to enable the development of Priority Area 1 as a vibrant, compact, transit-oriented development that is focused around a proposed Tri Delta Transit/BART transit station and as an employment center within the city. This will be accomplished through goals, policies, regulations, and guidelines that address land use, architectural and urban design, circulation and parking, infrastructure, public services, and economic development in the Priority Area 1 Specific Plan (PA-1 SP) area. The PA-1 SP addresses the needs of the various users who frequent the Specific Plan area, including residents, workers, and visitors. The PA-1 SP is intended to guide private development and public investment within the specific plan area for the next twenty to twenty-five years. (Ord. 1007 § 5, 2018)

 

17.295.002 Applicability of provisions.
     These regulations shall apply to all properties zoned PA-1 within the city. (Ord. 1007 § 5, 2018)

 

17.295.003 Brentwood Boulevard specific plan.
     The PA-1 SP establishes the primary means of regulating land use and development within the PA-1 zone. It also establishes the primary means of planning city actions and investments in support of the growth and redevelopment of the area within the PA-1 zone. The provisions of the PA-1 SP replace land use and development regulations previously contained within this title for applicable properties. In the instance of conflicting regulations with other municipal planning documents containing policies for land use and development in the PA-1 zone, the PA-1 SP and this chapter shall control. The PA-1 SP and this chapter do not replace or augment regulations pertaining to issues of building safety codes or other non-planning related codes. All applications for new construction, substantial modifications to existing buildings, and for changes in land use, shall be reviewed for conformance with the PA-1 SP. (Ord. 1007 § 5, 2018)

 

17.295.004 Availability.
     A copy of the PA-1 SP is on file with the city clerk’s office, the community development department, and is accessible via the city’s website. (Ord. 1007 § 5, 2018)

 

17.295.005 Map for Priority Area 1.


(Ord. 1007 § 5, 2008)

Article V. Industrial/Commercial Zoning Regulations
Chapter 17.300 INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL ZONES—GENERAL REGULATIONS
17.300.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this article shall be known as the “industrial/commercial zoning regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the industrial/commercial zones and the regulations applying to these zones include the following:

     1.     To provide appropriately located areas for manufacturing and industrial uses, industrial, commercial and office parks, and in certain circumstances residential uses, to meet the employment and service needs of the Brentwood community;

     2.     To encourage the provision of attractive and stimulating surroundings that make Brentwood’s industrial/commercial areas enjoyable and clean places in which to work;

     3.     To protect the industrial areas from the intrusion of incompatible activities which might impair on an area’s functioning as an industrial area;

     4.     To establish criteria to protect adjoining land uses and the general community from noise, vibration, smoke, odor, dust, dirt, heat, glare and from fire, explosion and other hazards. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.300.002 Applicability of provisions.
     These regulations shall apply to the IC and PEC zones unless expressly provided otherwise, and are supplementary to the industrial/commercial zoning regulations of this title. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.300.003 Development standards.
     The development standards set forth in Section 17.200.003 are applicable to the industrial/commercial zones unless expressly provided for otherwise within the regulations of each individual zones and with the exceptions set out in this section to the subsections enumerated in subsections A and B of this section.

     A.    Exception to Subsection B of Section 17.200.003—Refuse Container Enclosure. All industrial facilities shall provide refuse container enclosures to city standards and specifications.

     B.     Exception to Subsection E of Section 17.200.003—Manufacturing and Storage Areas. All manufacturing processes shall be within a structure and all open storage areas shall be screened with a minimum six-foot-high view-obscuring fence. No storage shall exceed the height of the fence. Masonry walls shall be utilized for screening areas visible from a public street while chain link with view-obscuring slats or other fencing materials, other than wood, may be used for screening areas not visible from a public street. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.300.004 Performance standards.
     The performance standards set forth in Section 17.200.004 are applicable to the industrial/commercial zones unless expressly provided for otherwise within the regulations of each individual zone. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.300.005 Nonconforming lots.
     See Section 17.610.014. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.310 IC (INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL) ZONE
17.310.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The IC (industrial/commercial) zone is a mixed use zone providing for a wide range of light industrial uses as the predominant use and business services and office uses not involving frequent public use as the optional secondary use in already established industrial and service commercial areas or on undeveloped parcels close to the downtown. Such uses are subject to development and performance standards to prevent deleterious uses and ensure compatibility with the surrounding community. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.310.002 Permitted uses.
     The following light industrial, business services and office uses are permitted in the IC zone:

     A.    Light industrial uses which generate minimal noise, odor, smoke, waste material, and similar items which may negatively impact the environment are permitted. Such uses include but are not limited to small assembly plants, printing establishments, contractors storage yard, lumber yard and similar uses;

     B.     Business services such as laundry, dry cleaning, automotive repair or service establishments such as electronic, clock or watch repair, small equipment repair, small welding shop, lumber yard and similar facilities;

     C.     Commercial uses which may or may not manufacture their primary product on the premises such as drapery shop, cabinet shop, upholstery shop and similar uses;

     D.    Office uses which are supplementary to an industrial, business or commercial uses permitted in the zone;

     E.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.310.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted only on the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Public and quasi-public uses necessary and appropriate to the IC zone;

     B.     Manufacture of food products, pharmaceuticals and similar products excluding the production of fish or meat products or similar products that create excessive sewage or odor problems;

     C.     Light metal fabrication, machine shops and similar uses;

     D.    Self-service storage facilities (ministorage or warehouses);

     E.     Churches as temporary uses to be located in existing buildings. (Ord. 450 § 3, 1989; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.310.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, heights and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the IC zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: twenty thousand square feet, except the minimum lot size shall not apply under the following circumstances;

     1.     Subdivision map would create lots for condominium units for industrial or commercial uses and the area of the map is a minimum of twenty thousand square feet;

     2.     Parking, driveways, landscaping and other facilities are owned and maintained by an association;

     B.     Minimum lot width: one hundred feet;

     C.     Minimum street frontage yard: ten feet. Except where there is a residentially zoned parcel within the same block, the minimum setback shall be seventy-five percent of the minimum setback for the residential zone, but not less than ten feet;

     D.    Minimum nonstreet frontage yard: none except where residentially zoned property is abutting the IC zone, the minimum yard shall be ten feet;

     E.     Maximum Building Height.

     1.     If the IC zone abuts any residential zone, the maximum height of the structure shall be one story not to exceed twenty feet,

     2.     A two-story structure, not exceeding thirty feet may be permitted abutting a residential zone subject to conditional use permit approval,

     3.     If the IC zone does not abut a residential zone, the maximum permitted height shall be two stories not to exceed thirty feet,

     4.     Structures greater than two stories or thirty feet and not abutting a residential zone may be permitted if approved in accordance with the conditional use permit procedure, (Chapter 17.830). (Ord. 472 § 2, 1990; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.310.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620.

     B.     Minimum Zoning District Size. Any IC zone formed shall be a minimum of five acres in size.

     C.     Development Standards. The uses within the IC zone shall comply with Section 17.300.003.

     D.    Performance Standards. The uses within the IC zone shall comply with Section 17.300.004.

     E.     Design and Site Development Review. All industrial facilities shall comply with Chapter 17.820 of this title. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.320 PEC (PLANNED EMPLOYMENT CENTER) ZONE
17.320.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The PEC (planned employment center) zone is a mixed use category intended to provide for integrated subclusters of industrial parks, business and research parks, large individual corporate establishments, professional and administrative office complexes and selected commercial activities as the predominant function (fifty-one percent or more of the total land area devoted to employment-generating uses) in conjunction with higher density residential uses to support the housing needs of employees and businesses in the planned employment center. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.320.002 General provisions.
     A.    The PEC (planned employment center) zone shall be established in accordance with the city of Brentwood general plan and no development shall be allowed to occur unless a specific plan has been adopted for the area. Such specific plan shall be in accordance with the community development plan, the city’s guidelines for preparing specific plans, and Government Code Section 65450 et seq.

     B.     The specific plan shall serve as, and include all zoning regulations, performance standards, development and design standards. The performance, development and design standards within the zoning ordinance shall be utilized as a basis for evaluating and determining standards for the PEC zone.

     C.     In the absence of an adopted specific plan the proponent of a planned employment center may request the city to prepare such a plan which shall be at the cost of the proponent and which shall be in conformance with Section 17.320.004. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.320.003 Land use ratio.
     The PEC (planned employment center) zone is intended to encourage the development of employment-generating uses, however, the land use designation allows for up to a maximum of forty-nine percent of the land area to be developed for residential uses if approved by the city. That land area utilized, shall be the gross acreage for which one specific plan is prepared and the residential acreage ratio is a maximum amount. The city may restrict the residential acreage to a lower ratio or prohibit residential development within the PEC area if the city determines that residential use is inappropriate for the specific area. The following ratio shall be used except for that area designated PEC within the Brentwood redevelopment project area which shall be developed in accordance with the Brentwood redevelopment plan.

 

PEC Specific Plan Area Gross Acres

Maximum Percent Allowed for Residential Use

0—74

0

75—99

10%

100—124

18%

125—149

26%

150—174

34%

175—199

42%

200 plus

49%

 

(Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.320.004 Specific plan area.
     A.    The area to be included with a specific plan area shall be determined by the city.

     B.     Specific plan areas shall normally have physical boundaries such as major thoroughfares and similar public rights-of-way, canals and other waterways and other physical features that define a cohesive planning unit.

     C.     A specific plan area may cross a physical boundary when found by the city to be necessary to solve common problems.

 

     D.    When a proponent of a planned employment center is required to prepare a specific plan for his or her property pursuant to Section 17.320.002, the specific plan area shall include any additional land necessary to represent a cohesive planning unit. (Ord. 408, 1987)

Article VI. Public and Semipublic Facility Zoning Regulations
Chapter 17.350 PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC FACILITY ZONES—GENERAL REGULATIONS
17.350.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this article shall be known as the “public and semipublic facility zoning regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the public and semipublic zones and the regulations applying to these zones include the following:

     1.     To provide for and preserve areas for public facilities which serve the community, such as the civic center, corporation yard, public schools and other such governmental complexes;

     2.     To provide for and preserve areas for semipublic facilities which serve the community such as recreation centers, senior citizen centers, senior citizen and handicap housing, administrative offices for governmental districts and similar uses;

     3.     To provide opportunities for community service uses and other institutional and semicommercial uses to cluster for the convenience of the public in attractive areas specially suited for community service activities;

     4.     To protect community service uses from the intrusion of incompatible activities, and to provide special areas for such community service uses as might be inappropriate in other locations within the community. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.350.002 Applicability of provisions.
     These regulations shall apply to the PF and SPF zones unless expressly provided otherwise, and are supplementary to the public and semipublic facility zoning regulations of this title. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.350.003 Criteria applicable to all public and semipublic facility zones.
     All new development within the PF or SPF zones shall be subject to design and site development review pursuant to Chapter 17.820 and all other applicable criteria established by the city through policy or resolution. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.350.004 Development standards.
     The development standards established in Section 17.200.003 for office and commercial uses shall apply within the PF and SPF zones. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.350.005 Performance standards.
     The performance standards established in Section 17.200.004 for office and commercial uses shall apply within the PF and SPF zones. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.360 PF (PUBLIC FACILITY) ZONE
17.360.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The purpose of the PF (public facility) zone is to provide areas for public facilities such as government offices, community centers, schools and parks. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.360.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PF zone:

     A.    Governmental or public administrative offices, special district offices, social service offices and similar uses and rights-of-way;

     B.     Quasi-public offices such as public utility offices and rights-of-way;

     C.     Public parks, public schools;

     D.    Similar uses subject to approval of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.360.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses require special consideration and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Governmental agency or special district corporation yards, pumping stations, treatment facilities, etc.;

     B.     Quasi-public uses such as public utility corporation yards, pumping stations, treatment facilities, private schools, etc. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.360.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     All uses within the PF zone are subject to the design and site development review procedures established in Chapter 17.820 and the setbacks, building height, parking and other regulations established in the commercial office zone (Sections 17.210.004 and 17.210.005). (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.370 SPF (SEMIPUBLIC FACILITY) ZONE
17.370.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The purpose of the SPF (semipublic facility) zone is to provide for areas for public facilities and semipublic facilities which may be in conjunction with senior and handicap housing projects. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.370.002 Permitted uses.
     Those uses identified as permitted uses within the PF zone in Section 17.510.002 are permitted within the SPF zone. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.370.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses require special consideration and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Those uses identified as conditionally permitted uses within the PF zone in Section 17.510.003 are conditionally permitted within the SPF zone.

     B.     A subsidized senior and handicap housing project at a density to be determined by the city based on location, design, availability of utilities and services and other criteria considered appropriate by the city. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.370.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     All uses within the SPF zone are subject to design and site development review pursuant to Chapter 17.820 and the setback, building height, parking and other regulations established in the R-3 (high density multifamily residence) zone, Section 17.150.004. Parking requirements for senior and handicap housing shall be in accordance with Section 17.620.017. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

Article VII. Agricultural and Open Space Zoning Regulations
Chapter 17.400 AGRICULTURAL AND OPEN SPACE ZONES—GENERAL PROVISIONS
17.400.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this article shall be known as the “agricultural and open space zoning regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose of Provisions. The purpose of the agricultural and open space zones and the regulations applying to these zones include the following:

     1.     To provide land use designations which will retain primary agricultural use to the greatest extent possible and protect such agricultural areas from urban encroachment;

     2.     To conserve certain areas slated for future planning of land use jointly between the city, county and adjacent communities primarily along the corridor for the proposed Highway 4 extension;

     3.     To preserve areas for parks, greenways, recreational areas and similar open space uses to meet the needs of the community. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.400.002 Applicability of provisions.
     These regulations shall apply to the A-10, A-20, AP and OS zones unless expressly provided otherwise, and are supplementary to the agricultural and open space zoning regulations of this title. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.400.003 Design review required.
     See Section 17.100.003. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.400.004 Design criteria.
     See Section 17.100.004. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.400.005 Secondary housing units.
     See Section 17.100.005. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.400.006 Nonconforming lots.
     See Section 17.610.014. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.410 A-10 (AGRICULTURAL CONSERVATION) ZONE
17.410.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The purpose of the A-10 (agricultural conservation) zone is to provide areas for general agricultural uses and to preserve lands best suited to agriculture against premature urban encroachment and to prevent the premature intrusion of incompatible activities. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.410.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the A-10 zone:

     A.    One single-family dwelling per parcel, including manufactured homes;

     B.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     C.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     D.    Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     E.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     F.     Small family residential care facilities subject to locational criteria adopted by resolution of the planning commission of the city of Brentwood;

     G.    Signs subject to Chapter 17.640;

     H.    All types of agriculture, including general farming, horticulture, floriculture, nurseries and greenhouses, mushroom rooms, forestry and similar agricultural uses other than those uses identified as conditionally permitted;

     I.      Other agricultural uses, including the erection and maintenance of sheds, warehouses, granaries, dehydration plants, hullers and similar uses necessary for the primary processing, packing and shipping of agricultural products;

     J.      A temporary stand not exceeding two hundred square feet for the sale of agricultural products predominantly grown in the East Contra Costa County area. The stand shall be set back at least twenty-five feet from the front property line and shall be placed out of view from the public right-of-way when the stand is not in regular use. The stand shall be subject to the approval and conditions of a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     K.    Limited animal husbandry and private kennels subject to the provision of Chapter 17.670. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.410.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted only on the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Animal husbandry;

     B.     Merchandising of agricultural supplies and services incidental to an agricultural use, canneries, wineries and processing of agricultural products;

     C.     Cold storage plant, slaughter houses, stock yards, livestock sales or auction yards;

     D.    Commercial recreation uses which are primarily open and not within a building;

     E.     Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005;

     F.     Large residential care facilities and day care centers subject to locational criteria adopted by resolution of the planning commission of the city of Brentwood. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.410.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the A-10 zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: ten acres;

     B.     Minimum lot width: three hundred feet;

     C.     Minimum front yard: fifty feet;

     D.    Minimum side yard: twenty-five feet;

     E.     Minimum rear yard: fifty feet;

     F.     Yards—accessory buildings and structures:

     1.     Minimum setback from main building: eight feet except for accessory buildings housing animals or livestock which shall be set back thirty feet,

     2.     Minimum rear yard: twenty feet,

     3.     Minimum side yard: ten feet,

     4.     No accessory building or structure housing animals, grain-fed rodents, bees, birds or poultry shall be located nearer than fifty feet of any residential land use district or a main building on an adjacent lot;

     G.    Maximum Building Height. No accessory or main building shall exceed a height of two-and-one-half stories or thirty-five feet, unless a greater building height is approved by a conditional use permit;

     H.    Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to Chapter 17.660. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.410.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Sections 17.100.004H.

     B.     Design review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Section 17.100.003 and 17.100.004.

     C.     Accessory buildings shall be prohibited in any required front yard.

     D.    A water well with minimum enclosure shall be permitted in any required front yard provided the well site is in the only possible location on the property. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.420 A-20 (INTENSIVE AGRICULTURAL) ZONE
17.420.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The purpose of the A-20 (intensive agricultural) zone is to provide for intensive agricultural uses and to preserve lands best suited for intensive long-term agricultural use against urban encroachment and to prevent the intrusion of incompatible activities. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.420.002 Permitted uses.
     All uses identified as permitted uses within the A-10 zone, Section 17.410.002, are permitted uses within the A-20 zone. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.420.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     All uses identified as a conditionally permitted use within the A-10 zone Section 17.410.003, except 17.410.003D, commercial recreational uses, are conditionally permitted uses within the A-20 zone, and permitted only on the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.420.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following development regulations shall apply to the A-20 zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: twenty acres;

     B.     Minimum lot width: five hundred feet;

     C.     Minimum front yard: fifty feet;

     D.    Minimum side yard: twenty-five feet;

     E.     Minimum rear yard: fifty feet;

     F.     Yards—accessory buildings and structures:

     1.     Minimum setback from main building: eight feet except for accessory buildings housing animals or livestock which shall be set back thirty feet,

     2.     Minimum rear yard: twenty feet,

     3.     Minimum side yard: ten feet,

     4.     No accessory building or structure housing animals, grain-fed rodents, bees, birds or poultry shall be located nearer than fifty feet of any residential land use district or main building on an adjacent lot;

     G.    Maximum Building Height. No accessory or main building shall exceed a height of two-and-one-half stories or thirty-five feet, unless a greater building height is approved by a conditional use permit. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.420.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004H.

     B.     Design review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Section 17.100.003 and 17.100.004.

     C.     Accessory buildings shall be prohibited in any required front yard.

     D.    A water well with minimum enclosure shall be permitted in any required front yard provided the well site is in the only possible location on the property. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.430 AP (AGRICULTURAL PRESERVE) ZONE
17.430.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The purpose of the AP (agricultural preserve) zone is to provide areas intended for the commercial production of food and fibre and other compatible uses consistent with the intent and purpose of the Land Conservation Act of 1965 (Williamson Act) and any subsequent amendments to such Act. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.430.002 Establishment of AP zone.
     Upon establishment of an agricultural preserve, in accordance with the Land Conservation Act of 1965, Section 51200 et seq., of the California Government Code, and any subsequent amendments to such act, the property shall be zoned AP (agricultural preserve) zone. Establishment of an agricultural preserve shall be initiated by the property owner in accordance with city regulations, policy and procedure and in accordance with Section 51200 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.430.003 Permitted uses.
     All uses identified as permitted uses within the A-10 zone, Section 17.410.002, are permitted within the AP zone. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.430.004 Conditionally permitted uses.
     All uses identified as a conditionally permitted use within the A-20, Section 17.420.003, are conditionally permitted within the AP zone, and permitted only on the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.430.005 Regulations for lot area, density yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the AP zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: twenty acres;

     B.     Minimum lot width: five hundred feet;

     C.     Minimum front yard: fifty feet;

     D.    Minimum side yard: twenty-five feet;

     E.     Minimum rear yard: fifty feet;

     F.     Yards—accessory buildings and structures:

     1.     Minimum setback from main building: eight feet except for accessory buildings housing animals or livestock which shall be set back thirty feet,

     2.     Minimum rear yard: twenty feet,

     3.     Minimum side yard: ten feet,

     4.     No accessory building or structure housing animals, grain-fed rodents, bees, birds or poultry shall be located nearer than fifty feet of any residential land use district or a main building on an adjacent lot;

     G.    Maximum Building Height. No accessory or main building shall exceed a height of two-and-one-half stories or thirty-five feet, unless a greater building height is approved by a conditional use permit. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.430.006 Other regulations.
     A.    Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004H.

     B.     Design review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Section 17.100.003 and 17.100.004.

     C.     Accessory buildings shall be prohibited in any required front yard.

     D.    A water well with minimum enclosure shall be permitted in any required front yard provided the well site is in the only possible location on the property.

     E.     Minimum Zoning District Size. All agricultural preserves established and AP zones established shall be a minimum of one hundred acres in size. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.440 OS (OPEN SPACE) ZONE
17.440.001 Purpose of provisions.
     The purpose of the OS (open space) zone is to provide for the control, protection and use of open space lands which form a part of the park and open space system of the city of Brentwood. This land use designation shall include all public parks, playgrounds, linear parks or greenways, golf courses and country clubs and similar uses of a predominantly open nature intended for public use. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.440.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the OS zone:

     A.    Active and passive public recreational areas including any structures incidental to such use;

     B.     Public or quasi-public rights-of-way for utility, irrigation, drainage, railroad or similar areas utilized for or having the potential to be utilized for linear trails, bicycle, pedestrian or horse trails and similar uses;

     C.     Open space as a reserve for fire protection, seismic safety, water conservation, protection of view or similar appropriate purposes. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.440.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses require special consideration and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 17.830:

     A.    An addition to an existing structure which will increase the coverage of the structure by five hundred square feet, or any new structure in excess of five hundred square feet, except minor recreational structures such as playground equipment, trellises and similar uses;

     B.     Any commercial use which may be conducted on open space land without substantially detracting from its value as open space such as golf courses, riding academy or stables, tennis or swim club and similar recreational related uses of a predominantly open nature. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.440.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     All uses within the OS zone are subject to the design and site development review procedures established in Section 17.820. The setback, building height, parking and other design and performance criteria shall be established at the time of the proposed development and in accordance with any development standards established by resolution for the type of use proposed. (Ord. 408, 1987)

Article VIII. Planned Development Zoning Regulations
Chapter 17.450 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONES—GENERAL REGULATIONS
17.450.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this article shall be known as the “planned development zoning regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of planned development zones include the following:

     1.     To allow a mixture of uses, unusual building intensity or design characteristics, or variations in density including density between the midrange and upper end of land use designated by the general plan, which would not normally be permitted in a single use zone;

     2.     To implement specific plans prepared for specific plan areas designated by the community development plan of the city of Brentwood, and to implement other specific plans which may be adopted by the city council, by providing regulations for the adoption of planned development zones for all or part of the area encompassed by each adopted specific plan. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.450.002 Applicability of provisions.
     The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the following properties:

     A.    To any property in the city at such time an application for rezoning for a planned development zone is made and to any property for which planned development zoning is approved;

     B.     To all or part of any area in the city for which a specific plan has been approved;

     C.     Rezoning to the planned development zone may be allowed through the approval by the city of a development plan showing the design of the project, the interrelationship of uses, their relation to the surrounding area and conformance of the plan to the community development plan and any applicable specific plan or following the adoption of an applicable specific plan. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.450.003 Permitted uses.
     Any and all compatible uses are permitted within the zoning regulations adopted for the specific planned development zone; provided, however, no use shall be authorized which does not conform to the community development plan of the city of Brentwood and to any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.450.004 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Any use not listed as a permitted use or listed as conditionally permitted in the specific planned development zone may be permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.450.005 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The development regulations shall be specified within the regulations adopted for the specific planned development zone. Deviation from those regulations shall be permitted only through zoning text amendment or the grant of a variance. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.450.006 Rezoning procedure.
     A.    In addition to the rezoning procedure set forth in Chapter 17.870 the creation of a PD zone shall require the adoption of zoning ordinance text specifying the regulations applicable to the newly created zone.

     B.     In addition to the information required by Section 17.800.007, application for the creation of a PD zone shall require submittal of plans and supporting data as may be appropriate to the size, nature and specificity of the proposed development and the specificity of any applicable specific plan. Plans and data may include any of the following as may be required by the planning director.

     1.     A map showing the proposed street system and lot design, if any, and areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for interior circulation, parks, school sites, public buildings and other such uses;

     2.     A map showing the topography of the proposed zone, with contour intervals sufficient to meet all the requirements of the city;

     3.     A land use plan, precisely indicating the area or areas to be used for each particular land use;

     4.     A professionally prepared site plan which shall be drawn to scale and shall show the location of all proposed buildings, including notation of minimum distances between buildings, and between buildings and building site, and/or use boundaries;

     5.     An off-street parking and loading plan showing the ratio between off-street parking and loading spaces and building floor areas, and/or the ratio of parking spaces to anticipated employees, or other criterion required by the city. Such plan shall be supported by data demonstrating the adequacy of the parking for the demand generated by the use to which it pertains;

     6.     A circulation diagram indicating the proposed movement of vehicles, goods and pedestrians within the development, and to and from any adjacent public thoroughfares;

     7.     Any special engineering features and traffic regulating devices needed to facilitate or insure the safety and efficiency of the circulation pattern;

     8.     A landscaping and tree-planting plan and an irrigation plan prepared by a licensed landscape architect;

     9.     Elevations and/or perspective drawings of all proposed major structures prepared by a licensed engineer or architect. Such drawings need not be the result of final architectural plans, but must be in detail sufficient to enable the commission to determine, within reasonable limits, the height, bulk and arrangement of the proposed buildings and their general appearance;

     10.   A development schedule indicating the date on which construction is to begin, the anticipated rate of development, and the anticipated date of completion. The development schedule, shall become a zoning regulation which, if not adhered to, will constitute a violation of the zoning and grounds for initiation of rezoning by the city;

     11.   Any proposed conditions, covenants or regulations including provisions for a homeowners association for the purpose of operating and maintaining any common facilities or spaces included in the development and requiring all homeowners to maintain membership in such association.

     C.     In addition to the plans and data submitted pursuant to this section, application for the creation of a PD zone which is established to implement a specific plan adopted or proposed for adoption by the city shall require the submittal of a copy of the specific plan, or any amendment thereof, which has been adopted by the city, or a draft of a specific plan, or an amendment thereof, which has been submitted or is concurrently submitted to the city for its ultimate adoption. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.450.007 Findings for approval.
     Rezoning for a PD zone shall only be granted when the city can make the following findings:

     A.    That the proposed development will clearly result in a more desirable use of land, and a better physical environment than would be possible under any single or combination of zones;

     B.     That the PD zone proposed is on property which has a suitable relationship to one or more thoroughfares; and that such thoroughfares are adequate to carry any traffic generated by the development;

     C.     That the plan for the proposed development presents a unified and organized arrangement of buildings and service facilities which are appropriate in relation to adjacent or nearby properties and that adequate landscaping and/or screening is included if necessary to insure compatibility;

     D.    That the natural and scenic qualities of the site are protected, with adequate available public and private open spaces designated on the development plan;

     E.     That the development of the subject property, in the manner proposed by the applicant, will not be detrimental to the public welfare, will be in the best interests of the city and will be in keeping with the general intent and spirit of the zoning ordinance and with the city’s community development plan, including all relevant elements thereof, and with any applicable specific plan adopted by the city. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.450.008 Conditional use permit—Supplemental use of.
     A conditional use permit may be granted in the following circumstances:

     A.    If in the opinion of the city certain aspects of the planned development do not lend themselves to zoning regulations the city may require the applicant for rezoning to apply for a conditional use permit for consideration concurrent with the rezoning.

     B.     If provided for in the adopted PD zoning regulations, the conditional use permit procedure may be utilized for the approval of subsequent more detailed plans; provided, that such subsequent plans conform to the PD zoning regulations. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.450.009 Enforcement.
     A.    From time to time, the zoning administrator shall compare the actual development accomplished in any PD zone with the approved development plan and shall report his or her findings to the planning commission.

     B.     If, in the opinion of the planning commission the owner of the property in any PD zone is failing to conform to the approved development plan, the commission may initiate proceedings to remove the PD zone designation from the zoning map or may initiate proceedings for an amendment to the zoning regulations. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.451 PD-1 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ONE) ZONE
17.451.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of PD-1 (planned development one) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-1 (planned development one) zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of PD-1 (planned development one) zone is to permit and regulate the development of that portion of specific plan area two, as designated by the city of Brentwood community development plan, which is encompassed by the Peterson Ranch specific plan.

     C.     Intent. It is intended that in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-1 (planned development one) zone, the coordinated development of the area encompassed by the zone will be undertaken in accordance with the Brentwood general plan and the Peterson Ranch specific plan. The boundary of the PD-1 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.451.008. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.451.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the PD-1 zone:

     A. Residential. All uses as set forth below:

     1.     Detached and attached single-family homes;

     2.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660 of the Brentwood Municipal Code into required yards, as proposed for adoption by the Brentwood city council under this title at such time as this chapter becomes legally effective;

     3.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850 of the Brentwood Municipal Code, as proposed for adoption by the Brentwood city council under the ordinance codified in this title at such time as this chapter becomes legally effective;

     4.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840 of the Brentwood Municipal Code;

     5.     Small family residential care;

     6.     Agriculture, animal husbandry and limited animal husbandry pursuant to Chapter 17.670 of the Brentwood Municipal Code;

     7.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets pursuant to Chapter 17.670 of the Brentwood Municipal Code;

     8.     Signs pursuant to Chapter 17.640 of the Brentwood Municipal Code;

     9.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.451.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a conditional use permit, the following uses are permitted in the PD-1 zone.

     A.    Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005;

     B.     Public facilities including parks, playgrounds, public schools and other public buildings;

     C.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     D.    Community buildings, clubs and activities of quasi-public, social, fraternal or recreational character intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residential project;

     E.     Riding academy or stables;

     F.     Large residential care facilities and day care centers subject to locational criteria adopted by resolution of the planning commission of the city of Brentwood;

     G.    Residential projects with a density exceeding sixteen dwelling units per gross acre; however, no project shall exceed the maximum density of twenty dwelling units per gross acre;

     H.    A subsidized senior and handicap housing project at a density to be determined by the city based on location, design, availability of utilities and services and other criteria considered appropriate by the city;

I.   Buildings in excess of two stories or thirty-five feet in height. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.451.004 Residential facility types permitted.
     The total number of family residences permitted shall be in accordance with the Peterson Ranch specific plan. The family residences may be distributed among the following residential facility types; provided, that upon ultimate build-out, the number of multiple-family dwelling units shall not exceed ten percent of the total number of family residence dwelling units:

     A.    Single-family dwelling, detached—S-F(D);

     B.     Single-family dwelling, zero lot line—S-F(ZLL);

     C.     Single-family dwelling, townhouse—two to six dwelling units per building group—S-F(TH). Each single-family dwelling unit contained in a townhouse building shall be located on a legally separate parcel and shall have its own separate entrance located at ground level;

     D.    Multiple-family dwelling—two to six dwelling units per building—M-F. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.451.005 General development standards for the PD-1 zone.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within the PD-1 zone shall conform to the development standards set forth in this section:

     A.    All housing units shall have a minimum overall width and depth of twenty feet.

     B.     Exterior building material shall be of the type customarily used on conventional housing and shall be compatible with the existing homes in the immediate neighborhood.

     C.     The architectural style of the structure shall be complimentary to the area and compatible with the architectural style of the existing homes in the immediate neighborhood.

     D.    All siding material shall be extended to a minimum of ten inches from the finish grade of the lot.

     E.     All roofing material shall be of a type customarily used on conventional housing and shall be compatible with the existing homes in the immediate neighborhood.

     F.     All roofs shall have a minimum twelve-inch eave overhang and shall have a pitch of not less than two-inch vertical rise for each twelve-inch horizontal run.

     G.    All dwelling units, other than multiple-family dwelling units, shall have an enclosed two-car garage having an inside clear width of eighteen feet and depth of twenty feet. Garages shall be constructed with material identical to or compatible with the external material of the housing unit. Garage doors shall have a minimum width of sixteen feet except where two doors are provided, in which case the doors shall have a minimum width of eight feet. A garage facing a street shall be a setback not less than twenty feet measured from the property line to the center of the garage door.

     H.    Parking shall be provided for each multiple-family dwelling unit in an apartment complex as follows: one private space which shall be covered plus one public space which may be uncovered for each dwelling unit.

     I.      The floor elevation of the housing unit shall be a maximum of twenty-four inches above the finish grade of the lot or be compatible with the immediate neighborhood.

     J.      All housing units shall comply with the applicable development standards set forth in Section 17.451.008.

     K.    Front yards and unfenced side yards adjacent to a street shall be landscaped in conformance with the standards set forth in Section 17.630.008(H) through (N) of the Brentwood Municipal Code. Landscaping shall be installed within eighteen months of occupancy of that housing unit.

     L.     Encroachments into required yards shall be in conformance with Chapter 17.660 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     M.    Vehicle storage shall be in conformance with Section 17.620.016 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     N.    Usable open space shall be in conformance with Section 17.140.007(F) of the Brentwood Municipal Code and shall apply to multiple-family dwellings.

     O.    Any development containing four or more single-family dwellings on contiguous lots shall provide a minimum of twenty-five percent of either:

     1.     Single story dwellings; or

     2.     Side entry garages; or

     3.     Minimum thirty-foot front yard setback; or

     4.     Any combination thereof.

     P.     Any garage exceeding thirty-two feet in width shall be located on a lot with a minimum width of ninety feet, as measured at the garage face. Garage width is defined as the door to door dimension. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.451.006 Development standards for the PD-1 zone by residential facility type.
     Residential facility types shall conform to the development standards set forth in Table 17.451.006.

 

Table 17.451.006

 

Development Standards by Residential Facility Type

 

Lot Area

M-F

S-F(d)

S-F(ZLL)

S-F(TH)

Min. lot area (sq. ft.)

1,900

6,000

4,000

1,900

Min. lot width (ft.)

20(30)a

60

40

20(30)a

Min. front yard (ft.)

20 b

20 ba

20 b

20 b

Min. side yard (ft.)

0(10)a

5/10

0/10

0(10)a

Min. rear yard (ft.)

20 c

20 cb

20 c

20 c

Max height (ft.)

35 d

35 d

35 d

35 d

(a)    For end units.

(b)    For a dwelling which has a side entry garage, the minimum front yard setback for the garage only is ten feet or fifteen feet from the curbline, whichever is greater.

(c)    The minimum rear yard may be fifteen feet provided the average rear yard is not less than twenty feet.

 

(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.451.007 Design and site development review.
     The design and site development review procedure contained in Chapter 17.820 of the Brentwood Municipal Code shall apply to the development of the PD-1 zone except as set forth in this section:

     A.    Applicability of Design Guidelines in Peterson Ranch Specific Plan. In lieu of the application of the general criteria and standards contained in Sections 17.820.006 through 17.820.009, inclusive, of the Brentwood Municipal Code, the planning commission or the zoning administrator, as appropriate, shall apply the design guidelines set forth in Chapters 4 and 5 of the Peterson Ranch specific plan in evaluating development proposed for the PD-1 zone. Since these design guidelines respond to the goals, objectives and policies contained in the specific plan, as applied to site-specific conditions, they define the scope of the review by the planning commission and zoning administrator. The design guidelines shall specify an optimum level of performance in order to provide a direction for the future planning and design of the development of the Peterson Ranch. The design guidelines are intended to encourage creative, innovative design solutions which may not strictly conform to the guidelines in every detail, provided such solutions achieve the overall design objective of creating an extroverted and inviting community reminiscent of a rural character. The scope of the design guidelines does not include density or intensity of use, interior building design and layout and building type.

     B.     Application of Design and Site Review Procedure to Residential Development. In order to insure housing compatibility and to allow for alternative methods of construction, all new housing units constructed, moved or relocated within the PD-1 zone shall require design and site development review as follows:

     1.     Design and site development review shall be required pursuant to Chapter 17.820 of the Brentwood Municipal Code for housing units proposed for the following projects or circumstances:

     a.     Subdivisions of five or more lots;

     b.     Duplex, triplex, townhouse and multiple residential dwellings or projects;

     c.     Individual single-family housing units which do not comply with one or more of the design criteria established in Section 17.451.005;

     d.     When an individual appeals the decision of the zoning administrator regarding the approval or denial of a “certificate of compatibility” as required in subdivision 3 of this subsection.

     2.     Design and site development review criteria shall be a consideration with any residential project requiring a conditional use permit.

     3.     Prior to issuance of a building permit for any housing unit not subject to design and site development review pursuant to subdivisions 1 or 2 of this subsection; the zoning administrator shall indicate thereon a “certificate of compatibility” certifying that the housing unit/s complies with the design criteria set forth in Section 17.451.005 and/or is compatible with the housing units in the immediate neighborhood. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.451.008 Map for PD-1.
 



(Ord. 960 § 2, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.452 PD-2 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT TWO) ZONE
17.452.001 Authority and purpose.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of PD-2 (planned development two) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-2 (planned development two) zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-2 (planned development two) zone is to permit and regulate the development of Edgewood in accordance with the Brentwood general plan.

     C.     Intent. It is intended that in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-2 (planned development two) zone of implementing the development of Edgewood in accordance with the Brentwood general plan, said zone shall be divided into four villages (subareas). Villages I, II, III and IV are designated on the development plan and related exhibits, and are further described below. The boundaries of the PD-2 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.452.006. Each village contains a unique architectural flavor and is separate and distinct from adjacent villages.

     1.     Village I is generally comprised of two lot sizes as follows:

     a.     Minimum eighty-foot wide by one hundred fifty-foot deep lots which buffer those lots located between Fairview Avenue and Edgewood,

     b.     Minimum six thousand square foot lots having at least a depth of one hundred feet which provide a transition between the eighty-foot wide lots and the remainder of Edgewood planned development;

     2.     Village II is generally comprised of lots having a minimum dimension of sixty feet by eighty feet;

     3.     Village III is generally comprised of lots having a minimum dimension of fifty feet by one hundred feet;

     4.     Village IV is generally comprised of lots having a minimum dimension of thirty-nine feet by eighty-three feet;

     5.     Also included within Edgewood are two creeks (Sand and Deer) which serve as regional drainage facilities. The Edgewood planned development and other adjacent developments provide for the revegetation of these corridors along with provisions for pathways as dictated by the city master creek trail plan. These corridors shall serve as linear park/greenbelt/trail system and provide a pleasant means of access to the five-acre park site on Edgewood;

     6.     As noted in subdivision (5) above, a five-acre park site is proposed along the Sand Creek Channel/Minnesota Avenue frontage. This park will be improved in conjunction with the Edgewood planned development, the school and other developments on nearby properties. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.452.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the PD-2 zone: those uses permitted under the R-1 zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.452.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a use permit, those uses identified as conditionally permitted uses in the R-1 zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.452.004 Residential type permitted.
     The residential type permitted in the Edgewood is as follows: single-family dwellings, detached, S-F(D). (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.452.005 General development standards.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

 

A.  S-F(D) Village I:

 

 

1.  Minimum lot area (sq. ft.)

8,000

6,000

2.  Minimum lot width

60′

50′

3.  Minimum front yard

20′

20′

4.  Minimum side yard

10′ aggregate

15′ aggregate*

10′ minimum

5′ minimum

5.  Minimum rear yard

20′

20′

6.  Maximum height

35′

35′

       * No less than fifteen percent with 10′/5′

 

B.   S-F(D) Village II:

 

1.  Minimum lot area (sq. ft.)

4,800

2.  Minimum lot width

60′

3.  Minimum front yard

20′

4.  Minimum side yard

15′ aggregate**

5′ minimum

5.  Minimum rear yard

20′

6.  Maximum height

35′

       ** Forty percent maximum to be 5′ and 5′

 

 

C.   S-F(D) Village III:

 

1.  Minimum lot area (sq. ft.)

5,000

2.  Minimum lot width

50′

3.  Minimum front yard

20′

4.  Minimum side yard

10′ aggregate

5′ minimum

5.  Minimum rear yard

20′

6.  Maximum height

35′

 

 

D.   S-F(D) Village IV:

 

1.  Minimum lot area (sq. ft.)

3,280

2.  Minimum lot width

39′

3.  Minimum front yard setback

 

a.  Side entry

10′ to garage façade

b.  Second floor stepped forward

18′ to garage door

15.5′ to second story façade

c.  Second floor stepped back

18′ to garage door

22.5′ to second story façade

4.  Minimum side yard setback

14′ aggregate

5′ minimum

5.  Minimum rear yard setback

15% of the lots shall have a minimum setback of 15′ and 15% of the lots shall have a minimum setback of 18′.

6.  Maximum building height

30′

7.  Corner lots shall maintain a sideyard setback of ten feet as measured from the right-of-way line.

 

 

     E.     Forty percent of the corner lots shall be single story.

     F.     Twenty percent of the homes shall have the second story stepped back four and one-half feet from the first floor façade.

     G.    Twenty percent of the homes shall have the second story stepped forward two and one-half feet from the first floor façade.

     H.    All housing units shall have a minimum overall width and depth of twenty feet.

     I.      All roofing material shall be of a type customarily used on conventional housing and shall be compatible with the existing homes in the immediate neighborhood.

     J.      All roofs shall have a minimum twelve-inch eave overhang and shall have a pitch of not less than four-inch vertical rise for each twelve-inch horizontal run.

     K.    All dwelling units shall have an enclosed two-car garage having an inside clear width of eighteen feet and depth of twenty feet. Garages shall be constructed with material identical to or compatible with the external material of the housing unit. Garage doors shall have a minimum width of fifteen feet except where two doors are provided, in which case the doors shall have a minimum width of eight feet.

     L.     Encroachments into required yards shall be in conformance with Chapter 17.660.

     M.    Vehicle storage shall be in conformance with Section 17.620.016.

     N.    One and two-story unit mix for those units abutting the existing four residences on Fairview Avenue shall be as specified on the development plan and related exhibits.

     O.    No more than fifty percent of the residences backing onto Dainty and Minnesota Avenues shall be two story with the remaining fifty percent to be one story.

     P.     All homes within this development area shall require design and site development review as contained in Chapter 17.820.

     Q.    Ten percent of the lots shall be side entry. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.452.006 Map for PD-2.
 



(Ord. 960 § 3, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.453 PD-3 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT THREE) ZONE
17.453.001 Authority and purpose.
     The authority and purpose for the adoption of PD-3 (planned development three) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-3 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-3 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the single family detached homes and public uses as well as approximately 10.13 acres located at the southeast corner of Balfour Road and Fairview Avenue with general commercial uses, including a supermarket, in accordance with the Brentwood general plan.

     C.     Intent. The intent of creating the PD-3 zone is to ensure the coordinated development of the entire zone in order to ensure the integration of residential and non-residential uses within the zone and minimize impacts on adjacent residential areas, while providing for the flexibility to maximize the potential for job creation and serve the needs of surrounding residential and commercial neighborhoods. The boundaries of the PD-3 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.453.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.453.002 Permitted uses.
     A. The following uses are permitted within subarea “A”:

     1.     Those uses permitted in the R-1 (Single Family Residential) zoning district in Title 17.

     B. The following uses are permitted within subarea “B”:

     1.     Convenience retail uses with up to twenty seats such as bakeries, pastry shops, coffee shops, bookstores, candy stores, florists, newsstands, stationery/gift shops, ice cream parlors, and similar uses;

     2.     Supermarkets, drugstores, and similar uses;

     3.     On-sale or off-sale liquor sales relating to a supermarket, drugstore, restaurant or similar use;

     4.     Service uses such as barber or beauty shops, shoe repair stores, laundromats, dry cleaners, mailing/mailbox centers, and similar uses;

     5.     Professional office uses such as dentist offices, real estate offices, chiropractic offices, optometrist offices, and veterinary clinics or pet stores (excluding boarding facilities);

     6.     Restaurants and cafés with up to twenty seats providing take-out service or having quick-serve capability (as determined by the community development director) with no restriction on the number or area of such uses within the center;

     7.     Restaurants and cafés with sit-down facilities, limited to a total of eleven thousand five hundred square feet within the entire shopping center;

     8.     Financial institutions; and

     9.     Convenience retail, service, and other permitted uses that conform with the city’s noise ordinance pursuant to the definition set forth in Chapter 17.200.004 and Chapter 9.32 as amended February 12, 2002. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.453.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     A.    The following uses are conditionally permitted within subarea “A”:

     1.     Those uses conditionally permitted in the R-1 (singe-family residential) zoning district in Title 17.

     B.     The following uses are conditionally permitted within subarea “B”:

     1.     On-sale or off-sale liquor establishments not relating to a supermarket, drugstore, restaurant or similar use;

     2.     Convenience stores;

     3.     Meeting rooms/fraternal halls and neighborhood community centers;

     4.     Freestanding restaurants and cafés, excluding a drive-in or drive-thru establishment;

     5.     Open storage or outdoor display of seasonal merchandise;

     6.     Restaurants and cafés with sit-down facilities, when the total square footage exceeds eleven thousand five hundred square feet within the entire center;

     7.     Child care nurseries, child care centers, day care centers, and similar uses; and

     8.     Other uses that the community development director determines, because of the type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances that require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.453.004 Regulation for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     A.    All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within the PD-3 residential subarea “A” zone shall comply with the following regulations:

     1.     Minimum lot area: six thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum front yard: twenty feet to garage; fifteen feet to house.

     3.     Minimum lot frontage: thirty-five feet.

     4.     Minimum side yard: five feet; sum of both sides, fifteen feet.

     5.     Minimum rear yard: fifteen feet, provided average rear yard setback is not less than twenty feet.

     6.     Maximum building height: No main building shall exceed the height of two stories and thirty feet.

     7.     Exceptions:

     a.     Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet.

     B.     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within the PD-3 commercial subarea “B” zone shall comply with the following regulations:

     1.     Minimum lot area: twenty-five thousand square feet, except that a master planned shopping center may be subdivided into parcels, having a minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet and a minimum lot width of one hundred feet.

     2.     Minimum street frontage: one hundred twenty feet, except in the event of a subdivision pursuant to subsection A of this section where frontage is not required provided perpetual access is provided by easements.

     3.     Minimum street frontage yards: ten feet that, except for driveway approaches, shall be landscaped pursuant to Section 17.630.

     4.     Minimum non-street frontage yards: fifty feet. These yards shall be screened if required pursuant to Section 17.630.

     5.     Maximum Building Height. The maximum height of all structures in the PD-3 commercial subarea “B” zone shall be one story not to exceed thirty feet except for architectural features (including roof elements) which can extend up to thirty-seven feet.

     6.     Delivery Hours. Supermarkets shall restrict delivery hours to seven a.m. to ten p.m., Monday through Saturday, and nine a.m. to ten p.m. on Sunday. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.453.005 Other regulations.
     A.    The following regulations shall pertain to PD-3 residential subarea “A”:

     1.     Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     2.     Off street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     3.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     4.     Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     5.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     6.     The development of the zone district shall be substantially in accord with the development plan and related exhibits.

     7.     Landscaping along Marsh and Dry Creeks, and within the public right-of-way, shall be substantially in conformance with the landscape plan submitted except as follows:

     a.     Marsh Creek trail development shall meet the standards and specifications of the East Bay Regional Park District;

     b.     One third of the street trees along Balfour Road and Fairview Avenue shall be a twenty-four-inch box and two thirds of the trees shall be fifteen-gallon size;

     c.     Heavier wood materials shall be used for the backyard fence for those homes backing up to Dry Creek. Materials and elevations will need staff approval;

     d.     The park trail fence shall be installed to city standard specifications;

     8.     Maximum number of dwelling units shall be three hundred ninety-nine.

     9.     Fifty percent of the homes along Balfour Road and Fairview Avenue Extension shall be single story.

     B.     The following regulations shall pertain to PD-3 commercial subarea “B”:

     1.     Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620 of the Brentwood Municipal Code, except that sit-down restaurants shall provide one parking space for each one hundred square feet of gross floor area.

     2.     Development Standards. The uses within the PD-3 commercial subarea “B” zone shall comply with Section 17.200.003 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     3.     Performance Standards. The uses within the PD-3 commercial subarea “B” zone shall comply with Section 17.200.004 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     4.     Signs. All signage for uses within the PD-3 commercial subarea “B” zone shall be in accordance with the master sign program, as approved by the city of Brentwood.

     5.     Prohibited Uses. Prohibited uses within the PD-3 commercial subarea “B” zone shall include drive-in or drive-thru facilities and gas station facilities.

     6.     Operating Covenant. No building permits shall be issued for any development unless and until the operating covenant between the city of Brentwood and Safeway Inc. has been entered into. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.453.006 Map for PD-3.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.454 PD-4 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FOUR) ZONE
17.454.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD 4 (planned development four) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-4 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-4 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the area in accordance with the Brentwood general plan.

     C.     Intent. The zone district is intended to provide a neighborhood of single family homes on minimum ten thousand square foot lots and open space in conformance with the adopted general plan. The boundary of the PD-4 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.454.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.454.002 Permitted uses.
     Permitted uses in the PD 4 zone are those permitted within the R-1-E (single-family residential estate) zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.454.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a use permit, those uses identified as conditionally permitted uses in the R-1-E (single-family residential estate) zoning district in Title 17 may be permitted in the PD-4 zone. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.454.004 General development standards.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Ten thousand square feet.

     B.     Minimum lot width: Eighty-five feet.

     C.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet.

     D.    Minimum side yard: Ten feet; the sum of both side yards, twenty five feet except as provided for in subsection (F)(2).

     E.     Minimum rear yard: Thirty feet.

     F.     Exceptions:

     1.     Cul-de-sac lots or lots on curvilinear streets shall have a width of not less than eighty feet measured thirty feet from the front property line and no less than forty-foot width at the front property line.

     2.     Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of fifteen feet.

     G.    Maximum building height: No main building shall exceed the height of two stories and thirty feet and accessory buildings shall not exceed one story and fifteen feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.454.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Section 17.100.003.

     B.     All housing units shall comply with the single-family residential design criteria identified in Section 17.100.004 except subsection (F) relative to eave overhang. The city may eliminate the eave overhang through the design and site development review process.

     C.     Off street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     D.    The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     E.     Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     F.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     G.    Development shall be substantially in accordance with the development plan and related exhibits.

     H.    Maximum number of dwelling units shall be one hundred ten.

     I.      Any variations in the development plan, including, but not limited to, streets and lots, shall be in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.454.006 Map for PD-4.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.455 PD-5 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FIVE) ZONE
17.455.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-5 (planned development five) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-5 (planned development five) zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of this code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-5 (planned development five) zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of thirty-three acres of single-family homes and public uses, and ten acres of commercial uses in accordance with the Brentwood general plan.

     C.     Intent. The intent of creating the PD-5 (planned development five) zone is to ensure the coordinated development of the entire property in order to minimize impacts on residential areas, while providing for the flexibility to maximize the potential for job creation and serve the needs of surrounding residential and commercial neighborhoods. The boundaries of the PD-5 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.455.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.455.002 Permitted uses.
     A.    Residential Subarea A. The following uses are permitted in the PD-5 (planned development five), subarea “A” zone:

     1.     Those uses which are permitted uses within the R-1 (single-family residential) zoning district of Title 17;

     2.     Single-family dwelling units not exceeding a density of three and one-half dwelling units per gross acre excluding any affordable housing units;

     3.     Attached or detached affordable housing units proposed in conformance with the city’s adopted affordable housing ordinance.

     B.     Commercial Subarea B. The following uses are permitted in the PD-5 (planned development five), subarea “B” zone:

     1.     Convenience retail uses such as bakeries, pastry shops, coffee shops, book stores, candy stores, florists, newsstands, stationery/gift shops, ice cream parlors and similar uses;

     2.     Supermarkets, drugstores and similar uses;

     3.     On-sale or off-sale liquor sales relating to a supermarket, drugstore, restaurant or similar use;

     4.     Service uses such as barber or beauty shops, shoe repair stores, laundromats, dry cleaners, mailing/mailbox centers, copy centers and similar uses;

     5.     Professional office uses such as dentist offices, real estate offices, title company offices, chiropractic offices, optometrist offices and veterinary clinics or pet stores (excluding boarding facilities);

     6.     Restaurants and cafés (excluding drive-thrus);

     7.     Financial institutions including banks, savings and loans, and similar uses which offer a wide range of services pursuant to the definition set forth in Section 17.030.030 of this code;

     8.     General retail uses including appliance stores, hobby shops, sporting goods, clothing, auto parts stores and similar uses;

     9.     Retail, service, and other permitted uses that conform to the city’s noise ordinance pursuant to the definition set forth in Section 17.200.004 and Chapter 9.32 of this code as amended February 12, 2002. (Ord. 991 § 5, 2017; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.455.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     A.    Residential Subarea A. The following uses are conditionally permitted in the PD-5 (planned development five), subarea A, zone and require the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830 of this code:

     1.     Those uses which are conditionally permitted uses within the R-1 (single-family residential) zoning district in Title 17.

     B.     Commercial Subarea B. The following uses are conditionally permitted in the PD-5 (planned development five), subarea B, zone and require the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830 of this code:

     1.     On-sale or off-sale liquor establishments not relating to a supermarket, drugstore, restaurant or similar use;

     2.     Convenience stores;

     3.     Meeting rooms/fraternal halls and neighborhood community centers;

     4.     Open storage or outdoor display of seasonal merchandise;

     5.     All drive-through or drive-up establishments;

     6.     Other uses that the community development director determines, because of the type of operation, material stored or sold or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.455.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to subarea A of the planned development zone:

     A.    Detached Single-Family Units.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Six thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width*: Sixty feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: Ninety feet;

     4.     Minimum lot frontage: Thirty-five feet;

     5.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet to a front-facing garage; fifteen feet to any primary building wall, turn garage or porch;

     6.     Minimum side yard: Five feet, with an aggregate of fifteen feet. All corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet;

     7.     Minimum rear yard: Twenty feet;

     8.     Maximum building height: Two stories not exceeding thirty feet;

     9.     Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent on one-story units and forty percent on two-story units.

     *Where lots are irregular in shape due to curvilinear street patterns, the minimum lot width shall be taken from a measurement thirty feet in from the front lot line.

     B.     Attached Duet Units.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Three thousand seven hundred feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width*: Thirty-six feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: Ninety feet;

     4.     Minimum lot frontage: Thirty-five feet;

     5.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet to a front-facing garage; fifteen feet to any primary building wall, turn garage or porch;

     6.     Minimum side yard: Zero feet on common wall property line, with an aggregate of five feet. All corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet;

     7.     Minimum rear yard: Twenty feet;

     8.     Maximum building height: Two stories not exceeding thirty feet;

     9.     Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent.

     *Where lots are irregular in shape due to curvilinear street patterns, the minimum lot width shall be taken from a measurement thirty feet in from the front lot line.

     C.     Attached Fourplex Airspace Unit.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Four hundred seventy-eight feet;

     2.     Common lot minimum width*: One hundred feet;

     3.     Common lot minimum lot depth: Eighty feet;

 

     4.     Common lot minimum frontage: Eighty-five feet;

     5.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet to a front-facing garage; fifteen feet to any primary building wall, turn garage or porch;

     6.     Minimum side yard: Zero feet on common wall property lines; five feet on any other side property line. All corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet;

     7.     Minimum rear yard: Forty-five feet to include common drive and driveways;

     8.     Maximum building height: Two stories not exceeding thirty feet;

     9.     Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent.

     The following regulations shall apply to sub-area B of the planned development zone:

     D.    Commercial.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Twenty-five thousand square feet, except that a master planned shopping center may be subdivided into parcels having a minimum lot area of seven thousand five hundred square feet and a minimum lot width of seventy-five feet;

     2.     Minimum street frontage: One hundred feet, except in the event of a subdivision pursuant to a master planned shopping center where frontage is not required provided perpetual access is provided by easements;

     3.     Minimum street frontage yards: Ten feet;

     4.     Minimum non-street frontage yards: Ten feet, except in the event of a subdivision pursuant to a master planned shopping center where frontage is not required provided perpetual access is provided by easements;

     5.     Maximum building height: The maximum height of all structures shall not exceed thirty-five feet except for architectural features (including roof elements) which can extend up to forty feet;

     6.     Delivery hours: Supermarkets and drugstores shall restrict delivery hours to seven a.m. to ten p.m. daily. (Ord. 872 § 2, 2009; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.455.005 Other regulations.
     The following regulations shall apply to sub-area A of the planned development zone:

     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H) of this code;

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H) of this code;

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016 of this code;

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of this code;

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of this code.

     The following regulations shall apply to sub-area B of the planned development zone:

     A.    Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620 of this code;

     B.     The development standards within the PD-5 (planned development five), commercial subarea B zone shall comply with Section 17.200.003 of this code;

     C.     The performance standards within the PD-5 (planned development five), commercial subarea B zone shall comply with Section 17.200.004 of this code;

     D.    All signage for uses within the PD-5 (planned development five), commercial subarea B zone shall be in accordance with the master sign program, as approved by the city of Brentwood;

     E.     Prohibited uses within the PD-5 (planned development five), commercial subarea B zone shall include gas station facilities and car washes, automobile and recreational vehicle sales, leasing, rentals and/or service and manufacturing. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.455.006 Map for PD-5.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.456 PD-6 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIX) ZONE
17.456.001 Authority, applicable law, purpose and intent.
     The authority, applicable law, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD (planned development six) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-6 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Brentwood Municipal Code 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Applicable Law. “Brentwood Municipal Code” shall mean the Brentwood Municipal Code in effect at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this article.

     C.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-6 zone is to permit and regulate the development of three hundred twenty-six and one-half acres to allow a mixture of uses, building Intensity and design characteristics, and variations in density that would not normally be permitted in a single use zone. Lands designated in the Sand Creek Development (SPA D) Plan include single-family and multifamily residential, regional commercial, office/commercial, parks and public facilities.

     D.    Intent. It is intended that, in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-6 zone of implementing a master planned development with commercial, office, residential, parks and public facilities in conformance with the Sand Creek Development (SPA D) Plan, development within the PD-6 zone shall be in such accordance by inclusion of land uses generally conforming to the locations and allocations shown in Section 17.456.006. The boundaries of the PD-6 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.456.006. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.456.002 Permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses.
     The following is a list of the permitted and conditional uses allowed within the project site.      The symbols used will denote the following:

       P = Permitted

       C = Conditional

       --- = Prohibited

 

PD-6—PERMITTED USES AND CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES

Uses

LDR

MDR

HDR

Park/O.S./Public Facility

Regional Commercial

P.A. 1 Office Commercial

P.A. 7 Office Commercial

Accessory Uses

P

P

P

P

P

C

C

Arcades, Game

---

---

---

C

C

C

C

Auto Service Station

---

---

---

---

C1 P

---

---

Bakeries

---

---

---

---

P

P

C

Bar, Tavern, Cocktail Lounge

---

---

---

---

P

P

---

Barber and Beauty Salon

---

---

C

---

P

P

P

Book Stores

---

---

---

---

P

P

P

Camera Stores

---

---

---

---

P

P

P

Car Wash

---

---

---

---

C

C

---

Child Care Centers

C

C

C

C

P

P

C

Churches

C

C

C

C

---

C

C

Commercial Recreation

---

---

---

C

P

P

P

Conference/ Convention Facilities

---

---

---

---

P

P

C

Convalescent Home

---

---

C

---

---

C

---

Convenience, Liquor Store

---

---

---

---

C

C

---

Department Store

---

---

---

---

P

P

---

Drug Store

---

---

---

---

P

P

C

Dry Cleaners

---

---

---

---

P

P

C

Financial Institutions

---

---

---

---

P

P

P

Firehouse

C

C

C

P

P

P

p

Florist

---

---

---

---

P

P

P

Galleries

---

---

---

---

P

P

P

Gift Shop

---

---

---

---

P

P

P

Golf Course

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

Health Clubs

C

C

C

P

P

P

---

Home Care—6 people or less

P

P

P

---

---

---

---

Home Care—more than 6 people

C

C

C

---

---

---

---

Home Occupations

C

C

C

---

---

---

---

Hospitals

---

---

---

---

C

C

---

Hotel

---

---

---

---

P

P

C

Industry

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

Libraries

---

---

---

C

P

P

P

Manufacturing

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

Model Home Sales Complex

C

C

C

---

---

---

---

Motels

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

Movie Theatre

---

---

---

---

P

P

---

Museum

---

---

---

---

---

P

P

Offices, Business, Professional

---

---

---

---

P

P

P

Parks and Playgrounds

C

C

C

P

C

P

P

Photo Development

---

---

---

---

P

P

P

Post Office

---

---

---

C

C

P

P

Residential—detached

P

P

P

---

---

C

---

Residential—attached

---

P

P

---

---

C

---

Restaurants—sit down

---

---

---

---

P

P

C

Restaurants—drive-through

---

---

---

---

C

---

---

Retail and Service Businesses

---

---

---

---

P

P

C

Schools—private

C

C

C

C

---

---

---

Supermarket

---

---

---

---

P

P

---

Utility Buildings and Facilities

C

C

C

C

---

---

---

Vehicle Sales, Leasing and Rentals

---

---

---

---

P

P

C

Vehicle Repair

---

---

---

---

C

C

---

Veterinary Services

---

---

---

---

C

C

C

Notes:

1      Stand-alone auto fueling and auto service stations are conditionally permitted; auto fueling stations that are accessory uses to an anchor retailer as the principal use are permitted.

 

     For any uses not specifically listed above, the director of community development shall make a determination as to whether it shall be permitted, conditionally permitted or prohibited in the planning area. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 899 § 2, 2012; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.456.003 Zoning regulations and other standards for development.
 

STANDARD

LDR

MDR

HDR

PARK/O.S./PUBLIC FACILITY

REGIONAL COMMERCIAL

OFFICE COMMERCIAL

Avg. Density per Land Use (DU/AC)

3.5

8.4

14.7

-

-

-

Min. Lot Size (lot sizes per PA vary)

6,000

4,000

5.0 AC

5.0 AC

5,000 SF

5,000 SF

Max. building height (feet/ stories)

35/2

35/2

36/3

-

50/3(10)

60/4

Min. lot width (feet)

60(7)

45

100

no min.

no min.

no min.

Min. lot depth (feet)

80

80

no min.

no min.

no min.

no min.

Min. front yard required (8)

20/10 side entry garages

20(9)

20(4)

no min.

-

-

Min. side yard required (feet) (ten feet minimum on all corner lots)

5/15 total

5/12(3)

10

-

10

10

Minimum rear yard required (feet)

20

20

(5)

-

(6)

(6)

Min. width at culs and knuckles

30

30

-

-

-

-

Notes:

1.     (-) not applicable

2.

3.     Zero lot lines are permitted so long as minimum distance between buildings is ten feet.

4.     Front yard setback shall be fully landscaped.

5.     Rear yard setback shall be twenty feet, with a minimum five feet of landscaping at the property line. Where the rear yard faces a street, a minimum setback of ten feet, fully landscaped, shall be required.

6.     Where the rear yard adjoins a street, the minimum setback shall be twenty-five feet, fully landscaped. Where the rear yard abuts a residential property line, the setback shall be fifty feet, of which a minimum of twenty feet shall be landscaped adjacent to the property line.

7.     Where side entry garages are proposed, minimum lot widths may be reduced to fifty-five feet.

8.     Setback shall be measured from the property line.

9.     Porches require a minimum ten feet setback in the front yard.

10.   Maximum building height for hotels is sixty feet per four stories. For all other uses, maximum building heights are as stated in the table.

 

(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.456.004 Overall residential densities and total allowed units.
     In no case shall residential densities or total permitted units per planning area exceed ten percent over the number shown below, neither shall the total units of the project area exceed one thousand two hundred thirty-four total units, so long as the density does not exceed the maximum permitted under the zoning category. Total units permitted by planning area and average density shall be determined as follows:

 

Area

Designation

Acreage

Avg. Density

Total Units

Min. Lot Size

PA 7

High Density

7.0

15.7

110

--

PA 11

High Density

11.5

14.1

163

 

 

Subtotal

18.5 ac.

15.6/AC

273

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PA 6

Medium Density

26.0

9.6

255

Attached

PA 10

Medium Density

12.7

10.1

129

Attached

PA 15

Medium Density

15.0

6.2

93

4,000 SF

PA 21

Medium Density

9.5

6.5

69

4,000 SF

 

Subtotal

63.2 ac.

8.6/AC

546.0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PA 5

Low Density

13.5

3.4

47

7,000 SF

PA 9

Low Density

13.0

3.9

51

5,000 SF

PA 16

Low Density

25.0

3.8

97

6,000 SF

PA 17

Low Density

40.0

3.8

152

6,000 SF

PA 18

Low Density

125.0

1.7

22

10,000 SF

PA 20

Low Density

7.0

3.7

26

8,000 SF

PA 22

Low Density

75.0

2.6

20

8,000 SF

 

Subtotal

118.5 ac.

3.5/AC

415.0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Residential

 

200.2 net acres

 

 

1,234 DUs

 

(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.456.005 Regulations for all areas.
     A.    Except as otherwise specified in regulations with this document, development of the PD-6 zone shall be in accordance with existing city standards as contained in Brentwood Municipal Code Chapters 17.200 through 17.300.

     B.     Lot sizes may vary with each planning area so long as minimum requirements contained in the zoning and development standards of this title are satisfied and the total number of units per planning area is not exceeded.

     C.     Development applications within all planning areas shall comply with the Brentwood Municipal Code in respect to development and performance standards, landscaping and screening, parking, signage, lighting and design and site development review.

     D.    Residential development adjacent to planning area four, Neighborhood Park and Sand Creek Regional Trail, must include a solid masonry wall and/or a view fence of consistent design treatment where backyard or side yard conditions abut the open space area. As an alternative, streets may also front on the open space area.

     E.     Where the Sand Creek Regional Trail crosses any streets, at grade crossings may occur provided signage, striping and other appropriate traffic control devices are installed.

     F.     Improvements and conveyance of land for the purposes of implementing the Sand Creek Regional Trail shall be in accordance with the city’s adopted trails master plan.

     G.    Minor modifications to planning area boundaries may be approved by the director of community development.

     H.    Development applications, such as subdivision maps, which incorporate common areas shall be accompanied by landscape plans for the common area.

     I.      Prior to final map approval of the first implementing subdivision map, a concept plan shall be prepared and submitted to the city showing designs, location, size, materials, colors and appearance for all entry monumentation and landscaping, including city entry signage.

     J.      The development area shall include a total of ten usable acres of neighborhood park area, the payment of in lieu fees, or a combination thereof, as required by the city’s park master plan. Park sizes, locations and configurations in the land use plan are deemed acceptable. Facilities to be included in each park shall be in conformance with the city’s parks master plan.

     K.    Should an offer of dedication of land for park purposes be not accepted by the city, the applicant shall establish a permanent master maintenance organization, acceptable to the city, to assume ownership and maintenance responsibility for all common areas. The organization may be public or private, or a combination of both.

     L.     Planning areas seven and eleven are designated as a candidate site for an affordable housing project, in accordance with the city’s housing element of the general plan. A minimum five-acre site within one of these two areas will be reserved for city acquisition to insure the provision of housing to meet the city’s needs for elderly, disabled, and lower income households.

     M.    Potential park and ride sites are designated for planning areas one, two, three and eighteen. The community park could also satisfy the need for a park and ride site. A park and ride lot will vary between one half to one acre in size and typically include twenty to thirty spaces that are clearly set aside for that purpose, although they may also be shared with office, commercial, worship center and/or other institutional or park uses. When shared, park and ride lots should be located so as to not interfere with normal business operations of adjacent uses. As SPA “D” is subdivided and/or projects are developed, a more precise location for park and ride lots will be determined.

     N.    Bus turnouts shall be provided at major intersection locations to accommodate future bus service in the area. As development is proposed, project plans will be reviewed by Tri-Delta Transit to insure appropriate design and location of bus turnouts and bus shelters.

     O.    In accordance with the city’s community design policy of minimizing the use of soundwalls along thoroughfares, developments within SPA “D” should be designed with a combination of earth berms, extensive landscaping, decorative wall features, stepped wall patterns, and other design features aimed at minimizing the visual impact of the soundwall.

     P.     Where lots back up to major thoroughfares, rear yard architectural elevations should be designed with enhanced window trim and other features such as balconies and trellises to provide greater articulation and variety. If possible, mixing hip and gable roof forms and one and two story elevations is encouraged. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.456.006 Map for PD-6.
 



(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 996 § 2, 2018; Ord. 960 § 4, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.457 PD-7 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SEVEN) ZONE
17.457.001 Authority and purpose.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-7 (planned development seven) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-7 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-7 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of single-family detached homes in accordance with the Brentwood general plan. The boundary of the PD-7 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.457.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.457.002 Permitted uses.
     Permitted uses in the PD-7 zone are those permitted under R-1 (single-family residential) zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.457.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in the R-1 zoning district in Title 17, which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.457.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height, and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the planned development zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Seven thousand five hundred square feet

     B.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet.

     C.     Minimum lot width: Sixty-five feet.

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Thirty-five feet.

     E.     Minimum side yard: Five feet; sum of both sides, fifteen feet.

     F.     Minimum rear yard: Twenty feet.

     G.    Maximum building height limit: No main building shall exceed the height of two stories and thirty feet.

     H.    Exceptions:

     1.     Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.457.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     B.     Off street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     F.     The development of the zone district shall be substantially in accord with the development plan and related exhibits.

     G.    Maximum number of dwelling units shall be seventy-two.

     H.    The parking and storage of boats, trailers, and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     I.      Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     J.      Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     K.    The development of the zone district shall be substantially in accord with the development plan and related exhibits.

     L.     Variations in the development plan including street and lot pattern may be approved through the subdivision map process.

     M.    Lots 3, 4, 10, 11, 23, 24 and 30 shall be single story. A minimum of fifty percent of the homes abutting Fairview Avenue and Balfour Road shall be single story. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.457.006 Map for PD-7.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.458 PD-8 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT EIGHT) ZONE
17.458.001 Authority and purpose.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of PD-8 (planned development eight) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-8 (planned development eight) zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-8 (planned development eight) zone is to permit and regulate the development of single-family detached homes and public uses in accordance with the Brentwood general plan. The boundary of the PD-8 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.458.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.458.002 Permitted uses.
     Permitted uses in PD-8 zone are those uses permitted in the R-1 zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.458.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in the R-1 zoning district in Title 17, which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by this city. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.458.004 Regulation for lot area, density, yards, height, and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the planned development eight zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Five thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Fifty-five feet;

     C.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet. At the time of design review, alternate front yard set back may be approved as follows:

     1.     The minimum front yard setback shall be eighteen feet, provided the average front yard setback from each block face shall not be less than twenty feet;

     2.     Notwithstanding subsection (C)(1) of this section, the distance from a garage door to the sidewalk shall not be less than twenty feet,

     3.     Covered entries and other similar features may project to within fifteen feet of the front property line provided the setback of the wall plane of the dwelling is a minimum of eighteen feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: One-half the required lot width;

     E.     Minimum side yard: Minimum five feet, sum of both sides - fifteen feet;

     F.     Minimum rear yard: The minimum back yard setback shall be twenty feet with the exception to lots abutting Balfour Road, which shall be a minimum of eighteen;

     G.    Maximum building height limit: No main building shall exceed thirty feet in height;

     H.    Exceptions:

     1.     The lot width for lots on culs-de-sac, curvilinear streets, etc. shall be measured thirty feet from the front property line,

     2.     Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.458.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers, and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     F.     The development of the PD-8 zone district shall be substantially in accord with the development plan and related exhibits.

     G.    The maximum number of dwelling units shall be one hundred ninety-seven.

     H.    Variations in the development plan (including street and lot pattern) may be approved through the subdivision map process. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.458.006 Map for PD-8.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.459 PD-9 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT NINE) ZONE
17.459.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-9 (planned development nine) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-9 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-9 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the area shown on the development plan and related exhibits, in accordance with the Brentwood general plan.

     C.     Intent. The zoning district is intended to provide a neighborhood of single-family houses on minimum thirteen thousand square foot lots in conformance with the Brentwood general plan. The boundary of the PD-9 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.459.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.459.002 Permitted uses.
     The permitted uses in the PD-9 zone are those uses permitted within the R-1-E (single-family residential estate) zoning district in Title 17, except the “parks and playgrounds” are added as permitted uses. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.459.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830, those uses identified as conditionally permitted uses in the R-1-E (single-family residential estate) zoning district in Title 17, may be permitted in the PD-9 zone. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

17.459.004 General development standards.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Minimum lot area: thirteen thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: ninety feet;

     C.     Minimum front yard: twenty feet;

     D.    Minimum side yard: ten feet; the sum of both side yards, twenty-five feet except as provided for in subsection (F)(2) of this section;

     E.     Minimum rear yard: thirty feet;

     F.     Exceptions:

     1.     Cul-de-sac lots or lots on curvilinear streets shall have a width of not less than eighty feet measured thirty feet from the front property line and no less than forty foot width at the front property line,

     2.     Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of fifteen feet;

     G.    Maximum building height: no main building shall exceed the height of two stories and thirty-five feet and accessory buildings shall not exceed one story and fifteen feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.459.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Section 17.100.003.

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     F.     All housing units shall comply with the single-family residential design criteria identified in Section 17.100.004.

     G.    Development shall be substantially in accordance with the development plan and related exhibits.

     H.    Maximum number of dwelling units shall be one hundred twenty-seven.

     I.      Minor variations in the development plan may be approved through the subdivision map process. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.459.006 Map for PD-9.
 



(Ord. 960 § 5, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.460 PD-10 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT TEN) ZONE
17.460.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-10 (planned development ten) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-10 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-10 zone is to permit and regulate the development of that portion of the Planned Employment Center/Specific Plan Area No. One as designated by the city community development plan and area designated as commercial/manufacturing/residential by the redevelopment plan for the Brentwood redevelopment project, which is encompassed by the Brentwood TownCentre master plan.

     C.     Intent. It is intended that in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-10 zone of implementing the development of a planned employment center in conformance with the Brentwood community development plan and redevelopment plan and in accordance with the Brentwood TownCentre master plan, said zone shall be divided into five subareas as geographically designated on the development plan and related exhibits and as further described below. The primary character of the area is intended to be a mix of commercial, office and residential uses. Light industrial and service uses may be allowed, provided that they are found compatible with the primary uses. The boundaries of the PD-10 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.460.007.

     1.     Subarea A consists of approximately 12.2 net acres intended for the development of an approximate one hundred thirty thousand square foot commercial shopping center to serve the everyday shopping needs of the Brentwood community. The shopping center will provide for the development of a major retail food store, drugstore, convenience and service retail uses, restaurants, banks and other such uses typically provided for within a neighborhood or community shopping center;

     2.     Subarea B consists of approximately ten net acres intended for the development of approximately one hundred thirty thousand square feet of light industrial uses, heavy commercial uses, service and convenience retail uses; and an approximate eighty thousand square foot self-storage facility and similar compatible uses to serve the needs of the Brentwood community;

     3.     Subarea C consists of approximately 6.1 net acres intended for the development of a mixture of approximately thirty-five thousand to seventy-five thousand square feet of commercial, and/or up to one hundred twenty-three (or greater with density bonus in accordance with Government Code Section 65915 et. seq.) high-density residential units generally consistent with the intent of the high density multifamily residential (R-3) and/or the commercial residential (CR) zone, Chapters 17.150 and/or 17.240. Prior to the issuance of building permits for those units to be constructed in Area C3 as shown on the development plan and related exhibits, the developer and the city shall enter into an agreement for the realignment, design, financing and reconstruction of Central Boulevard at the approximate intersection with Second Street. The purpose of this realignment is to increase existing radii and site distances thereby improving traffic and intersection characteristics and improving vehicular travel speeds;

     4.     Subarea D consists of approximately 5.53 net acres intended for the development of up to one hundred ten high-density residential dwelling units generally consistent with the high-density, multifamily residential (R-3) zone, Chapter 17.150;

     5.     Subarea E consists of approximately 5.7 net acres intended for the development of approximately eighty-five thousand square feet of administrative and professional offices and related uses to serve the office needs of the Brentwood community and/or for the expansion of existing contiguous office, commercial or auto sales facilities. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.460.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-10 zone:

     A.    Subarea A. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     General retail sales (excluding uses without outdoor storage or display), financial institutions, professional offices uses; veterinarian or pet store (excluding kennels), supermarket and drugstores;

     2.     Service uses including, but not limited to, banks, addressing and mailing service, appliance, television and radio repair; barber or beauty shop; butcher, meat market, including frozen food locker; shoe repair, laundromat, dry cleaners and similar uses;

     3.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator.

     B.     Subarea B. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Commercial uses or retail sales including, but not limited to, auto rental, leasing or sales, auto service and repair facility, boat and recreational vehicle sales, service and repair facility, parts and accessory store, home improvement, garden supply or nursery, factory outlet retail facilities and similar retail uses requiring or best suited for operation within a warehouse-type facility, commercial uses which may or may not manufacture their primary product on the premises such as drapery shop, cabinet shop, upholstery shop, veterinary clinic, kennel and similar uses;

     2.     Business services such as laundry, dry cleaning, automotive repair or service establishments such as electronic, clock or watch repair, small equipment rental or repair, health club, reducing studio, recreation club and similar facilities;

     3.     Office uses which are supplementary to industrial, business or commercial uses, public and quasi-public offices such as government offices, employment office, or utility office;

     4.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator.

     C.     Subarea C. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Commercial uses or services such as beauty shop, barber shop, shoe repair, laundromat, community or residential care facility, convenience retail uses such as bakery, pastry shop, bookstore, candy or ice cream store, apparel and accessory store, stationery store, drugstore or pharmacy, food store and similar establishments;

     2.     Business and professional offices such as architects, attorneys, accountants, engineers, insurance agency, real estate and similar professional and general business offices;

     3.     Financial institutions;

     4.     Residential uses consisting of apartments, condominiums or townhomes at a density of twenty units per acre;

     5.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator.

     D.    Subarea D. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Apartments, condominiums, townhouses and attached single-family homes not exceeding a density of sixteen dwelling units per gross acre;

     2.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     3.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     4.     Temporary uses related to the primary use subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Section 17.850;

     5.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840.

     E.     Subarea E. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Business and professional offices such as architects, attorneys, accountants, engineers, insurance agencies, real estate, medical, dental, dental laboratory, optical and other professional and general business offices;

     2.     Financial institutions;

     3.     Addressing and mailing service, blueprinting and photostating service (other than a printer or lithographer), drafting service, messenger service, stenographic service, telegraph office, answering service, private postal box service, travel agency and similar services typically associated with administrative and professional offices;

     4.     Public and quasi-public offices such as government offices, library, employment office, utility offices and similar uses;

     5.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.460.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830, the following uses are permitted in the PD-10 zone:

     A.    Subarea A. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     On- or off-sale liquor establishments, recreation services such as bowling alley, skating rink and similar uses;

     2.     All drive-in, drive-through establishments, building materials, garden supply, outdoor sales or display;

     3.     Restaurants;

     4.     Other uses that the zoning administrator determines, because of type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure.

     B.     Subarea B. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Manufacture of food products, pharmaceuticals and similar products excluding the production of fish or meat products or similar products that create excessive sewage or odor problems;

     2.     Light metal fabrication, machine shops, small welding shop, small assembly, printing shop, contractor storage yard, lumber yard and similar light industrial uses which generate minimal noise, smoke, waste material, etc.;

     3.     Self-service storage facilities (mini-storage or warehouses) with or without resident manager dwelling unit, outdoor storage uses;

     4.     All drive-in, drive-through establishments and all on- and off-sale liquor facilities;

     5.     Churches;

     6.     Other uses that the zoning administrator determines because of the type of operation, material stored or sold or other special circumstances requiring special consideration and conditioning through the conditional use permit procedure.

     C.     Subarea C. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Medical or dental laboratories, medical or dental office or clinic, funeral services and crematorium;

     2.     Liquor establishments, restaurants, health club, reducing studio, recreational club, drive-in or drive-through establishments related to a permitted use;

     3.     Residential projects requesting a density bonus in accordance with city and state guidelines and regulations;

     4.     Community or large residential care and day care facilities subject to locational criteria adopted by the planning commission of the city.

     D.    Subarea D. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Residential projects with a density exceeding sixteen dwelling units per gross acre; however, no project shall exceed the maximum density of twenty dwelling units per gross acre;

     2.     Residential projects requesting a density bonus in accordance with city and state guidelines and regulations;

     3.     Public facilities including parks, playgrounds, public schools and other public buildings;

     4.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     5.     Community buildings, clubs and activities of quasi-public, social, fraternal or recreational character such as golf, tennis and swimming clubs intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residential project;

     6.     Community or large residential care and day care facilities subject to locational criteria adopted by the planning commission of the city;

     7.     Duplexes and triplexes.

     E.     Subarea E. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Public and quasi-public uses appropriate to and compatible with the area such as hospitals, medical laboratory, outpatient care facility, convalescent hospitals, business and technical schools;

     2.     Health club, reducing studio, recreational club, restaurant/lounge, and similar uses;

 

     3.     Funeral services, mortuary, crematorium, drug store or pharmacy associated with medical uses, drive-in or drive-through use related to a permitted use in the zone, excluding drive-in or drive-through restaurants.

     F.     Subarea E-1. The expansion of existing contiguous commercial or auto sales facilities shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.460.004 Development standards for subareas A, B, C, D and E.
     A.    All nonresidential permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within subareas A, B, C and E shall conform to the development standard set forth as follows:

 

Non-Residential Uses

Area

A

B

C

E and E-1

Minimum lot area

15,000 sf

10,000 sf

6/ac unless Master Plan approved, then 10,000 sf

10,000 sf

Minimum lot width

100 ft.

50 ft.

50 ft.

100 ft.

Public street frontage setback

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

Nonpublic street frontage setback

0 ft.

0 ft., but 10 ft. up to 2 stories, 5 ft. ea. additional story if abutting residential

10 ft., 5 ft. additional for each story over one, if abutting residential

10 ft., 0 ft. if within or contiguous to subarea E-1

Maximum height*

2 stories, 35′

2 stories, 35′

2 stories, 35′

2 stories, 35′

Average. floor area ratio for subarea**

1:4

1:2

1:4

1:3

 

Notes:

*      Structures greater than two stories or thirty-five feet may be permitted, subject to conditional use permit approval.

**    Greater floor area ratios may be approved by conditional use permit.

 

     Other development standards:

     1.     Refuse Disposal Enclosure. All facilities shall provide masonry refuse disposal enclosures to city standards and specifications;

     2.     Illumination of Parking Facilities and Structures. All facilities shall provide adequate lighting or illumination of parking facilities and structures pursuant to Chapter 17.620;

     3.     Parking Lot Design and Development Standards. All facilities shall comply with the design and development standards of Chapter 17.620;

     4.     Open Storage or Display. Open storage and/or outdoor display of merchandise is prohibited in the commercial zones unless expressly provided for in an individual zone by a conditional use permit;

     5.     Open Storage or Display: Area E1. Open storage or display of new or used vehicles shall be allowed within area E1. The expansion of auto-related uses into the E1 area shall give the appearance of a parking lot rather than an auto repair/body shop area;

     6.     Advertising Signs. All signs shall be subject to Chapter 17.640 and the Brentwood TownCentre master sign program;

     7.     Landscaping and Screening—Areas A, B, C and D. All facilities constructed before September 10, 1991 or constructed pursuant to city approval granted before September 10, 1991 shall provide landscaping and screening in accordance with Chapter 17.630. All facilities approved after September 10, 1991 shall provide landscaping and screening in accordance with Chapter 17.630, except as follows: the minimum width of landscaping along a public street shall be twenty feet; the average width of landscaping for each parcel shall be twenty-five feet. The width shall be measured from face of curb to the edge of a building or parking lot. A public sidewalk shall be included within the required width;

     8.     Landscaping and Screening: Areas E and E1. A ten-foot wide landscape buffer shall be incorporated along the boundary line separating the E and E1 areas. Plantings within this buffer shall consist of those items which will create an opaque screen so as to visually separate the uses on the area E and E1 properties. This ten-foot area may be totally on one property or the other or it may straddle the line created between the areas. A block wall a minimum of six feet in height shall be constructed within this ten-foot landscaped area to assist in the screening process;

     9.     Yards. All required yards shall be utilized for landscaping only, except for access drives to the property. Architectural features may project in to any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660;

     10.   Accessory structures and buildings shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660;

     11.   Security Measures. All facilities shall provide security measures in accordance with city standards and subject to design review;

     12.   Energy Conservation. All facilities shall, to the greatest extent possible, incorporate energy conservation measures in conformance with city standards and subject to design review;

     13.   Manufacturing and Storage Areas. All manufacturing processes shall be within a structure and all open storage areas shall be screened with a minimum six-foot high view-obscuring fence. No storage shall exceed the height of the fence. Masonry walls shall be utilized for screening areas visible from a public street while chain link with view-obscuring slats or other fencing materials, other than wood, may be used for screening areas not visible from a public street.

     B.     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within subarea D and residential uses developed within subarea C shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     1.     Minimum lot area: one acre except that a master planned project, approved by the city with a conditional use permit, may be subdivided into parcels having a minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: seventy-five feet;

     3.     Minimum front yard: ten feet;

     4.     Minimum side yards: five feet; sum of both sides: fifteen feet;

     5.     Minimum rear yard: twenty feet. Corner lots shall maintain a side yard on the street side of ten feet;

     6.     Maximum allowable density: The maximum density shall be twenty dwelling units per gross acre;

     7.     Maximum building height limit: three stories, not to exceed thirty-six feet;

     8.     Parking: parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620.007;

     9.     Usable open space: residential projects shall provide and maintain private and shared open space equivalent to forty-five percent of the net lot area excluding all parking and access driveways;

     10.   The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016;

     11.   Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660;

     12.   Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.460.005 Performance standards for subareas A, B, C and E.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within subareas, A, B, C and E shall conform to the performance standards set forth below:

     A.    Noise.

     1.     At the property line, the maximum sound pressure level radiated by listed uses or facilities shall not exceed the following values:

     Industrial and warehouse—75 dBA

     Retail, commercial, office, schools—65 dBA;

     2.     The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer conforming to the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association;

     3.     American Standards Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, Z224. 3-1994, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, NY, and American Standard Specification for an Octave-Bank Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, Z224.10-1953, or latest approved revision thereof, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, NY, shall be used.

     B.     Heat, Glare and Humidity.

     1.     Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines;

     2.     Any operation or activity producing glare shall be performed within a completely enclosed building and be conducted so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one foot candle when measured at the lot line. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded and flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled so as not to cause a nuisance across lot lines;

     3.     Any use producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat, shall be carried on in such a manner that steam, humidity or heat is not perceptible at any lot line.

     C.     Vibration. Any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any point along the property line of the subject use, earth-borne vibrations which are discernible without the use of instruments is prohibited.

     D.    Fire, Safety and Explosion. All uses shall provide adequate safety devices against fire, explosion and other hazards and adequate firefighting and fire-suppression equipment in compliance with applicable fire prevention and building codes.

     E.     Soundproofing. Offices, retail activities and other acoustically-sensitive activities shall be designed so that interior noise levels due to exterior noise sources do not exceed the peak hour Leq 55 dBA.

     F.     Solid and Liquid Waste.

     1.     No discharge at any point into public sewer, stream or bay or into the ground shall be permitted, except in accord with the standards approved by the state department of health, or standards specified in applicable local ordinances for similar uses of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements;

     2.     No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any property in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the property by natural causes or forces;

     3.     Any wastes which might be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers.

     G.    Electrical and Radioactive Radiation. No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, electrical disturbances adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.

     H.    Air Pollution. All uses shall comply with regulations of the San Francisco Bay Area Air Pollution Control District.

     1.     Smoke. For the purpose of determining the density or equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines in Circular No. 7718 (August, 1955) shall be employed. The emission of smoke from any chimney, stack, vent, opening or combustion process shall not exceed Ringlemann No. 1;

     2.     Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the property line of the subject use;

     3.     Toxic and Noxious Matter. No use shall be permitted which creates any emission which endangers human health, can cause damage to animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause soiling at any point beyond the boundaries of the site. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.460.006 Design and site development review.
     The design and site development review procedure contained in Chapter 17.820 shall apply to the development of the Brentwood TownCentre. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.460.007 Map for PD-10.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.461 PD-11 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ELEVEN) ZONE
17.461.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-11 (planned development eleven) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-11 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-11 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of 5.18 acres located generally between Sycamore Avenue and Spruce Street, east of Brentwood Boulevard, with high-density residential uses in accordance with the Brentwood general plan, for a maximum of sixty-six lots.

     C.     Intent. The intent of creating the PD-11 zone is to ensure the coordinated development of the entire property in order to minimize impacts on adjacent areas, while providing for needed housing. The boundary of the PD-11 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.461.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.461.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the PD-11 zone:

     A.    Single-family dwelling units not exceeding a density of 12.7 units per gross acre for a maximum of sixty-six units;

     B.     Parks, playgrounds, and recreational trails; and

     C.     Those uses permitted under the R-1 zone, Section 17.130.002 of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.461.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are conditionally permitted in the PD-11 zone:

     A.    Those uses conditionally permitted under the R-1 zone, Section 17.130.003 of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.461.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within the PD-11 zone shall comply with the following regulations:

     A.    Minimum lot area: One thousand eight hundred eighty-five square feet.

     B.     Minimum lot width: Twenty-eight feet.

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Sixty-seven feet.

     D.    Minimum front yard setback: Nine feet for living space and three feet for porches.

     E.     Minimum side yard setback: Three feet; except that corner lots on the street side shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of five feet to living space and porches.

     F.     Minimum rear yard setback: Five feet for garages.

     G.    Maximum building height: Two stories and thirty-five feet.

     H.    Maximum lot coverage: Sixty percent.

     I.      Maximum number of units: Sixty-six. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.461.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660, with the exception that no feature may project into the minimum front yard setback.

     F.     The development of the PD-11 zone shall be substantially in accordance with the approved development plan. Variations in the development plan, including street and lot pattern, may be approved through the subdivision map process. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.461.006 Map for PD-11.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.462 PD-12 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT TWELVE) ZONE
17.462.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose, and intent for the adoption of the PD-12 (planned development twelve) zone is as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-12 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-12 zone is to permit and regulate development of a portion of the planned development/specific plan area No. 3 as designated by the city of Brentwood general plan and planned employment as designated by the Brentwood redevelopment plan.

     C.     Intent. In order to achieve the purpose of the PD-12 zone in implementing the development of a planned employment center in accordance with the city’s general and redevelopment plan, such zone district shall be divided into three subareas as designated on the development plan and related exhibits and as further described in this chapter. The primary uses intended for this area shall consist of thoroughfare commercial, commercial office and industrial commercial land uses. The boundaries of the PD-12 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.462.006.

     1.     Subarea A consists of 16.01 net acres intended for thoroughfare and general commercial uses. This area would provide for the development of automotive, retail, restaurants and other such uses which cater to the use of the automobile.

     2.     Subarea B consists of 5.87 net acres intended for commercial-office and a limited amount of light industrial uses. This area would also provide for commercial uses which are supplementary to light industrial uses, certain light industrial uses and office uses.

     3.     Subarea C consists of 47.88 net acres intended for industrial-commercial uses. This area would provide for automotive, storage, lumber yards and light industrial uses. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.462.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-12 zone:

     A.    Subarea A. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     General retail sales, professional office uses; veterinarian or pet store, excluding kennels;

     2.     Service uses including but not limited to, addressing and mailing service; appliance, television and radio repair; barber or beauty shop; butcher, meat market, including frozen food locker; shoe repair, laundromat, dry cleaners and similar uses;

     3.     Hotel, auto sales, boat sales, parts and accessory store, camper or recreational vehicle sales, mobile or manufactured housing sales, home improvement center with or without lumber sales, garden supply store or nursery and similar uses involving outdoor sales subject to design controls;

     4.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator.

     B.     Subarea B. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Business and professional offices such as architects, attorneys, accountants, engineers, insurance agencies, real estate, medical, dental, optical and other professional and general business offices;

     2.     Financial offices, including banks, savings and loans and mortgage companies but excluding drive-in and drive-through facilities;

     3.     Business services such as laundry, dry cleaning or service establishments such as electronic, clock, watch repair, health club, reducing studio, recreational club and similar uses;

     4.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator.

     C.     Subarea C. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Light industrial uses which generate minimal noise, odor, smoke, waste material, and similar items which may negatively impact the environment are permitted. Such uses include small assembly plants, printing establishments, contractor storage yards and similar uses;

     2.     Business services such as laundry, dry cleaning, automotive repair or service establishments such as electronic, clock or watch repair, small equipment repair, small welding shop and similar facilities;

     3.     Commercial uses which may or may not manufacture their product on the premises such as drapery shop, cabinet shop, upholstery shop and similar uses;

     4.     Business and professional office uses;

     5.     Warehouse, distribution and wholesale;

     6.     Research and development space which includes office, support, light industrial and warehouse/research areas (flex tech);

     7.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.462.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are conditionally permitted only on the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Subarea A. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Auto service station, auto repair (tires, brakes, etc. but excluding auto body), car wash, auto rental and leasing agency, all on and off-sale liquor facilities, card and gaming room, dance hall, bowling alleys and similar commercial recreational uses, restaurants, new and used equipment rental, hospital, truck and trailer rental, vocational or trade school;

     2.     All drive-in, drive-through establishments;

     3.     Public and quasi-public uses;

     4.     Other uses that the zoning administrator determines, because of the type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances, requires special consideration and conditioning through the conditional use permit process.

     B.     Subarea B. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Retail-commercial uses which may or may not manufacture their primary product on the premises and are supplementary to the main use on the property such as a drapery shop, carpet shop, upholstery shop, and similar uses;

     2.     Office uses which are supplementary to an industrial, business, or commercial use permitted within subarea B;

     3.     Financial institutions when less than three such uses are located in the CB district, at the time of application for a discretionary approval by the city or, if no discretionary approval is needed, at the time of initial nondiscretionary approval, e.g., building permit or certificate of occupancy;

     4.     Self-service storage facilities (mini-storage or warehouse);

     5.     Light industrial and warehouse uses which have no outdoor storage or activities;

     6.     Public and quasi-public uses;

     7.     Churches as temporary uses to be located in existing buildings.

     C.     Subarea C. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Manufacture of food products, pharmaceutical, and similar products, excluding the production of fish or meat products or similar products that create excessive sewage or odor problems;

     2.     Retail-sales which are accessory to a permitted or conditionally permitted use within this subarea;

     3.     Light metal fabrication, machine shops, and similar uses;

     4.     Self-service storage facilities (mini-storage or warehouses);

     5.     Home improvement center with or without lumber sales, garden supply store, nursery or lumberyard;

     6.     Public and quasi-public uses;

     7.     Other uses that the zoning administrator determines because of the type of operation, material stored or sold or other special circumstance requiring special consideration and conditioning through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.462.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to all subareas as described below:

     A.    Subarea A.

     1.     Minimum lot area shall be one acre unless a master plan is approved, then minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum lot width shall be one hundred feet.

     3.     Minimum street frontage yard shall be twenty feet unless a residentially zoned parcel is located in the same block, then the setback shall be seventy-five percent of the setback for the residential zone, but not less than twenty feet.

     4.     Minimum non-street frontage yard shall be zero feet except that the minimum building setback from a residential zone shall be forty feet.

     5.     Maximum building height permitted in sub-area A shall be three stories not to exceed forty feet in height.

     B.     Subarea B.

     1.     Minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum lot width shall be one hundred feet.

     3.     Minimum street frontage yard shall be ten feet.

     4.     Minimum non-street frontage yard shall be zero feet except that the minimum building setback from a residential zone district shall be forty feet.

     5.     Maximum building height shall be one story not to exceed twenty-four feet. A two-story building not exceeding thirty feet may be permitted subject to conditional use permit approval.

     C.     Subarea C.

     1.     Minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum street frontage yard is ten feet.

     3.     Minimum non-street frontage yard is zero feet.

     4.     Maximum building height is two stories not to exceed thirty feet. Buildings greater than two stories and thirty feet in height may be permitted subject to conditional use permit approval. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.462.005 Other regulations.
     A.    All development and performance standards within subareas A and B shall comply with Chapter 17.200.

     B.     All development and performance standards within subarea C shall comply with Chapter 17.300.

     C.     Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620.

     D.    Landscaping and screening shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.630 except as follows:

     1.     The minimum width of landscaping along Brentwood Boulevard (Highway 4), Balfour Road, and Fairview Parkway shall be twenty feet with an average of twenty-five feet. The minimum width of landscaping along Harvest Park Drive within subarea A only shall be fifteen feet and an average of twenty feet. The width shall be measured from the face of curb to the edge of a building or parking lot. A public sidewalk shall be included within this required width.

     2.     At the time of development, landscaping shall be installed along any property line abutting a residential zone district. The required landscaping shall consist of the following:

     a.     Minimum width of the landscaped area shall be five feet; exclusive of any vehicle overhang;

     b.     Landscape fingers or tree wells perpendicular to the perimeter landscaping shall be provided no more than forty feet apart;

     c.     Evergreen trees shall be planted in areas (a) and (b) such that a visual screen is created.

     E.     Design and site development review of all new structures within each subarea shall comply with Chapter 17.820.

     F.     Within subareas A, B, and C, the minimum lot area shall not apply under the following circumstances:

     1.     Subdivision map would create lots for condominium units for industrial or commercial uses and the area of the map is twenty thousand square feet;

     2.     Parking driveways, landscaping and other facilities are owned in common and maintained by an association. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.462.006 Map for PD-12.
 



(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 997 § 2, 2018; Ord. 960 § 6, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.463 PD-13 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT THIRTEEN) ZONE
17.463.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-13 (planned development thirteen) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-13 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of this code.

     B.     Purpose and Intent. The purpose of the PD-13 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the Balfour South and Gerry properties. Opportunities include providing a landscape/open space buffer along Sellers Avenue to Mount Diablo, providing a pedestrian oriented environment within the proximity of the downtown area, and providing a distinctive edge for the city. Constraints include the need to provide major infrastructure improvements such as drainage and sewer and ensuring that the residential development is compatible with the industrial park to the west and the agricultural uses to the east and south. The boundary of the PD-13 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.463.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.463.002 General requirements.
     The following general standards apply to PD-13:

     A.    Subareas. PD-13 has been divided into separate areas based on land use. These include residential, parks, detention basin/open space, and street rights-of-way. The areas are indicated in the chart below. Street rights-of-way only includes Guthrie Lane, Balfour Road and Sellers Avenue. Local streets would be included in the residential acreage.

 

Land Use

Acres

Max. Density

Max. Units

Gerry Property

20.4

6.0 du/ac

122.40

Balfour South property

4.85

6.0 du/ac

29.10

Parks*

1.50

 

 

Detention/open space

2.90

 

 

Road right-of-way

3.80

 

 

Totals

33.45

 

151.00

*      The acreage for the park is indicated as a minimum acreage. The exact size, dimensions and location will be determined through the use permit process.

 

     B.     Master Plan. Through the use permit process, a master land use plan shall be approved by the planning commission prior to submittal for a tentative map or design review. The master plan shall include, but not be limited to, identifying the various land uses, the location and approximate dimensions of the park areas, the dimension and design of the open space areas, and the lot sizes. Staff and the planning commission may ask for additional information that will help in determining the approximate development of the property.

     C.     Density. The maximum unit count and overall density of six units per acre may not be exceeded for each property within the planned development. The density of any one product may go up to ten units per acre, provided that the average density for the property is not exceeded. The maximum unit for the entire planned development shall not exceed one hundred fifty-one units. There shall be no transfer of density between properties.

     D.    Unit Count. Through approval of a master plan, tentative map or other discretionary action, the city may approve residential projects at less than the maximum allowable density due to such reasons as:

     1.     Avoid or reduce significant environmental effects as identified in an environmental impact report;

     2.     Achieve compliance with objectives and policies of the general plan;

     3.     Certain characteristics of a property such as topography, utility easements, shape or other items which restrict the amount of development;

     4.     Aesthetic or site planning considerations which will improve the quality of the development or increase its compatibility with adjacent land uses; or

     5.     Compliance with the development regulations, or standards.

     E.     CC&Rs. CC&Rs shall be provided for all properties located within planned development thirteen. CC&Rs are subject to city review and approval.

     F.     Utilities. All utilities shall be built per the requirements in effect at time of tentative map submittal. These improvements are subject to the requirements of the city engineer.

     G.    Other Requirements. All requirements not specifically regulated in this ordinance will be regulated by the city of Brentwood Municipal Code.

     H.    Design and Site Plan Review. The design of the homes and improvements shall have the following characteristics:

     1.     The park or parks shall be located to serve as a focal point for the residents living in the area.

     2.     The developments shall be designed to accommodate and encourage pedestrian circulation throughout the area, to the park, to the open space buffer and to the existing business park.

     3.     The streets shall be designed to mimic the old-town concept and include formal street trees placed twenty-five feet on center and old-style street lights. The sidewalk shall be detached by five feet to allow for the placement of the trees.

     4.     The residential units shall include elements which copy old-style architectural features. Examples include large front porches, rear set garages, steep pitched roofs and courtyards.

     5.     Consideration shall be given to providing an adequate transition between the residential uses and the business park to the west. This transition may include landscape screening, larger landscape setbacks, mounding, masonry walls or similar. The exact type of transition will depend on the type of product and be determined through the tentative map process.

     I.      Streets and Traffic. A limited traffic study shall be submitted concurrently with each tentative subdivision map. The study shall identify specific roadway improvements needed to accommodate the traffic expected by that subdivision. These on or off-site improvements shall be a condition of approval of the subdivision. Fairview Parkway shall be developed as a two-lane collector, unless a traffic study (as required by subsection I of this section) indicates that a wider street is necessary. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.463.003 Permitted uses.
     The following residential uses may be allowed, provided that a master land use plan has already been approved for the property:

     A.    Medium Lot Single-Family Residential (Medium Lot). The medium lot single-family residential category allows primarily single-family detached homes. The following standards apply to this category:

     1.     Medium lot permitted uses:

     a.     One single-family dwelling per parcel;

     b.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003 of this title;

     c.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660 of this title;

     d.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850 of this title;

     e.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840 of this title;

     f.      Small family residential care facilities;

     g.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670 of this title;

     h.     Signs subject to Chapter 17.640 of this title;

     i.      Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005 of this title. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.463.004 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Medium Lot Conditionally Permitted Uses.

     A.    Public facilities including parks, playgrounds, public schools and other public buildings;

     B.     Churches, religious institutions and private schools;

     C.     Community buildings, clubs and activities of quasi-public, social, fraternal or recreational character such as golf, tennis and swimming clubs intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residential project;

     D.    Large residential care facilities and day care centers. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.463.005 Development standards.
     Medium Lot Site Development Standards.

     A.    Unit Density. Unit density shall not be greater than five dwelling units per acre;

     B.     Lot Area. Minimum six thousand six hundred fifty square feet;

     C.     Lot Width. Minimum fifty feet for interior lots and fifty-five feet for corner lots. Minimum of thirty-five feet at the street for cul-de-sac lots;

     D.    Lot Depth. Minimum ninety-four feet;

     E.     Height. No main building shall exceed the height of two stories and thirty feet;

     F.     Rear Yard. Minimum fifteen feet;

     G.    Front Yard. Minimum twelve feet for house and twenty feet to garage door;

     H.    Side Yard. Minimum five feet, sum of both yards twelve feet. Corner lots shall have minimum ten feet on street side;

     I.      Garage. Maximum forty-five percent of the lot width;

     J.      Parking. Minimum one space per lot on street plus two covered spaces in garage;

     K.    Coverage. Not more than forty percent lot coverage. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.463.006 Map for PD-13.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.464 PD-14 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FOURTEEN) ZONE
17.464.001 Authority and purpose.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of PD-14 (planned development fourteen) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-14 (planned development fourteen) zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-14 (planned development fourteen) zone is to permit and regulate the development of single-family detached homes and public uses in accordance with the Brentwood general plan. The boundary of the PD-14 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.457.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.464.002 Permitted uses.
     Permitted uses in the PD-14 zone are those uses permitted under R-1 zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.464.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in the R-1 zoning district in Title 17 which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.464.004 Regulation for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the planned development fourteen zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Eight thousand square feet.

     B.     Minimum lot width: Seventy feet.

     C.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet.

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: One-half the required lot width.

     E.     Minimum side yard: Minimum seven feet, sum of both sides, twenty feet.

     F.     Minimum rear yard: Twenty feet.

     G.    Maximum building height limit: No main building shall exceed thirty feet in height.

     H.    Exceptions:

     1.     The lot width for lots on culs-de-sac and curvilinear streets shall be fifty-five feet as measured thirty feet from the front property line;

     2.     Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet.

     I.      Maximum density: Three and one-half dwelling units/acre. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.464.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     F.     The development of the PD-14 zone district shall be substantially in accord with the development plan and related exhibits.

     G.    The maximum number of dwelling units shall be one hundred forty-nine.

     H.    Fifty percent of the housing along Balfour Road and Griffith Lane shall be single-story. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.464.006 Map for PD-14.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.465 PD-15 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FIFTEEN) ZONE
17.465.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of PD-15 (planned development fifteen) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. This zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. A purpose of the PD-15 zone is to permit and regulate the development of the 234.6 acres depicted on the development plan and related exhibits. Another purpose of the PD-15 zone is to supersede and replace all prior zoning regulations applicable to the property of the development plan and related exhibits, including those of Ordinance No. 512—Planned Development Zone 15 (PD 15), Chapter 17.465. Further, in recognition of the very large size of the Brentwood Country Club, its predominant age-restricted occupancy and its probable construction over a number of years, it is also the purpose of this zone to allow flexibility in the design and development standards to encourage construction of a high quality community and to facilitate ease of adapting the housing product to market demands which change over time, and to allow construction of streets and other improvements consistent with reduced demand levels of age-restricted occupancy.

     C.     Intent. In order to achieve the purpose of the PD-15 zone, it is intended that development be in accordance with the land uses described herein for the acreage depicted on the development plan and related exhibits. The boundaries of the PD-7 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.465.005. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.465.002 Areas A1, A2 and A3—Residential and golf uses.
     A.    Permitted Uses—Age-Restricted Areas A1 and A2. Single-family detached and attached homes for age-restricted occupancy are permitted uses within Areas A1 and A2.

     B.     Permitted Uses—Non-Age-Restricted Area A3. Single-family detached homes for non-age-restricted occupancy are permitted uses within Area A3.

     C.     Additional Permitted Uses—All Residential Areas A1, A2 and A3.

     1.     Model home sales facilities;

     2.     Golf course and related facilities including, tennis courts, maintenance structures and related recreation facilities;

     3.     Homeowners’ association recreation buildings, tennis courts, recreational vehicle parking lots, other common-use facilities and open area;

     4.     Other uses determined by the community development department to be similar to and compatible with the preceding permitted uses.

     D.    Conditionally Permitted Uses—All Residential Areas A1, A2 and A3. Land uses determined by the community development department to be similar to or ancillary to a permitted use may be permitted pursuant to approval of a conditional use permit.

     E.     Maximum Number of Units, Lot Area, Setbacks, Height and Parking—All Residential Areas A1, A2 and A3.

     1.     Maximum Number of Units. A maximum of six hundred seventy-four dwelling units may be developed within Areas A1, A2 and A3.

     2.     Minimum Lot Area. The minimum area of a residential lot area shall be four thousand square feet, provided that two thousand five hundred square feet is the permitted minimum per attached duet dwelling unit. A variety of lot sizes, larger than the minimums, shall be included to provide a variety of housing products and yard conditions.

     3.     Setbacks, Height and Parking. Each yard setback specified in Table A shall be measured from its respective property line, except that measurement shall be from the back of the sidewalk wherever a street’s sidewalk lies inside a lot. All yard setbacks shall be measured to the nearest specified wall of the dwelling. Allowable projections into yard setbacks shall be as set forth in Section 17.660.005 of Chapter 17.660, Encroachments Into Required Yards.

 

TABLE A

 

Setbacks, Height and Parking

Area A1 Age-Restricted Home

Area A1 Age-Restricted Home

Area A2 Age-Restricted Home

Area A3 Non-Age-Restricted Home

Minimum (Min.), Maximum (Max.)

 

A. Min. Front Yard

Duet Lot

All Other Lots

All Lots

All Lots

(1) To door of a front-entry garage

18′

18′

20′

20′

(2) To a wall of a side-entry garage

NA

10′

10′

10′

(3) To a wall of a habitable room

13′

13′

20′

20′

B. Min. Side Yard Adjoining a Street

NA

12′

15′

15′

C. Min. Side Yard at Interior Lot Line

 

(1) To a wall of a garage

5′1

5′

5′

5′

(2) To a wall of a habitable room

5′1

6′

5′

5′

(3) Aggregate, both side yards

5′1

12′

10 for lots less than 55′ wide; 15′ for lots 55′ and wider

10 for lots less than 55′ wide; 15′ for lots 55′ and wider

D. Min. Rear Yard

5′2

15′ where the yard adjoins a golf course; 15′ minimum and 20′ average elsewhere

15′ where the yard adjoins a golf course; 15′ minimum and 20′ average elsewhere

15′ minimum and 20′ average

E. Min. Off-Street Parking Spaces

 

(1) In a garage

1

2

2

2

(2) In a driveway

2

 

 

 

F. Max. Building Height

35′

35′

35′

35′

Notes:

1      A 0′ setback is permitted at one side yard of a duet lot.

2      Every duet unit shall include patio area of not less than 15′ x 10′.

 

     F.     Construction Standards—All Residential Areas A1, A2 and A3.

     1.     Variety in Building Mass—Age-Restricted Homes Areas A1 and A2. Variety in building mass shall be accomplished by:

     a.     Inclusion in the floor plans available for purchase, varying front façade design, such as optional side-entry garages and varying the entryway location and design;

     b.     Avoidance of using of a single floor plan more than twice in any group of four or more contiguous homes;

     c.     Inclusion of floor plan purchase-options, such as additional golf cart garage space, which alter the visual mass of a floor plan;

     d.     Multiple floor plans incorporating design variations such as those of subdivisions a, b and c above, shall be submitted at the time of site design and development review.

     2.     Variety in Building Mass—Non-Age-Restricted Homes Area A3. In each group of four or more contiguous homes, twenty-five percent shall be constructed with one or more of:

     a.     Single story units; or

     b.     Side-entry garages; or

     c.     Minimum front setback of thirty feet.

     3.     Acoustical Analysis—All Residential Areas A1, A2 and A3. Dwellings adjacent to Balfour Road, Fairview Avenue, Central Boulevard and the proposed Highway 4 Bypass shall be designed to meet the city’s interior noise level standard of forty-five dBA Ldn.

     G.    Design Review—All Residential Areas A1, A2 and A3.

     1.     Residential Buildings. Design and site development review shall be required for residential buildings pursuant to Chapter 17.820, except that the authority to review and approve or deny an application for design and site development review is delegated to the community development department.

     2.     Landscaping, Fencing and Walls. Landscaping, fencing and walls in areas adjoining a public or private street shall conform to a plan to be approved by the community development department prior to issuance of building permits for the lots to be landscaped, fenced or walled. The plan shall specify colors, materials and spacing of elements.

     3.     Recreational and Conditionally Permitted Facilities. Design and site development review approval by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 17.820 shall be required for the following:

     a.     Golf clubhouse and related buildings;

     b.     Recreational buildings and accompanying outdoor facilities such as pools;

     c.     Buildings for which approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission is required. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.465.003 Area P—Park and related uses.
     A.    Permitted Uses—Area P. Subject to city approval of plans prior to development the following uses are permitted:

     1.     Public park, trail and other recreational uses;

     2.     Storm drainage, flood control, floodplain and related facilities;

     3.     Other uses determined by the community development department to be similar to and compatible with the preceding conditionally permitted uses. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.465.004 Exceptions.
     A.    Exceptions to Zoning Regulations. The community development department may permit exceptions to the regulations of this chapter and the remainder Title 17 upon finding that granting of the exception will constitute an insignificant deviation from the land uses, activities and construction otherwise resulting from strict application of the regulations of this chapter.

     B.     Exceptions to Engineering Standards. Adopted city engineering standards are contained in the city’s Title 17, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, the engineering design standards, the standard plans and specifications, the standard drawings and in policy determinations made by the director of public works and the city engineer. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.465.005 Map for PD-15.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.466 PD-16 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIXTEEN) ZONE
17.466.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent of the PD-16 (planned development sixteen) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-16 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-16 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the southeast corner of Balfour Road and Walnut Avenue commonly referred to as South Brentwood Village. The property is being developed as a pedestrian-oriented village community utilizing neoclassical traditional town planning principles. The villages will be within walking distance of downtown Brentwood and future commercial uses within the Baez property. A minimum of eighteen percent of the gross area of the one hundred forty-one-acre site shall be developed for retail, service and office uses.

     C.     Intent. It is intended that in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-16 zone of implementing the development of a neoclassical traditional village, the zone shall be divided into two residential villages, a commercial and office subarea and a medium density residential subarea, as further described below. The primary purpose of a neoclassical traditional town is to develop an area with a mix of commercial office and residential uses in an effort to create a pedestrian-oriented community. The boundaries of the PD-16 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.466.007.

     1.     Village I consists of approximately 21.4 net acres intended for the development of up to one hundred seventy-five residential lots and up to two hundred fifteen residential units including approximately forty granny flats. The exact number of units will be determined through the tentative map procedure, Chapter 16.050;

     2.     Village II consists of approximately 46.1 net acres intended for the development of up to three hundred eleven residential dwelling units. The exact number of units will be determined through the tentative map procedure, Chapter 16.050;

     3.     Subarea A consists of a minimum of 10.5 net acres intended for the development of retail and commercial uses typically provided for within a downtown commercial area;

     4.     Subarea B consists of approximately 15.6 net acres intended for the development of one hundred twenty-eight medium density residential dwelling units in accordance with the Brentwood general plan. (Ord. 894 § 2, 2011)

 

17.466.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-16 zone:

     A.    Village I. The following uses shall be permitted within the village:

     1.     One single-family dwelling per parcel and a secondary dwelling unit over the garage per the approved PD architectural review documents;

     2.     Accessory uses subject to Section 17.650.003, excluding rooming and boarding, transient housing and nonresidential accessory uses (i.e., Christmas tree lot, fruit stand, etc.);

     3.     Accessory buildings subject to Section 17.660.006 and accessory structures subject to Section 17.660.007. Temporary uses defined in Section 17.850.003 shall also be excluded;

     4.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     5.     Community and neighborhood parks as shown on approved tentative map;

     6.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     7.     Small-family day care facilities limited to a maximum of six children.

     B.     Village II. The following uses shall be permitted within the village:

     1.     One single-family dwelling per parcel;

     2.     Accessory uses subject to Section 17.650.003, excluding rooming and boarding, transient housing and nonresidential accessory uses (i.e., Christmas tree lot, fruit stand, etc.). Temporary uses defined in Section 17.850.003 shall also be excluded;

     3.     Accessory buildings subject to Section 17.660.006 and accessory structures subject to Section 17.660.007;

     4.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     5.     Community and neighborhood parks as shown on approved tentative map;

     6.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     7.     Small-family day care facilities limited to a maximum of six children.

     C.     Subarea A. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     General retail sales (excluding uses with outdoor storage or display); financial institutions; professional offices uses; pet stores (excluding kennels); markets and food stores; appliance, radio and television sales; drug and general convenience stores;

     2.     Existing nonconforming uses within subarea A shall include two existing single-family residences which will be allowed to continue indefinitely until a time when the structure is modified or converted to another use wherein it may no longer maintain its nonconforming status and will be held to the planned development standards applicable to subarea A;

     3.     Service uses including, but not limited to, banks; cafés and bakeries; addressing and mailing service; barber or beauty shop; butcher shop; delicatessen; shoe repair and sales; laundromat; dry cleaners; and similar uses;

     4.     Commercial uses and convenience retail uses such as bakery, pastry shop, book store, candy or ice cream store, apparel and accessory store, stationery store and similar retail establishments;

     5.     Business and professional offices such as architects, financial institutions, attorneys, accountants, engineers, travel agency, insurance agency, title companies, real estate and similar professional and general business offices;

     6.     Parks, playgrounds and open space uses identified on the approved tentative map;

     7.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator.

     D.    Subarea B. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Single-family detached dwelling units;

     2.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     3.     Accessory structures shall be permitted subject to specific small-lot accessory structure development standards that may be prepared by the developer and submitted for the review and approval of the community development director prior to recordation of the final map. All future accessory structures shall adhere to these development standards;

     4.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit subject to Chapter 17.850;

     5.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     6.     The keeping of animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     7.     Recreational trails, parks and open space;

     8.     Accessory dwelling units in accordance with Chapter 17.100;

     9.     Similar uses as determined by the community development director. (Ord. 991 § 4, 2017; Ord. 894 § 2, 2011)

 

17.466.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830, the following uses are permitted in the PD-16 zone:

     A.    Village I. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this village:

     1.     Commercial day care facilities contiguous to subarea A or immediately adjacent to Walnut Boulevard. In-home, large-family day care facilities subject to the location criteria adopted by resolution of the planning commission of the city;

     2.     Secondary dwelling units not originally approved under PD architectural design approvals, subject to Section 17.100.005;

     3.     Churches and other religious institutions immediately adjacent to Walnut Boulevard or contiguous to subarea A.

     B.     Village II. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this village:

     1.     Commercial day care facilities contiguous to subarea A or immediately adjacent to Walnut Boulevard. In-home, large-family day care facilities subject to the location criteria adopted by resolution of the planning commission of the city;

     2.     Secondary dwelling units not originally approved under PD architectural design approvals, subject to Section 17.100.005;

     3.     Churches and other religious institutions immediately adjacent to Walnut Boulevard.

     C.     Subarea A. The following uses shall be conditioned permitted within this subarea:

     1.     On- or off-sale liquor establishments;

     2.     Sit-down restaurants and pizza parlors not associated with a drive-through facility. Outdoor dining areas are highly encouraged;

     3.     Day care facilities;

     4.     Cinemas and/or theaters;

     5.     Gas station/mini-mart, without service bays: this use must integrate with other site circulation and design. Additional access points on Walnut Boulevard and Balfour Road are not allowed (see the development plan and related exhibits). Automotive, boat, recreational vehicle or similar sales and/or service are specifically prohibited;

     6.     Veterinarians;

     7.     Public and quasi-public offices such as government offices, library, employment office, utility offices and similar uses, including day care facilities;

     8.     Other uses that the zoning administrator determines, because of type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure.

     D.    Subarea B. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Those identified in Section 17.140.003 (R-2 zone) of the zoning ordinance, which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city. (Ord. 894 § 2, 2011)

 

17.466.004 Design and development standards.
     A.    Streets and Alleys.

     1.     Introduction. The design of streets and alleys provides for comfortable and convenient pedestrian access throughout the neighborhood by creating direct routes, narrowing streets and slowing cars, providing a shade canopy or covered arcade, and by promoting visual interest at a human scale along the way.

     2.     Standards.

     a.     Street Standards. Street widths will be seventy feet ROW for the PEC access road, sixty feet ROW for major residential streets and a fifty-six-foot ROW for minor residential streets, as indicated on the development plan and related exhibits. The location of the streets shall be as indicated on an approved tentative map.

     b.     Sidewalks, Crosswalks and Bike Trails.

     i.      Sidewalks are to be continuous and link with other paths rather than dead end. They are to be continuous past alley access points using curb cuts. They are to be generally straight with minimal meandering. (See the development plan and related exhibits.)

     ii.     Crosswalks at pedestrian crossings are to be designated with a change of material on the road surface (interlocking pavers or concrete).

     iii.    Bike paths: concrete or A.C. paving to be consistent with city-wide bike path master plan.

     c.     Street Lighting. Historic street lights, similar to fixture as shown on the development plan and related exhibits; twelve feet to twenty feet high at fifty feet to seventy-five feet on center staggered from one side of the street to the other. This is to maintain a pedestrian scale to the lighting and streetscape. The final fixture selected must be approved by the public works department.

     d.     Utility Location and Screening. Utilities are to be coordinated with landscape plans to ensure proper screening and landscape around utility vaults, boxes, transformers, etc., so as not to be visible from primary pedestrian paths, to the extent practical. Special consideration must be taken with transformers, vaults, etc., on corner lots.

     e.     Mailboxes. Individual or duplex mailboxes are strongly encouraged rather than ganged mailboxes of four, six or twelve. The post, stand and enclosure should be in keeping with the character of the homes. A design for the mailboxes shall be submitted for staff review and approval prior to construction.

     B.     Residential. Residential designation allows for small and medium-size lot single-family residential units along with ancillary units (“granny flats”) on lots with alley-accessed garages.

     1.     Standards.

     a.     Building intensity: N/A.

     b.     Height. Building heights in the residential areas shall not exceed two stories or thirty feet.

     c.     Setbacks. Building setbacks vary depending on the Village (I or II) or subarea B, site plan configuration, whether side drive, alley or corner lot.

     2.     Village I—Phase I.

     a.     Minimum lot area: four thousand square feet. Typical: four thousand five hundred square feet.

     b.     Minimum lot frontage: thirty feet for cul-de-sac and knuckle lots and forty-five feet for standard lots.

     c.     Minimum lot depth: ninety feet.

     d.     Front yard: eighteen feet minimum.

     e.     Side yard: fifteen aggregate between living spaces on adjacent lots, ten feet between garages.

     f.      Rear yard: twenty feet minimum.

     g.     Corner conditions: on the street side, the building setback shall be a minimum of five feet from the right-of-way line.

     h.     Encroachment into yards: Chapter 17.660 dealing with encroachment into required yards does not apply. Architectural features such as porches, chimneys, bay windows or columns must meet the required setback (eave overhang areas are excluded).

     3.     Village I—Phase IIIA and IIIB.

     a.     Minimum lot area: four thousand square feet. Typical: four thousand five hundred square feet.

     b.     Minimum lot frontage: thirty feet for cul-de-sac and knuckle lots and forty-five feet for standard lots.

     c.     Minimum lot depth: ninety feet.

     d.     Front yard: five feet minimum for minor residential streets and ten feet minimum for major residential streets to be generally consistent alignment along street.

     e.     Side yard for house and attached garage: three feet minimum, fifteen feet aggregate. Zero feet for detached garage.

     f.      Side yard for detached garage: zero feet interior lot and five feet for street-side lot on corner.

     g.     Rear yard: zero feet for the garage portion of the building only, provided twenty-foot by twenty-foot or four hundred square foot yard size is provided. Fifteen feet minimum for the house. The area for the granny unit parking is exclusive of the rear yard required. One-story homes with a granny unit may reduce required rear yard setback to ten feet. A minimum ten-foot by sixteen-foot rear yard shall be provided. (In these cases, a twenty-foot by twenty-foot side yard will be provided.)

     h.     Alley: five feet minimum/maximum rear yard setback required on alley.

     i.      Encroachment into yards: Chapter 17.660 dealing with encroachment into required yards does not apply. Architectural features such as porches, chimneys, bay windows or columns must meet the required setbacks (eave overhang areas are excluded).

     4.     Village II.

     a.     Minimum lot area: four thousand six hundred eighty square feet. Typical: six thousand square feet.

     b.     Minimum lot frontage: thirty feet for cul-de-sac or knuckle lots and sixty feet for standard lots.

     c.     Minimum lot depth: seventy-eight feet.

     d.     Front yard: ten feet minimum from property line to front porch or buildings (stairs do not apply).

     e.     Side yard: five feet minimum, fifteen feet minimum between living spaces. Where the blank wall of a garage abuts the blank wall of a garage on the adjacent lot, the distance between structures may be a minimum of ten feet where the blank wall of a garage abuts the living unit on an adjacent lot, the minimum distance between structures shall be fifteen feet. In limited instances (twenty percent), a ten-foot separation will be acceptable between living unit on one lot and the blank garage wall on the adjacent lot. Some architectural feature shall be applied to the blank garage wall. On units with detached garages, one side yard setback may be a minimum of three feet.

     f.      Rear yard: zero feet for the garage portion of building only, provided twenty-foot by twenty-foot or four hundred square foot yard size is provided. Fifteen feet minimum for the house.

     g.     Encroachment into yards: Chapter 17.660 dealing with encroachment into required yards does not apply. Architectural features such as porches, chimneys, bay windows or columns must meet the required setbacks (eave overhang areas are excluded).

     5.     Building Configuration, Orientation.

     a.     Village I: include rear yard garages, both side drive and alley accessed. Both configurations provide for building separation while making better use of side yard, whether a hardscape courtyard or extensive landscaped area. The front yard setbacks are reduced to bring the entry/porch and living areas closer to the sidewalks, encouraging interaction with neighbors.

     b.     Village II: are to be developed with a combination of front on garages attached to the living unit in the conventional manner with the living unit stepped forward of the garage and rear yard garages with side drive access. No alleys are planned for the Village II lots.

     6.     Porches/Entries. Front doors must be on the front façade and be visible from the street. Entries must be accessed via a front porch.

     a.     Village I and those units within Village II utilizing detached garages: porches must extend over at least fifty percent of the front façade and have a useable area for seating with a minimum dimension of six feet by ten feet.

     b.     Village II: those units employing an attached garage must provide porches on all units. The usable area for seating shall be five feet by ten feet.

     7.     Garages.

     a.     Village I and those units within Village II utilizing detached garages: all garages are to be recessed a minimum of forty feet behind the front façade and be accessed by a side drive or alleyway.

     b.     Village II: all garages attached to the residential unit are to be recessed a minimum of five feet behind the front façade and be a minimum of twenty feet from the established right-of-way line.

     8.     Side drives are a maximum of twelve feet wide from curb cut to parking courtyard where it may widen out. Special paving or a “Hollywood” drive is required for the twelve-foot wide portion of the side drive at a minimum.

     9.     Alley accessed garages within Village I are detached from the house. They may be connected by an open trellis or breezeway.

     10.   Ancillary Units. Granny flats or carriage homes are allowed over detached garages on alleyways within Village I. A third parking stall (covered and uncovered) shall be provided adjacent to the garage for the granny flat. The area for the parking stall is exclusive of the twenty-foot by twenty-foot or four hundred square foot yard requirement noted under subsection (B)(1)(c), Setbacks. Carriage homes provide a versatile space that can be used by extended family, rented or serve as an at-home studio or office.

     11.   Corner Lots. Standards setbacks (subsection (B)(1)(c)) apply for corner lots. The side drive elevation of the unit should face the corner property line whenever possible. The driveway must access the parking court by the side property line with a maximum twelve-foot curb cut and drive. The garage elevation facing the street must be articulated with a window and architectural treatment in a similar manner to the front façade. The area in front of the garage must allow for a minimum of two off-street parking spaces. Within Village II, fifty percent of the corner lots shall incorporate side entry garages.

     12.   Units Which Abut a Soundwall. In instances where units with detached garages abut a soundwall in the side yard, a five-foot setback to the garage is required. Where units with attached garages abut the soundwall, the minimum setback shall be ten feet to the garage and/or living unit.

     13.   Architectural Design.

     a.     Village I: to ensure a certain amount of variation within the development, a minimum of three unit types, three variations on each unit type and three individual color schemes, and two roofing materials with two roof colors or one material and three colors are required of each village.

     b.     Village II: the first one hundred fifty units are to be comprised of four separate and distinct models; three units will utilize the attached garage concept and one model will incorporate the detached garage. The percentage of detached garage units shall be a minimum of ten percent. Two additional models shall be introduced for the one hundred fifty-first through three hundred eleventh building lot, bringing the total offering to six separate and distinct unit types. These two additional models shall be submitted for review and approval of the planning commission.

     c.     Articulation and Massing and Roofs.

     i.      Village I: combination of gables, hips and turret roof form will be used. Roof slopes shall be 6:12 or greater for primary roofs. Articulation of the building façade should relate to the roof form of the building. No bubble skylights visible from the street allowed.

     ii.     Village II: roof slopes shall be 5:12 or 6:12 for primary roofs. Hip and gable roof forms are acceptable. Some variation in roof form over the garage is encouraged. Bubble skylights shall not be visible from the street.

     d.     Materials. Horizontal board siding, shingles or a similar material is required for all homes. Materials should be the same for all four façades rather than change on side or rear yard elevations. No plywood siding is allowed.

     e.     Windows. Front elevation windows shall be vertical in proportion, or divided by mullions, or divided into separate lights. Long horizontal sliding windows are strongly discouraged. (See the development plan and related exhibits.)

     f.      Fencing. Fencing may be of a different board siding than the homes. Fencing should be painted or stained to match color palette of homes. Side yard fencing will be recessed a minimum of ten feet behind front façade of house where applicable. On corner lots, fencing will only enclose the rear yard on street side and be recessed a minimum of two feet behind the garage façade. Extreme care shall be exercised within Village II with regard to the location of the fence element connecting two adjacent units. It is imperative where one unit is located closer to the street than the adjacent unit that the connecting fence and its side yard element do not extend past the front façade of the more rearward located unit. A detailed fencing plan shall be submitted to the director of community development for review and approval prior to recordation of the final map.

     14.   Yard Trees and Landscaping.

     a.     Village I: two trees required per lot; one on the side yard property line and the other approximately centered on the lot, each five to seven feet from back of sidewalk. This will form a row of canopy yard trees approximately twenty-two feet six inches on center.

     b.     Village II: three trees total required per lot in the tree lawn strip; one the side yard property line and the other approximately equally spaced thirty feet on center.

     c.     Yard trees are in addition to street trees which are located in the tree lawn strip at all sixty-foot ROW streets. One yard tree should approximately align across the sidewalk with street trees in the tree lawn strip.

     15.   With respect to the architectural design of residences, the owner shall have the right to submit additional designs in the future for review and approval by the planning department, providing the designs conform to the guidelines and regulations herein.

     C.     Master Use Permit. Upon application for development of any portion of subarea A or B, the entire area will be master planned and this master plan will be submitted as part of the use permit process (Chapter 17.830) to ensure compliance with these PD standards. Cross access and parking easements will be required for each subarea.

     D.    Retail Subarea A—Building Standards.

     1.     Floor area ratio (FAR): to be determined through the master use permit process.

     2.     Height. Building heights in the retail areas shall not exceed two stories or thirty feet.

     3.     Setbacks. Setbacks vary depending on the property line. Where arcades are shown along the street, buildings are to be set within ten feet of the property line with ten-foot arcades. (See the development plan and related exhibits.) The building or arcade must extend to the setback line and adjacent to the future bus stop location. The walkway under the arcade shall be paved to provide a continuous path to the bus stop. Buildings directly across the street from residential shall be set back a minimum ten feet, maximum fifteen feet from the property line to provide for landscaping. Buildings and the parking lot adjacent to Walnut and Balfour Roads must maintain a ten-foot setback from the property line, for landscaping. The setback between the retail and office uses between subareas A and B should allow for a shared access drive and ten feet of landscaping on each side, approximately twenty-two feet setback on each side of property line. (See the development plan and related exhibits.)

     4.     Building Configuration and Pedestrian Access. The development of each retail site should provide for multiple access points from the residential areas for both pedestrians and vehicles. (See the development plan and related exhibits.) Vehicle access from the rotaries is encouraged. A second access is allowed. Pedestrian access is required from those points shown on the illustrative plan. No fence or soundwall is allowed between the residential and retail commercial sites, except screen walls associated with service, loading or garbage.

     5.     Entries. Locating entries on the streets creates a “main street” quality which reinforces the pedestrian activity. Primary shop entries must be provided on pedestrian paths (designated by arcade locations on the illustrative plan). Secondary entries will be allowed to face the parking areas, but the arcade entry shall not be service oriented. (See the development plan and related exhibits.)

     6.     Architectural Design. The retail buildings shall be compatible in terms of design with the residential uses. This includes roofing materials, colors, sidings, roof pitch, etc. The site planning of the retail buildings necessitates that all four elevations of the retail shops buildings be equally articulated in massing and materials. These façades can be screened through the landscape buffers provided. (See the development plan and related exhibits.)

     a.     Materials. It is required that the retail buildings share the material palette of the rest of the development. Colored and split-faced CMU matching the soundwall design, may be used as an accent material. Board siding and similar roofing materials to the residential and office areas shall be provided. Materials must be used consistently on all elevations. Stucco may be used in conjunction with other materials upon design approval by the planning commission, provided that it is not the predominant material.

     b.     Articulation and Roof Forms. Mansard roofs, high pitched (12:12 and above) are not allowed. A combination of flat, shed, gabled and hipped roofs are allowed. The articulation of the building façade should relate to the roof form of the building. (See the development plan and related exhibits.)

     c.     Arcades and Awnings. A continuous arcade is required along those building façades shown on the development plan and related exhibits. This is to provide comfort and protection from heat and rain for pedestrians along primary pedestrian paths. The arcade could be a supported extension of the roof structure.

     d.     Windows and Display Cases. Windows are required on all primary pedestrian path façades. Secured display cases are allowed in place of windows on rear or secondary elevations. (See the development plan and related exhibits.) Windows and display cases add visual interest for pedestrians as well as act as secondary signage for shops. (See the development plan and related exhibits.)

     e.     Individual windows openings, “punched or recessed,” are recommended over continuous aluminum store front systems. It is recommended that the window system be supported by a solid stem wall rather than extend to the floor level. (See the development plan and related exhibits.)

     f.      Signage. Signs should blend with the architecture of the building and should not overshadow the building character. Signs should be exterior illuminated (internally illuminated signs and back-lit awnings are not permitted). Sign materials should integrate well with the building’s materials; plastic signs are discouraged. “Marquee” signage or “pylon” signage along Balfour Road and Walnut Boulevard is acceptable after planning approved. A master signage program, illustrating common theme, materials, size and location must be submitted and approved by the planning commission, through the use permit process.

     g.     Parking Lot Design.

     i.      In no case shall a parking lot occupy more than thirty-three percent of the internal street’s frontage.

     ii.     An orchard-like tree pattern (gridded at thirty feet to forty feet on center maximum) is required to ensure adequate shading of the paved areas. A minimum of one tree between every three to four parking stalls is required. The tree well will be a minimum of five feet by five feet or twenty-five square feet unless a two-foot diameter tree cage is used (see the development plan and related exhibits for alternative parking lot tree placements). This does not include perimeter landscaping. The extent of parking lot landscaping otherwise required is per Section 17.630.008.

     iii.    Landscape hedges at the parking lot perimeter (plus or minus three-foot height) will shield the autos from view without blocking signage. The extent of parking lot landscaping otherwise required is per Section 17.630.008.

     iv.    Joint Use Parking. Due to the requirement of common parking and access easements, the overall parking standards identified in Chapter 17.620 may be reduced by fifteen percent for all types of uses.

     h.     Landscaping and Hardscape Plaza. Hardscape plazas with built-in seating and potential table areas are required at major pedestrian entries to the retail centers.

     i.      Screening and Fencing. Screening of trash enclosures should be integrated into the building form with the same material palette, and further screened with landscaping so as not to be visible by pedestrians passing by. Where visual screening is desired it is strongly recommended that hedges or a hedgerow of trees, such as Lombardy poplars be used in conjunction with berms, wood or masonry screen walls.

     E.     Residential Subarea B—Detached Single-Family Residential Units.

     General development standards.

     1.     Minimum lot area: two thousand five hundred square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: thirty feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: sixty feet;

     4.     Minimum front yard setback:

     a.     Twelve and one-half feet for garages when located within a private courtyard that has residences facing both sides of the courtyard,

     b.     Twenty feet to the back of sidewalk for garages facing a public street,

     c.     Five feet for living space and porches;

     5.     Minimum side yard setback:

     a.     Zero feet for a garage,

     b.     Four feet for living space, except for lots 117 and 121 which shall maintain a minimum setback of three feet,

     c.     Total aggregate side yard setback: five feet;

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: five feet;

     7.     Minimum private open space: two hundred fifty contiguous square feet with a minimum dimension of ten feet. No future building additions are permitted within the required private open space area;

     8.     Maximum building height: thirty feet;

     9.     Maximum lot coverage: sixty-three percent. (Ord. 894 § 2, 2011)

 

17.466.005 Performance standards for subarea A.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within subarea A shall conform to the performance standards set forth in Section 17.200.004.

     General. No uses will produce excessive noise, heat, glare, humidity, vibration, excessive wastes, toxics, air pollution, smoke or odors, etc., and will comply with all police, fire department ordinances and health department ordinances. (Ord. 894 § 2, 2011)

 

17.466.006 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004;

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620;

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers, and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions in Section 17.620.016;

     D.    All future replacement and maintenance of fences shall adhere to the approved fencing plan;

     E.     The development of PD-16 zone shall be substantially in accordance with the development plan. Variations in the development plan, including street and lot patterns, may be approved through the subdivision map process. (Ord. 894 § 2, 2011)

 

17.466.007 Map for PD-16.


(Ord. 894 § 2, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.467 PD-17 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SEVENTEEN) ZONE
17.467.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-17 (planned development seventeen) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-17 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones, General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose and Intent. The purpose of the PD-17 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of properties located within the Garin Ranch specific plan. The boundaries of the PD-17 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.467.003. (Ord. 975 § 2, 2016; Ord. 864 § C, 2009; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.467.002 Garin Ranch specific plan.
     The Garin Ranch specific plan as adopted by Ordinance No. 505 and as may be subsequently amended, provides the land use and development regulations for the planned development zone district. The Garin Ranch specific plan is not intended to supersede or amend other sections of Title 17 of this code or any other chapter of this code. In the event of conflict between the provisions of the specific plan and other provisions of this code, the other provisions shall prevail.

     A.    Purpose and Intent. These regulations will serve as the primary mechanism for implementation of the land uses for the Garin Ranch specific plan. Implementation of the standards set forth in this section will insure that future development proceeds in a coordinated manner consistent with the goals and objectives of the Garin Ranch specific plan and Brentwood general plan. Future review of staff approval permits and other necessary discretionary approvals by the city of Brentwood will ensure the realization of these standards.

     The regulations contained herein provide an appropriate amount of flexibility to anticipate future needs and to achieve compatibility between land uses. Principal land use designations for the specific plan shall be as follows:

     1.     Residential;

     2.     Commercial;

     3.     School district;

     4.     Parks;

     5.     Parks/detention.

     All such development within Garin Ranch shall conform to the development standards as set forth in the specific plan. The city Zoning Ordinance shall have effect on areas which are not covered by the standards. In areas of conflict between the city Zoning Ordinance and these provisions, this specific plan shall control.

     B.     Definitions. For the purposes of this specific plan, the definitions contained in the Brentwood Zoning Ordinance shall apply.

     C.     General Provisions.

     1.     Code Compliance: All construction and development within the specific plan area shall comply with applicable provisions of the Uniform Building Code and the various related mechanical, electrical, plumbing codes, fire code, water ordinance, grading and excavation code and the subdivision code, as currently adopted by the city of Brentwood.

     2.     Setbacks: The setback requirements are as specified within the development standards for each zoning designation. If not otherwise specified, all setbacks shall be determined as the perpendicular distance from the existing or planned street right-of-way line, or property line, to the foundation point of the closest structure.

     3.     Process and Procedures: If specific development standards have not been established or if an issue, condition or situation arises or occurs that is not clearly understandable in the specific plan, then those regulations and standards of the Brentwood Zoning Ordinance that are applicable for the most similar issue, condition or situation shall apply as determined by the city community development director.

     These regulations are adopted pursuant to Section 65450 of the state of California Government Code. It is specifically intended by such adoption that the development standards herein shall regulate all development within the specific plan area.

     4.     Violations: Any person, firm or corporation, whether a principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provisions of these regulations shall be made to comply with the Brentwood Zoning Ordinance pertaining to zoning misdemeanors.

     5.     Unlisted Uses: Whenever a use has not been specifically listed as being a permitted use in a particular zone classification within the specific plan, it shall be the duty of the city community development director to determine if said use is: (1) consistent with the intent of the zone; and (2) that said use is compatible with other listed permitted uses. Any person aggrieved by the determination may appeal that decision to the city planning commission.

     D.    General Standards.

     1.     Abandoned Vehicles: Those provisions contained in Chapter 10.28 of the Brentwood City Code shall apply to all development within the specific plan area.

     2.     Nonconforming Uses of Land: Those provisions contained in Brentwood Zoning Ordinance Chapter 17.610 shall apply to all development within the specific plan area.

     3.     Nonconforming Structures: Those provisions contained in Brentwood Zoning Ordinance Chapter 17.610 shall apply to all development within the specific plan area.

     4.     Planning Area Adjustments: The specific plan allows for flexibility to move uses within the general locations (planning areas) shown on the maps.

     Adjustments in the planning area boundaries, which do not exceed a cumulative total of ten percent of the original size in acres, resulting from final road alignments, geotechnical or engineering refinements to the site plan, tentative and/or final tract shall not require an amendment of the specific plan where such adjustments are consistent with the intent of the city general plan and this specific plan.

     Boundaries not dimensioned on the land use plan shall be established at the tentative or final subdivision map process.

     5.     Exterior Lighting: Outdoor lighting in public rights-of-way and on private property shall be the minimum to serve its intended purpose. On private property, light sources shall be oriented downward and inward and fixtures shall be selected to minimize illumination of areas not intended to be lit. Generally, the light source shall be shielded so as not to be visible off the premises. Lighting levels will be sufficient to provide for personal safety after dusk.

     6.     Outdoor Screening: Parking areas abutting street: A screen or other similar structure shall be installed along all parking areas abutting any street. Except as otherwise provided below, the screening shall have a maximum height of three and one-half feet.

     a.     Outdoor storage in nonresidential areas shall be screened from view. Trash enclosures shall be enclosed and designed to minimize visibility.

     b.     A screen as referred to above shall consist of one or any combination of the following:

     i.      Walls, Including Retaining Walls: A wall shall consist of stone, tile or similar type of solid masonry material a minimum of six inches thick.

     ii.     Berms: A berm shall be constructed of earthen materials and it shall be landscaped.

     iii.    Fences: A fence shall be constructed of wood, or other materials having a minimum nominal thickness of two inches.

     c.     Mechanical Equipment: Mechanical equipment placed on any roof or ground level such as, but not limited to, air conditioning, solar devices, heating, ventilating ducts and exhaust, shall be reasonably screened or recessed from view from any abutting street or highway and any abutting residential planning areas.

     Note: Mechanical equipment is prohibited on residential roofs.

     E.     Signage. Those provisions contained in the Brentwood Zoning Ordinance Chapter 17.640 (Signs) shall apply to all development within the specific plan area. A master sign plan shall be designed for the specific plan area which is to be submitted and approved by the city prior to the recordation of any final map. With each phase of development, the city shall ensure that signage is consistent with the master sign plan.

     F.     Parking. Parking shall be in conformance with the standards set forth in the Brentwood Zoning Ordinance Chapter 17.620 (Off-Street Parking). No on-street parking shall be allowed along major arterial streets nor along collector streets, as follows:

 

Major Streets:

Balfour Road, Sellers Avenue

Collectors:

Fairview Parkway, Oak Street, Sycamore Drive

 

     G.    Landscaping. A landscaping and tree planting plan will be required for all development plans or similar information may be required to be included on plot plans.

     All front yards adjoining a public or private street shall be landscaped prior to the granting of an occupancy permit. A landscaping plan indicating the type of plants, initial plant size, location and method of irrigation for all landscaped areas including single-family yard areas shall be submitted and approved by the city community development director.

     The standards which follow shall apply to all development except, single-family detached subdivisions not having common areas. Landscaping, consisting of evergreen or deciduous trees, shrubs or groundcover shall be installed and maintained subject to the following standards:

     1.     General:

     a.     Separation: Any landscaped area shall be separated from an adjacent vehicular area by a wall or curb at least six inches higher than the adjacent vehicular area.

     b.     Water: Permanent automatic watering facilities shall be provided for all landscaped areas. This system may be augmented by water conserving vegetation.

     c.     Maintenance: All landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, clean and healthful condition. The city has a requirement that all commercial sites enter into an agreement for the maintenance of landscaped areas.

     d.     All plants within required setback shall be of species suited to valley conditions, using plants listed in the Garin Ranch Design Guidelines.

     e.     Parking delineators of a minimum area of eighty square feet shall be established at a maximum separation of ten continuous parking stalls. The islands shall be landscaped with groundcovers, with one fifteen-gallon tree planted in each island. Trees should provide a sixty percent shade canopy within fifteen years of planting. A total of two trees shall be provided for every island:

     f.      All landscaping required within this section shall be reviewed by the planning department as to the type, density of planting and size of plants intended for use. Irrigation lines should be extended to parkways along Balfour Road, Sellers Avenue and Fairview Parkway. A landscaping and lighting district will maintain landscaping within parks, public right-of-way and landscape easements. This landscape district will be annexed to an existing city landscape district. Landscaping within residential property lines shall be maintained by the property owner.

     g.     All landscaped areas shall be surrounded with six-inch high concrete curbing, unless waived by the design review committee.

     2.     Trees:

     a.     Spacing of trees is to be variable depending on type, location and eventual size. The Garin Ranch Design Guidelines specify street tree and median tree spacing.

     b.     Trees to be used are listed in the Garin Ranch Design Guidelines, Section V.

     3.     Shrubs: At least seventy-five percent of shrub planting shall be a five-gallon minimum size. One-gallon shrubs should only be used as accent shrubs.

     4.     Berms: Berms are encouraged along street frontages with a slope rate not to exceed 3:1. Berms of two to three and one-half feet in height should be located along Sellers Avenue and Balfour Road.

     Berms are to be compacted prior to planting to prevent excessive runoff and sinkage.

     Black plastic is not to be used under wood chips on mounds, or slopes in general.

     5.     Groundcovers:

     a.     Definitions:

     i.      “Living groundcover” shall mean low-growing plants or shrubs that after being planted will grow together to form a solid cover in one year or less. To achieve that coverage, low-growing groundcover plants taken from flats shall be planted a maximum of twelve inches on center and low-growing shrub type groundcovers grown in cans shall be planted a maximum of three feet on center.

     ii.     “Non-living groundcover” shall mean forest humus or walk-on bark, aggregate rock, and other materials by permission of the planning department.

     b.     All areas within a required setback shall contain living groundcover or a combination of living and nonliving groundcovers (nonliving to be a maximum of twenty percent).

     6.     Fencing: Fencing shall occur at the time of development.

     A six-foot high solid masonry wall shall be provided along single-family residential areas adjacent to collector streets except for back or side on lots unless otherwise determined by the city community development director. However, side on culs-de-sac and breaks in fencing and variations in fencing setbacks are encouraged. Streetside and rear yard fencing shall be provided for all single-family detached units on individual lots. The fence will be a six-foot high solid wood fence. Noise attenuation walls along Balfour may require additional height and are subject to approval by the community development director.

     Commercial sites that abut residential areas shall provide a minimum of six-foot high masonry wall along such residential border. Pedestrian access from multifamily sites to commercial sites is encouraged.

     7.     Specific Plan Regulation Validity: If any portion of these regulations is, for any reason, declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. The city council hereby declares that they would have enacted these regulations and each portion thereof respective of the fact that anyone or more portions be declared invalid or ineffective.

     H.    Oil and Gas. Oil and gas production may be allowed in accordance with Chapter 17.680 (Oil and Gas Production) of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     I.      Commercial Development Regulations. The commercial zone is intended to serve the general shopping needs of the Garin Ranch community as well as the city of Brentwood and the surrounding area.

     Development, including subdividing parcels, will not be allowed within the commercial zone unless a comprehensive site development plan is approved by the planning commission. This plan must include a major tenant, a day care facility, a Park-and-Ride lot and pedestrian access to the school site.

     1.     Permitted Uses: General retail sales excluding uses with outdoor storage or display; professional office uses, veterinarian or pet stores excluding kennels. Such uses include:

     a.     Apparel stores, bakery, banks and financial institutions, beauty or barber shops, book store, candy stores, cleaning and laundry agencies, delicatessen, floral shops, food stores, gift shop, meat markets, offices, pharmacy, photography studios, photo processing, sporting goods, video machine and tape rental/sales.

     b.     Service uses including, but not limited to, addressing and mailing service, appliance, television and radio repair, barber or beauty shop, butcher, meat market, including frozen food locker, shoe repair, laundromat, dry cleaners and similar uses.

     c.     Office uses.

     d.     Restaurant or café without liquor sales.

     e.     Day care facilities.

     2.     Conditionally Permitted Uses:

     a.     Billiard hall; dance hall; laboratory-medical, dental, optical; meeting room lodge, fraternal hall, community facility, medical or dental office, hospital, restaurant or café with liquor sales, on- or off-sale liquor establishments, recreation services.

     b.     All drive-in, drive-through establishments, garden supply, outdoor sales or display.

     3.     Site Development Standards: Any development of the commercial site will be preceded by a preliminary site plan for the entire site.

 

Lot Area:

Minimum 7,500 sq. ft.

Lot Width:

Minimum 50 feet

Front Yard Setback:

25 feet on Highway 4 frontage, 20 feet along Balfour

Side Yard Setback:

10 feet, 0 feet if adjacent to existing commercial, 15 feet when abutting a residential use

Rear Yard Setback:

10 feet, 0 feet if adjacent to existing commercial, 15 feet when abutting a residential use

Building Height:

45 feet

Screening:

A 6-foot masonry wall shall be constructed along a property line to any residential use. Landscape screening as subject to city review. All commercial facilities shall provide masonry refuse disposal closure which meet city standards and specifications.

Parking:

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620 of the Brentwood Municipal Code. The additional parking needed for the park and ride area may be partially credited toward the off-street parking.

Bus Facilities:

Facilities must be provided in the commercial zone for covered bus stops.

Illumination of Parking Facilities and Structures:

All commercial facilities shall provide adequate lighting or illumination of parking facilities and structures in accordance with Chapter 17.062, of the Brentwood Zoning Ordinance.

Open Storage or Display:

Open storage and/or outdoor display of merchandise is prohibited in the commercial zones.

Yards:

All required yards shall be utilized for landscaping only, except for access drives to the property.

Security Measures:

All commercial facilities shall provide security measures in accordance with city standards and subject to design review.

Conservation:

All commercial facilities shall, to the greatest extent possible, incorporate energy and water conservation measures in conformance with city standards and subject to design review.

Building and Roofing Materials:

All commercial facilities should utilize those materials which have been recommended as acceptable material, subject to design review, and maintained on file within the planning department of the city of Brentwood.

 

     J.      Residential Development Standards. The Garin Ranch specific plan has been designed to provide a variety of housing types including small and large lot single-family housing, attached single-family housing, condominiums, and townhouses. Provisions have also been made to allow for low and moderate income housing and senior housing. A minimum of fifty percent of all single-family detached units within the development and within each planning area shall be:

     1.     Garage with side entry; or

     2.     Detached garages within the rear yard; or

     3.     Garage set back from the unit by at least five feet. In this case the front yard setback can be reduced.

     At least:

     1.     Twenty-five percent of all units within the southern half and northern half shall be one-story units.

     2.     Twenty-five percent of all units within the southern half and northern half shall be two story units.

     Architecture style, as further outlined in the Garin Ranch Design Guidelines should emulate the quasi historic style of Brentwood through the use of porches, steeper roof pitches and dormer windows.

     1.     Large Lot Single-family Residential: The large lot single-family residential category allows for primarily single-family detached homes. The following standards apply to this category.

     a.     Permitted Uses.

     i.      One single-family dwelling per parcel.

     ii.     Rooming and boarding subject to Brentwood Municipal Code (BMC) Section 17.650.003.

     iii.    Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to BMC Chapter 17.660.

     iv.    Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to BMC Chapter 17.850.

     v.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to BMC Chapter 17.840.

     vi.    Small family residential care facilities subject to locational criteria adopted by resolution of the planning commission of the city of Brentwood.

     vii.   The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to BMC Chapter 17.670.

     viii.  Signs subject to BMC Chapter 17.640.

     b.     Conditionally Permitted Uses.

     i.      Accessory dwelling units subject to BMC Section 17.100.005.

     ii.     Public facilities including parks, playgrounds, public schools and other public buildings.

     iii.    Churches, religious institutions and private schools.

     iv.    Community buildings, clubs and activities of quasi public, social, fraternal or recreational character such as golf, tennis and swimming clubs intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residential project.

     v.     Large residential care facilities and day care centers subject to locational criteria adopted by resolution of the planning commission of the city of Brentwood.

     c.     Site Development Standards.

 

Unit Density:

Unit density shall not be greater than 4.5 dwelling units per acre.

Lot Area:

Minimum 6,000 square feet.

Lot Width:

Minimum 60 feet for interior lots and 65 feet for corner lots, minimum of 40 feet at the street for cul-de-sac lots.

Lot Depth:

Minimum 100 feet.

Height:

No main building shall exceed the height of 2 stories or 30 feet.

Rear Yard:

Minimum 15 feet, average 20 feet for all lots except those backing up to a thoroughfare, minimum 20 feet for thoroughfare lots, average 25 feet.

Front Yard:

Minimum 20 feet for front facing garages. Minimum 15 feet for house and side facing garages.

Side Yard:

Minimum 5 feet, sum of both side yards 12 feet. Corner lots shall have a minimum 10 feet on street side.

Garage:

Maximum 45% of the lot width.

Parking:

Minimum 1.0 space per lot, on street, plus 2 covered spaces in a garage.

 

     2.     Medium Lot Single-Family Residential. The medium lot single-family residential category allows for primarily single-family detached homes. The following standards apply to this category.

     a.     Permitted Uses.

     i.      One single-family dwelling per parcel.

     ii.     Rooming and boarding subject to Brentwood Municipal Code (BMC) Section 17.650.003.

     iii.    Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to BMC Chapter 17.660.

     iv.    Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to BMC Chapter 17.850.

     v.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to BMC Chapter 17.840.

     vi.    Small family residential care facilities subject to locational criteria adopted by resolution of the planning commission of the city of Brentwood.

     vii.   The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to BMC Chapter 17.670.

     viii.  Signs subject to BMC Chapter 17.640.

     b.     Conditionally Permitted Uses.

     i.      Accessory dwelling units subject to BMC Section 17.100.005.

     ii.     Public facilities including parks, playgrounds, public schools and other public buildings.

     iii.    Churches, religious institutions and private schools.

     iv.    Community buildings, clubs and activities of quasi public, social, fraternal or recreational character such as golf, tennis and swimming clubs intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residential project.

     v.     Large residential care facilities and day care centers subject to locational criteria adopted by resolution of the planning commission of the city of Brentwood.

     c.     Site Development Standards.

 

Unit Density:

Unit density shall not be greater than 5.0 dwelling units per acre.

Lot Area:

Minimum 5,000 square feet.

Lot Width:

Minimum 50 feet for interior lots and 55 feet for corner lots, minimum of 40 feet at the street for cul-de-sac lots.

Lot Depth:

Minimum 100 feet.

Height:

No main building shall exceed the height of 2 stories and 30 feet.

Rear Yard:

Minimum 15 feet, average 20 feet for all lots except those backing up to a thoroughfare, minimum 20 feet for thoroughfare lots, average 25 feet.

Front Yard:

Minimum 15 feet for house and 20 feet for garage.

Side Yard:

Minimum 5 feet, sum of both side yards 12 feet. Corner lots shall have minimum 10 feet on street side.

Garage:

Maximum 45% of the lot width.

Parking:

Minimum 1.0 space per lot on street plus 2 covered spaces in a garage.

 

     3.     Small Lot Single-Family Residential. The small lot single-family residential category allows for single-family detached homes and duets (single-family attached homes). The following standards apply to this category.

     a.     Permitted Uses.

     i.      One single-family dwelling or duet per parcel.

     ii.     Rooming and boarding subject to Brentwood Municipal Code (BMC) Section 17.650.003.

     iii.    Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to BMC Chapter 17.660.

     iv.    Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to BMC Chapter 17.850.

     v.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to BMC Chapter 17.840.

     vi.    Small family residential care facilities subject to locational criteria adopted by resolution of the planning commission of the city of Brentwood.

     vii.   The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to BMC Chapter 17.670.

     viii.  Signs subject to BMC Chapter 17.640.

     b.     Conditionally Permitted Uses.

     i.      Accessory dwelling units subject to BMC Section 17.100.005.

     ii.     Public facilities including parks, playgrounds, public schools and other public buildings.

     iii.    Churches, religious institutions and private schools.

     iv.    Community buildings, clubs and activities of quasi public, social, fraternal or recreational character such as golf, tennis and swimming clubs intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residential project.

     v.     Large residential care facilities and day care centers subject to locational criteria adopted by resolution of the planning commission of the city of Brentwood.

     c.     Unit density shall not be greater than six dwelling units per acre.

     d.     Site Development Standards for Single-Family.

 

Unit Density:

Unit density shall not be greater than six dwelling units per acre.

Lot Area:

Minimum 4,500 square feet.

Lot Width:

Minimum 45 feet for interior lots and 50 feet for corner lots. Minimum of 35 feet at the street for cul-de-sac lots.

Lot Depth:

Minimum 100 feet.

Height:

No main building shall exceed the height of 2 stories and 30 feet.

Rear Yard:

Minimum 15 feet, average 20 feet for all lots except those backing up to a thoroughfare. Minimum 20 feet for thoroughfare lots, average 25 feet.

Front Yard:

Minimum 15 feet for house and 20 feet for garage.

Side Yard:

Minimum 0 feet, sum of both side yards 10 feet. Corner lots shall have minimum 10 feet on street side.

Garage:

Minimum 5-foot offset from the main building. Maximum 55% of the lot width.

Parking:

Minimum 1.0 space per lot on street plus 2 covered spaces in a garage. The on-street parking may also be provided via parking bays.

 

     e.     Site Development Standards for Duets.

 

Lot Area:

Minimum 3,200 square feet.

Lot Width:

Minimum 40 feet for interior lots and 45 feet for corner lots. Minimum of 35 feet at the street for cul-de-sac lots.

Height:

No main building shall exceed the height of 2 stories and 30 feet.

Rear Yard:

Minimum 15 feet, average 20 feet.

Front Yard:

Minimum 10 feet for house and 20 feet for garage.

Side Yard:

Minimum 0 feet on the attached side and 5 feet on the exposed side, provided there is a minimum of 15 feet between buildings. Duets on corner lots shall have a minimum 10 feet on the street side.

Garage:

Minimum 5-foot offset if 2 garages are attached.

Parking:

Minimum 0.5 spaces per lot on street plus 2 covered spaces in a garage. The on-street parking may also be provided via parking bays.

 

     4.     Wide-Shallow Single-Family Residential. The wide-shallow single-family residential category allows for single-family detached homes on interior lots and duets on the corners. The following standards apply to this category.

     a.     Permitted Uses.

     i.      One single-family dwelling per parcel.

     ii.     One duet per parcel on corner lots.

     iii.    Rooming and boarding subject to Brentwood Municipal Code (BMC) Section 17.650.003.

     iv.    Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to BMC Chapter 17.660.

     v.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to BMC Chapter 17.850.

     vi.    Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to BMC Chapter 17.840.

     vii.   Small family residential care facilities subject to locational criteria adopted by resolution of the planning commission of the city of Brentwood.

     viii.  The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to BMC Chapter 17.670.

     ix.    Signs subject to BMC Chapter 17.640.

     b.     Conditionally Permitted Uses.

     i.      Accessory dwelling units on single-family lots subject to BMC Section 17.100.005.

     ii.     Public facilities including parks, playgrounds, public schools and other public buildings.

     iii.    Churches, religious institutions and private schools.

     iv.    Community buildings, clubs and activities of quasi public, social, fraternal or recreational character such as golf, tennis and swimming clubs intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residential project.

     v.     Large residential care facilities and day care centers subject to locational criteria adopted by resolution of the planning commission of the city of Brentwood.

     c.     Unit density shall not be greater than seven dwelling units per acre.

     d.     Site Development Standards for Single-Family.

 

Lot Area:

Minimum 4,000 square feet

Lot Width:

Minimum 50 feet. Minimum 35 feet at the street for cul-de-sac lots.

Height:

No main building shall exceed the height of 2 stories and 30 feet.

Rear Yard:

Minimum 15 feet, average 20 feet.

Front Yard:

Minimum 20 feet for front facing garages. Minimum 15 feet for house and side facing garages.

Side Yard:

Minimum 5 feet, sum of both side yards 15 feet.

Garage:

Minimum 3-foot setback from the main building. Maximum 45% of the lot width.

Parking:

Minimum 1.0 space per lot on street plus 2 covered spaces in a garage. The on-street parking may also be provided via parking bays.

 

     e.     Site Development Standards for Duets on Corners.

 

Lot Area:

Minimum 3,200 square feet.

Lot Width:

Minimum 40 feet for interior lots and 45 feet for corner lots. Minimum of 35 feet at the street for cul-de-sac lots.

Height:

No main building shall exceed the height of 2 stories and 30 feet.

Rear Yard:

Minimum 15 feet average 20 feet.

Front Yard:

Minimum 10 feet for house and 20 feet for garage.

Side Yard:

Minimum 0 feet on the attached side and 10 feet on the exposed side. Duets on corner lots shall have minimum 10 feet on street side.

Garage:

Minimum 5-foot offset if 2 garages are attached.

Parking:

Minimum 1.0 spaces per lot on street plus 2 covered spaces in a garage. The on-street parking may also be provided via parking bays.

 

     5.     Small Lot Single-Family Alley Homes. The small lot alley home category allows for small lot detached homes served by a network of private streets and alleyways. The following standards apply to this category.

     a.     Permitted Uses.

     i.      One detached single-family home per parcel.

     ii.     Rooming and boarding subject to Brentwood Municipal Code (BMC) Section 17.650.003.

     iii.    Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to BMC Chapter 17.660.

     iv.    Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to BMC Chapter 17.850.

     v.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to BMC Chapter 17.840.

     vi.    Small family residential care facilities subject to locational criteria adopted by resolution of the planning commission of the city of Brentwood.

     vii    The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to BMC Chapter 17.670.

     viii.  Signs subject to BMC Chapter 17.640.

     b.     Conditionally Permitted Uses. Large residential care facilities and day care centers subject to locational criteria adopted by the resolution of the planning commission of the city of Brentwood.

     c.     Unit density shall not be greater than 7.9 dwelling units per acre.

     d.     Site Development Standards.

 

Lot Area:

Minimum 3,149 square feet.

Lot Frontage:

32 feet measured at the front property line.

Height:

No main building shall exceed the height of 2 stories and 30 feet.

Front Yard:

Minimum 20 feet for garage. Minimum 12 feet for living space. Minimum 10 feet for porches.

Side Yard:

Minimum 5 feet. Minimum 10 feet on the street side of corner lots.

Rear Yard:

Minimum 10 feet.

Parking:

Minimum of 2 covered spaces in a garage and two spaces within the private driveway.

 

     6.     Duet/Townhouse Residential. The duet townhouse category allows for duets (attached single-family) townhouses, and low density condominiums. Senior housing may be allowed in this planning area with a higher maximum density. The following standards apply to this category.

     a.     Permitted Uses.

     i.      One duet, townhouse, or condominium per parcel and senior housing.

     ii.     Rooming and boarding subject to Brentwood Municipal Code (BMC) Section 17.650.003.

     iii.    Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to BMC Chapter 17.660.

     iv.    Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to BMC Chapter 17.850.

     v.     Home Occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to BMC Chapter 17.840.

     vi.    Small family residential care facilities subject to locational criteria adopted by resolution of the planning commission of the city of Brentwood.

     vii.   The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to BMC Chapter 17.670.

     viii.  Signs subject to BMC Chapter 17.640.

     b.     Conditionally Permitted Uses.

     i.      Public facilities including parks, playgrounds, public schools and other public buildings.

     ii.     Churches, religious institutions and private schools.

     iii.    Community buildings, clubs and activities of quasi public, social, fraternal or recreational character such as golf, tennis and swimming clubs intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residential project.

     iv.    Large residential care facilities and day care centers subject to locational criteria adopted by the resolution of the planning commission of the city of Brentwood.

     c.     Unit density shall not be greater than ten dwelling units per acre.

     d.     Site Development Standards for Duets.

 

Lot Area:

Minimum 4,000 square feet.

Lot Width:

Minimum 40 feet for interior lots and 45 feet for corner lots. Minimum of 35 feet at the street for cul-de-sac lots.

Lot Depth:

Minimum 100 feet.

Height:

No main building shall exceed the height of 2 stories and 30 feet.

Rear Yard:

Minimum 15 feet, average 20 feet.

Front Yard:

Minimum 10 feet for house and 20 feet for garage.

Side Yard:

Minimum 0 feet on the attached side and 10 feet on the exposed side. Duets on corner lots shall have minimum 10 feet on street side.

Garage:

Minimum 5-foot offset if 2 garages are attached.

Parking:

Minimum 1.0 space per lot plus 2 covered spaces in a garage. The common parking may also be provided via parking bays.

 

     e.     Site Development Standards for Townhouses.

     i.      Site Area: Minimum five acres.

     ii.     Setbacks: Minimum setbacks from property lines shall be as follows:

 

Type of Setback

Building*

Parking*, **

Abutting a public right-of-way

20 feet plus 1 foot for each foot of building height over 20 feet

15 feet

Property lines not defining a public right-of-way

20 feet

10 feet

Abutting a lot zoned for single-family residential or abutting football field

50 feet

10 feet

*      Includes garages and accessory buildings.

**    Includes carports, driveways and other paved areas used for parking.

 

     iii.    Height: No main building shall exceed the height of two stories and thirty feet.

     iv.    Garage: Minimum five-foot offset if two garages are attached.

     v.     Parking: Minimum one-half space per dwelling unit plus two covered spaces in a garage. The common parking may also be provided via parking bays.

     vi.    Other: No more than six units may be attached, provided that no more than four units within a cluster about the same public or private street. A minimum of fifty percent of the site shall be open space, exclusive of parking lots, driveways, or residential buildings. Recreational buildings may be included in the open space area.

     f.      Site Development Standards for Condominiums.

     i.      Site Area: Minimum five acres.

     ii.     Setbacks: Minimum setbacks from property lines shall be as follows:

 

Type of Setback

Building*

Parking*, **

Abutting a public right-of-way

20 feet plus 1 foot for each foot of building height over 20 feet

15 feet

Property lines not defining a public right-of-way

20 feet

10 feet

Abutting a lot zoned for single-family residential or abutting football field

50 feet

10 feet

*      Includes garages and accessory buildings.

**    Includes carports, driveways and other paved areas used for parking.

 

     iii.    Parking: One covered space in a garage plus one and one-half uncovered spaces per unit.

     iv.    Storage: Minimum two hundred cubic feet per unit located within or adjacent to the garage.

     v.     Other: A minimum of fifty percent of the site shall be open space, exclusive of parking lots, driveways, or residential buildings. Recreational building may be located within a required open space area.

     g.     Site Development Standards for Senior Housing.

     i.      Unit Density: Unit density shall not be greater than twenty-four dwelling units per acre.

     ii.     Site Area: Minimum five acres.

     iii.    Setbacks: Minimum setbacks from property lines shall be as follows:

 

Type of Setback

Building*

Parking*, **

Abutting a public right-of-way

20 feet plus 1 foot for each foot of building height over 20 feet

15 feet

Property lines not defining a public right-of-way

20 feet

10 feet

Abutting a lot zoned for single-family residential or abutting football field

50 feet

10 feet

*      Includes garages and accessory buildings.

**    Includes carports, driveways and other paved areas used for parking.

 

     iv.    Parking: Minimum one-half covered space in a garage and one-half uncovered space per unit.

     v.     Storage: Minimum two hundred cubic feet per unit located within or adjacent to the garage.

     vi.    Other: A minimum of fifty percent of the site shall be open space, exclusive of parking lots, driveways, or residential buildings. Recreational buildings may be located within a required open space area.

     h.     Special Requirements.

     i.      Area #11: Due to the proximity to the school, only townhouses and low density condominiums will be allowed in Planning Area #11. A minimum setback of seventy-five feet shall be maintained from the school property line to the nearest residential structure.

     ii.     Area #10: A Civic Facilities overlay zone shall be applied to area #10 for possible expansion of school district or city facilities.

     K.    Public Facilities. The purpose of the public facility zone is to provide areas for public facilities such as government offices, community centers, schools and parks.

     1.     Permitted Uses.

     a.     Governmental or public administrative offices, special district offices, social service offices and similar uses and rights-of-way.

     b.     Quasi public offices such as public utility offices and rights-of-way.

     c.     Public parks, public schools.

     2.     Conditionally Permitted Uses. Other appropriate uses as determined by the planning commission.

     3.     Site Development Standards.

     a.     Minimum Lot Area: Ten thousand square feet.

     b.     Minimum Lot Width: One hundred feet.

     c.     Setbacks: Front: Minimum ten feet.

     d.     Rear: Minimum twenty feet

     e.     Side: Minimum fifteen feet

     f.      Maximum Building Height: thirty feet.

     L.     Open Space Park Standards. Open space areas are established for preservation of natural, visual resources and floodplain areas, for active and passive recreation, and for the enjoyment of the Garin Ranch community and the city of Brentwood.

     1.     Permitted Uses.

     a.     Public or quasi-public uses including, but not limited to, the following:

     i.      Parks;

     ii.     Pedestrian, bicycle and equestrian trails;

     iii.    Vista points;

     iv.    Nature preservation and study areas;

     v.     Archeological and paleontological study sites.

     b.     Infrastructure service facilities or extension necessary for the development of the adjacent urban areas including but not limited to, the following:

 

     i.      Roads;

     ii.     Flood control works;

     iii.    Utility transmission lines;

     iv.    Infrastructure service facilities or extension necessary to serve the adjacent urban areas, and as identified in subsection I herein.

     c.     Accessory uses which clearly are incidental or necessary to permitted uses.

     2.     Conditionally Permitted Uses. Tennis courts, swimming pools, sports facilities, including community or health centers.

     Stables and other equestrian-related facilities, when not located within one hundred feet of any habitable structure.

     3.     Site Development Standards. Development standards for those permitted uses shall be established by the staff approval permit or other applicable plan, as determined by the city. When uses proposed in the open space/park land use classification are permitted in other land use classifications of the Garin Ranch specific plan, the development standards in those other applicable classifications shall apply.

 

GARIN RANCH LAND USE

Residential:

 

 

 

Housing Type

Planning Area #

Acres

Dwelling Units

Cluster Home

1

6.9

64

Small S.F. Alley Homes

9

6.1

48

Zero Lot Line

5

10.5

96

Small S.F.

6

34

202

Medium S.F.

2

17.4

88

8

17.4

88

Large S.F.

7

22.4

101

Wide-Shallow S.F.

3

15.6

109

4

8.8

62

Total

 

139.1

858

Public Facilities:

 

 

 

Parks

 

6.8

 

Parks/Detention

 

17.9

 

Road ROW

 

18.6

 

Commercial

 

8.5

 

Total Plan Area

 

190.9

858

(Ord. 991 § 4, 2017; Ord. 975 § 2, 2016; Ord. 864 § D, 2009; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.467.003 Map for PD-17.


(Ord. 975 § 2, 2016; Ord. 960 § 7, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.468 PD-18 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT EIGHTEEN) ZONE
17.468.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-18 (planned development eighteen) zone is as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-18 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-18 zone is to permit and regulate development of the four hundred forty-one plus or minus acres within the zone as designated by the city general plan.

     C.     It is intended that in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-18 zone of implementing the development of single-family housing and commercial uses, the zone district shall be divided into several subareas as shown in Section 17.468.006 of this chapter and made a part of this chapter, and as further described below. The primary uses intended for this area shall consist of single-family residential, neighborhood commercial, office, park and open space uses. The boundaries of the PD-18 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.468.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.468.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-18 zone:

     Subarea A—Single-Family Residential.

     1.     Those uses which are permitted uses within the R-1 (single-family residential) zone.

     Subarea B—Neighborhood Commercial.

     1.     Convenience retail uses such as a bakery, pastry chop, bookstore, candy store, florist, newsstand, stationery/gift shop, ice cream parlor, supermarket, drugstore and similar uses;

     2.     Services uses such as laundromat, laundry or dry cleaning pickup station, shoe repair, beauty and barber shop;

     3.     Financial institutions;

     4.     Those uses which are permitted in Subarea C—Office.

     Subarea C—Office.

     1.     Business and professional offices such as architects, attorneys, accountants, engineers, insurance agency, travel agency, real estate, medical, dental, dental laboratory, optical clinics, title companies, financial institutions, automatic teller machine (ATM); other professional and general business offices and data processing facilities. Both single- and multi-tenant office uses are permitted;

     2.     Service uses including addressing and mailing service, blueprinting, printing and photostating service; drafting service; messenger service; television, computer, radio and appliance repair; stenographic service; telegraph office; answering service; private postal box service; and similar services typically associated with administrative and professional offices. Automotive, boat, recreational vehicle or similar sales and/or service are specifically prohibited;

     3.     Information data processing facilities;

     4.     Storage, warehousing and warehousing uses which include a small percentage of office uses, including, but not limited to, general contractors, plumbing contractors, and electrical contractors, provided that there is no outdoor storage;

     5.     Finish product assembly such as computer assembly, bookbinding and garment manufacturer;

     6.     Commercial uses or retail sales including but not limited to commercial uses which may or may not manufacture their primary product on the premises such as drapery shop, cabinet shop, upholstery shop, carpet sales, spa sales, sales of building supplies, satellite dish sales and furniture sales.

     Subarea D—Open Space.

     1.     Parks and related facilities. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.468.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses require special consideration and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.830:

     Subarea A—Single-Family Residential.

     1.     Those conditionally permitted uses within the R-1 (single-family residential) zone.

     Subarea B—Neighborhood Commercial.

     1.     Restaurant or café restricted to sit down facility only, excepting a drive-through coffee use approved only for the east end of the building located at 390 West Country Club Drive approved with Design Review 04-37, and on and off sale liquor establishments;

     2.     Convenience banking center, drive-in or drive-through establishments relating to permitted uses in the zone, excluding a drive-in or drive-through restaurant;

     3.     Nursery, child care, day care center, meeting hall or fraternal hall, community center;

     4.     Those uses which are conditionally permitted in Subarea C—Office.

     Subarea C—Office.

     1.     Hospitals; medical facilities; facilities for care of the elderly including residential, congregate residential and convalescent care;

     2.     Restaurants and other facilities serving employees;

     3.     Financial institutions.

     4.     Health club, reducing studio or recreational club;

     5.     Veterinary clinic;

     6.     Public and quasi-public use such as government office, library, employment office, utility offices, and similar uses, including daycare facilities;

     7.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator.

     Subarea D—Open Space.

     1.     Golf course and associated uses, including the clubhouse, driving range, etc.

     Subarea E (APN 019 680 023)—Recreational Vehicle and Boat Storage.

     1.     Recreational vehicle and boat/watercraft storage on the property identified as APN 019680023 that shall be limited to use only by the residents of the Shadow Lakes development which includes Final Map Subdivision Numbers 7705, 8210, 8299, 8305, 8322, 8344, 8373, 8374, 8375, 8659, 8663 and 8953. The storage of inoperable vehicles is expressly prohibited. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.468.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters—Development plan required.
     Subarea A—Single-Family Residential.

     1.     Minimum lot area: the minimum lot area shall be six thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: the minimum lot width shall be sixty feet. Cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum lot width of sixty feet as measured parallel thirty feet back from the front property line;

     3.     Minimum lot frontage: the minimum lot frontage shall be one-half of the required minimum lot width;

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: the front yard setback shall be twenty feet as measured from the property line to the face of the garage and fifteen feet to any building façade or side entry garage;

     5.     Minimum side yard setbacks: side yard setbacks shall be fifteen feet aggregate, with five feet being the minimum as measured from the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet. Minimum distance between houses shall be fifteen feet;

 

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: the minimum rear yard setback shall be fifteen feet with an overall average setback of twenty feet as measured from the building foundation;

     7.     Maximum building height: the maximum building height for all structures shall be two stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet. Split-level lots may be three stories, which do not exceed thirty-five feet in height as measured from the lowest pad elevation on the lot;

     8.     Architectural Design.

     a.     Three-car garages including golf cart garages shall be allowed on lots over sixty feet wide, and four-car garages shall be allowed on lots over eighty feet, provided that any garage does not exceed thirty-two feet in width, as measured at the garage door face. All third or fourth car garages shall be offset from the main plane of the house,

     b.     Dual side entry four-car garages shall be allowed on lots over eighty feet wide as long as there are two separate garage structures,

     c.     A single off-set four-car garage may have a reduced inside length of eighteen feet,

     d.     All front entry doors shall be visible from the street and shall provide a minimum of two steps into the house,

     e.     The use of stone and masonry accent material is encouraged. The use of a variety of roof materials (tile, fire retardant shake) is encouraged,

     f.      A variety of architectural designs shall be used in clusters throughout the development area. The exact design shall be determined at the time of design review.

     Subarea B—Neighborhood Commercial.

     1.     Minimum lot area: the minimum lot area shall be 0.80 acres;

     2.     Minimum street frontage yard: the minimum street frontage yard consisting of building frontage along all public streets shall be twelve feet which shall be landscaped. A public sidewalk shall be included within this required width;

     3.     Minimum non-street frontage yard: the minimum non-street frontage yard shall be zero feet except that the minimum building setback from a residential zone shall be twenty feet, which shall be landscaped;

     4.     Maximum building height: the maximum building height shall be two stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet.

     Subarea C—Office.

     1.     Minimum lot area: the minimum lot area shall be one acre;

     2.     Minimum street frontage yard: the minimum street frontage yard consisting of building frontage along all public streets shall be fifteen feet which shall be landscaped. A public sidewalk shall be included within this required width;

     3.     Minimum non-street frontage yard: the minimum non-street frontage yard shall be zero feet except that the minimum building setback from a residential zone shall be twenty-five feet, which shall be landscaped;

     4.     Maximum building height: the maximum building height shall be two stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet.

     Subarea D—Open Space.

     1.     Parks and open space shall be substantially as approved with VTSM 7705.

     Subarea E—Recreational Vehicle Storage. Development standards shall be determined by subsequent conditional use permit approval. Such conditional use permit shall include the following: Sufficient landscaping to screen the facility from adjacent residential uses, limited hours of operation, maximum size, height ad length of vehicles stored, maximum number of vehicles stored, security measures for the facility which shall also prohibit the use of barbed wire or other razor-type wire, and restrictions limited the use of the facility to the residents of the Shadow Lakes development which includes Final Map Subdivision Numbers 7705, 8210, 8299, 8305, 8322, 8344, 8373, 8374, 8375, 8659, 8663, and 8953. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.468.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Landscaping. The landscaping standards for this development area shall comply with the regulations contained in Chapter 17.630, Landscaping and Screening, except as provided below:

     1.     Street Trees. Street trees are required to be planted on all streets within the development area. Tree spacing shall be staggered thirty feet on center on the parkway, and an average of thirty feet on center on other, residential streets. This also includes the Balfour Road frontage adjacent to soundwalls. Trees along the golf course frontage on Balfour Road should be clustered to allow views into the golf course.

     2.     Entryway Design and Balfour Road Landscaping. The design of the entryways shall consist of signage, landscaping, hardscape and other materials in the development area shall be reviewed by the planning commission. Landscaping and soundwall design shall be consistent along Balfour Road.

     3.     Graded Slope Landscaping.

     a.     All graded slopes shall require revegetation with native plant species, which are indigenous to the Brentwood area, whenever possible, to retain natural character, maintain views and contribute towards slope stabilization.

     b.     To ensure safe fire protection, fuel modification zones utilize plant materials that provide a gradual transition to natural vegetation to avoid hard planted edges.

     c.     Landscape plans for all graded slope areas shall be reviewed by the fire chief, planning commission, and other interested parties prior to implementation.

     B.     Parks and Open Space. All park areas and any relevant open space areas or alterations thereto shall require design review by the parks commission prior to final tract map approval, for each park in that particular tract. Facilities to be included in each park are as follows:

     1.     Mini-parks (0 to 2 acres).

     a.     Free play lawn area,

     b.     Shade landscaping,

     c.     Benches and low seat walls,

     d.     Picnic table with barbeque,

     e.     Other facilities required at the time of park plan submittal;

     2.     Neighborhood Parks (2.1+ acres).

     a.     Play equipment such as swings, slides, jungle gyms and climbing apparatus,

     b.     Softball and Little League field, including, but not limited to, bleachers, dugouts, skinned infield,

     c.     Volleyball pit, par course, full-court basketball,

     d.     Picnic tables, barbecue pits, drinking fountains,

     e.     Restrooms,

     f.      Other facilities required at the time of park plan submittal;

     3.     Open Space.

     a.     Areas to remain as open space, as indicated on the approved subarea map as subarea D may be required to be offered for dedication as part of a public open space or park system. Where such offer of dedication is not accepted, the development shall provide legal arrangements, acceptable to the council, sufficient to assure the maintenance and preservation of such open space for whatever purpose it is intended. Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify the ownership of the open space; method of maintenance; responsibility for maintenance; maintenance; taxes and insurance; compulsory membership and assessment provisions; guarantees that any association formed to own and maintain common open space will not be dissolved without the consent of the council; and any specification deemed necessary to the city,

     b.     All ungraded open space areas shall remain in their natural state, with no additional plantings,

     c.     All property approved as a golf course shall remain as open space, until such time as a golf course is deemed necessary for implementation. At no time shall any residential development occupy that area designated as a golf course except as that area described as a 1.64 acre Parcel “D,” created by MS 10-002, located east of West Country Club Drive and south of Lakeview Drive,

     d.     Public play shall be provided to the golf course. The exact terms and agreements between the developer and the city shall be negotiated prior to opening of the course.

     C.     Hillside Development and Grading. This subsection pertains to the design and development of prominent hilltop and ridgeline areas. This section is required due to the physical nature of the property. All requirements for development, as outlined in PD-18, shall be complied with in addition to this subsection.

     1.     Ridge Views. Off-site views of distant ridgelines as seen off-site (looking west, and northwest) should not be impaired and shall be protected;

     2.     Pad Grading.

     a.     All 2:1 slopes shall not exceed twenty feet between pads, shall be located in rear or side yards, and shall be hidden from public view. All plot plans shall give final pad elevations and top of slope elevations for each lot,

     b.     Every means shall be undertaken to provide split-level lots (vertical and horizontal) which correspond to the natural contour,

     c.     All building pads that do not drain to the street shall have drains installed in the rear portion of the lot for horizontal rear yard split-level lots. All other lots shall drain to the front of the lot and away from the house foundation. Individual lot drains shall be installed, where necessary;

     3.     Contour Grading. Cut and fill slopes shall be designed without long uninterrupted flat surfaces, meaning that the slopes shall be sculptured with existing contour and without sharp angles of intersection at top and bottom of slopes. Slopes shall be rounded at top and bottom, and wherever constructed slopes shall blend with existing topography;

     4.     Erosion Control. Slope and pads graded and left longer than ninety days should be hydroseeded or planted with nonirrigated materials and allowed to naturalize. During the rainy season (October fifteenth through April fifteenth), slopes and pads graded and left longer than thirty days should be hydroseeded or planted with nonirrigated materials and allowed to naturalize;

     5.     Wall and Fence Location. All masonry soundwalls, park, golf course and “good neighbor” fences shall be set back a minimum of one foot at the top of slope. All lots which abut the golf course shall have a six-foot high wrought iron fence with brick columns or similar materials planned for project consistency set at thirty-foot intervals;

     6.     Architectural Design. This subsection is to provide direction for the design and construction of homes within this subarea, due to the physical nature of this subarea.

     a.     A variety of roof orientations and types which emphasize roof pitches reflecting the overall slope of the hillside are required,

     b.     Large, two-story unbroken wall expanses which face public view shall be avoided, such wall expanses shall be enhanced through varied architectural elements,

     c.     Exterior finishes of dwelling units and structures shall blend in with natural surroundings of the area and shall not dominate the natural environment,

     d.     The need for building skirting shall be kept at a minimum by stepping the foundation and using appropriate hillside architectural designs,

     e.     Building height and scale shall respond to the existing terrain,

     f.      All side split-level lots shall be limited to a two-car garage. However, through the design review process, a third car garage may be allowed if the garage is side entry and offset from the main plane of the house.

     D.    Streets.

     1.     Street Standards.

     a.     All public and private street standards within the development area shall conform with those standards adopted by the department of public works for residential collector and cul-de-sac streets. However, East Country Club Drive and West Country Club Drive which provides access to the project shall have a ROW of ninety-six feet. Single loaded parkway areas next to the golf course shall have a reduced street width, eliminating the parking lane. The road standard shall be shown on an approved vesting tentative map,

     b.     Private streets within gated areas shall be allowed to have a sidewalk on one side of the street only,

     c.     All on-street parking and sidewalks shall be eliminated on streets which abut the golf course;

     2.     Light Standards. Street lights for the parkway and local residential streets, pedestrians and lights for walkways shall be staggered on each side of the street, and the standards for the public streets shall be approved by the department of public works. In no case shall lighting spill over into private lots from neighborhood commercial, park and driving range facilities.

     E.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     F.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     G.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     H.    Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     I.      Uses within the neighborhood commercial and office areas shall comply with those development standards as defined in Section 17.200.003.

     J.      Uses within the neighborhood commercial area and office areas shall comply with those performance standards as defined in Section 17.200.004.

     K.    Design review applications for the homes shall be limited to the first one hundred lots, in one hundred-lot increments.

     L.     Fifty percent of the homes along the Delta Expressway and Balfour Road shall be single-story.

     M.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003, 17.100.004(H) and Chapter 17.820.

     N.    A master plotting plan, illustrating the placement of the house plans, shall be submitted for each phase or tract of development.

     O.    The use of model home complexes shall be allowed within a recorded tract and subsequent tracts throughout the development plan are subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit as required by Chapter 17.850.

     P.     All development shall comply with Chapter 17.805, Phased Development Plan, and that all adequate agreements between the developer(s) and the city are in place (financing mechanisms, phasing, etc.) prior to approval of any tract map(s). (Ord. 890 § 2, 2011; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.468.006 Map for PD-18.
 



(Ord. 960 § 8, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.469 PD-19 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT NINETEEN) ZONE
17.469.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-19 (planned development nineteen) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-19 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose and Intent. The purpose of the PD-19 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of Tract 7399 (Phase IV) of the Four Seasons development located south of Balfour Road and west of Marsh Creek. Four Seasons Phase IV consists of approximately thirty-nine gross acres intended for the development of up to one hundred twenty-two residential dwelling units. The exact number of units will be determined through the tentative map procedure, Chapter 16.050. The density for this phase shall not exceed 3.15 dwelling units/acre. The boundary of the PD-19 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.469.005. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.469.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-19 zone.

     A.    The following uses shall be permitted:

     1.     One single-family dwelling per parcel;

     2.     Accessory uses subject to Section 17.650.003, excluding rooming and boarding, transient housing, and nonresidential accessory uses (i.e., Christmas tree lot, fruit stand, etc.);

     3.     Accessory buildings subject to Section 17.660.006 and accessory structures subject to Section 17.660.007. Temporary uses defined in Section 17.850.003 shall also be excluded;

     4.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     5.     Community and neighborhood parks as shown on approved tentative map;

     6.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     7.     Small-family day care facilities limited to a maximum of six children. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.469.003 Standards.
     A.    Street Standards.

     1.     Introduction. The design of streets provides for comfortable and convenient pedestrian access throughout the neighborhood by creating direct routes, and by promoting visual interest at a human scale along the way;

     2.     Standards.

     a.     Street Standards. Street widths will be sixty feet ROW for major residential streets and a fifty-six foot ROW for minor residential streets. The location of the streets shall be as indicated on an approved tentative map,

     b.     Sidewalks, Crosswalks and Bike Trails.

     i.      Sidewalks are to be continuous and link with other paths rather than dead end. They are to be generally straight with minimal meandering. There shall be a five-foot-wide parkway strip placed between the back of curb and the sidewalk on all streets except the south side of F Drive which shall have an eight-foot meandering sidewalk,

     ii.     Bike paths: concrete or A.C. paving to be consistent with city-wide bike path master plan.

     c.     Utility Location and Screening. All electrical and utility vaults are to be placed below ground,

     d.     Mailboxes. Individual or duplex mailboxes are strongly encouraged rather than ganged mailboxes of four, six or twelve. The post, stand and enclosure should be in keeping with the character of the homes. A design for the mailboxes shall be submitted for staff review and approval prior to construction.

     B.     Residential Standards.

     1.     Height. Building heights in the residential areas shall not exceed two stories or thirty feet;

     2.     Setbacks. Building setbacks vary depending on site plan configuration and whether side drive or corner lot.

     a.     Minimum lot area: Four thousand seven hundred twenty-five square feet,

     b.     Minimum lot frontage: Thirty feet for cul-de-sac and knuckle lots and forty-five feet for standard lots,

     c.     Minimum width for corner lots shall be fifty feet,

     d.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred five feet,

     e.     Front yard: Twelve feet six inches minimum to front porch and seventeen feet five inches to the house; units to be staggered along the street three feet to five feet where possible. Fifty feet minimum to the garage on a standard lot with a front-on garage and five feet minimum with a side-on garage with two parking spaces provided in the driveway,

     f.      Side yard for house: Three feet minimum, seventeen feet aggregate,

     g.     Side yard for detached garage: One foot interior lot and five feet for side-on garage on a corner lot. If garage is accessed straight on, then a twenty-foot setback shall be maintained,

     h.     Rear yard: three feet for the garage. Twenty-five feet minimum for a one-story house and thirty feet for a two-story house,

     i.      Encroachment into yards: Chapter 17.660 dealing with encroachment into required yards does not apply. Where permitted by building codes, eaves may extend one-half the distance between the building and the property line. Chimneys may project into the side yard setback by one and one-half feet, provided that the side fence is set back to the rear of the chimney,

     j.      Minimum building separation: Seventeen feet between houses, active orientation; ten feet between houses, passive orientation, with seven foot/three foot side yard minimums; six feet minimum between garages (See the development plan and related exhibits,

     k.     Unit mix: Twenty-five percent single-story units will be provided;

     3.     Building Configuration, Orientation.

     a.     Include rear yard garages accessed via side drive. The front yard setbacks are reduced to bring the entry/porch and living areas closer to the sidewalks, encouraging interaction with neighbors;

     4.     Porches/Entries. Front doors must be on the front façade and be visible from the street. Front porches must have a minimum square footage of fifty-five square feet;

     5.     Side drives are a maximum of ten feet wide from curb cut to parking courtyard where it may widen out. Special paving or a “Hollywood” drive is required for the ten-foot wide portion of the side drive at a minimum;

     6.     Corner Lots. Standard setbacks (in paragraph 2 of this subsection) apply for corner lots. The side drive elevation of the unit should face the corner property line whenever possible. The driveway must access the parking court by the side property line with a maximum twelve-foot curb cut and drive. The area in front of the garage must allow for a minimum of two off-street parking spaces;

     7.     Architectural Design. To ensure a certain amount of variation within the development, a minimum of three unit types, three variations on each unit type and three individual color schemes, and two roofing materials with two roof colors or one material and three colors are required.

     a.     Articulation and Massing and Roofs. Combination of gables and hip roof forms will be used. Roof slopes shall be 5:12 or greater for primary roofs. Articulation of the building façade should relate to the roof form of the building. No “bubble” skylights visible from the street allowed,

     b.     Materials. Horizontal board siding, shingles or stucco is required for all homes. No plywood siding is allowed,

     c.     Windows. Front elevation windows shall be vertical in proportion, or divided by mullions, or divided into separate lights. Long horizontal sliding windows are strongly discouraged,

     d.     Fencing. Fencing may be of a different board siding than the homes. Side yard fencing will be recessed a minimum of ten feet behind front façade of house. On corner lots, fencing will only enclose the rear yard on street side and be recessed a minimum of two feet behind the garage façade. Visible fencing for corner lots shall be of an upgraded material and stained or painted to match the siding of the homes;

     8.     Yard Trees and Landscaping.

     a.     Two trees required per interior lot; minimum of three trees required per corner lot to be planted between the sidewalk and the curb. Approximate spacing for street trees shall be twenty feet on center(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.469.004 Design and site development review.
     A.    The design and site development review procedure contained in Chapter 17.820 shall apply to this development.

     B.     If not specifically covered in these PD standards, it is then governed by Title 17, the zoning ordinance of the city. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.469.005 Map for PD-19.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.470 PD-20 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT TWENTY) ZONE
17.470.001 Authority, applicable law, purpose and intent.
     The authority, applicable law, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-20 (planned development twenty) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-20 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Applicable Law. “Brentwood Municipal Code” means the Brentwood Municipal Code in effect at the time of adoption of the PD ordinance codified in this chapter.

     C.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-20 zone is to permit and regulate the development of seven hundred twenty acres described on the development plan and related exhibits and to allow a mixture of uses, unusual building intensity and design characteristics, and variations in density that would not normally be permitted in a single-use zone. This land is designated by the Brentwood community development plan for planned employment center, park/recreation, residential (urban), commercial/office, public facility, school, and street uses.

     D.    Intent. It is intended that, in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-20 zone of implementing the development of a planned employment center in conformance with the Brentwood community development plan, development within the PD-20 zone shall be in such accordance by inclusion of land uses substantially conforming to the locations and acreage shown on the development plan and related exhibits. It is further intended that no construction shall occur in the PD-20 zone before approval of a development plan and adoption of detailed regulations for development, as set forth in Section 17.470.005. The boundaries of the PD-20 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.470.008. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.470.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-20 zone.

     A.    Single-Family (SF). Permitted uses shall be attached single-family homes, including model homes sales facilities; common-use recreation facilities; and other uses, including home occupations, determined similar or compatible by the zoning administrator.

     B.     General Commercial. The following uses shall be permitted:

     1.     General retail sales, excluding uses with outdoor storage or display, professional office uses; veterinarian or pet store, excluding kennels;

     2.     Service uses, including but not limited to, addressing and mailing service; appliance, television and radio repair; barber or beauty shop; butcher, meat market, including frozen food locker; shoe repair, laundromat, dry cleaners and similar uses.

     3.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator.

     C.     Planned Employment Center. The following uses shall be permitted:

     1.     Business and professional offices such as architects, attorneys, accountants, engineers, insurance agency, travel agency, real estate, medical, dental, dental laboratory, optical clinics, title companies, financial institutions, other professional and general business offices and data processing facilities. Both single and multi-tenant office uses are permitted;

     2.     Service uses, including addressing and mailing service, blueprinting and photostating service (other than a printer or lithographer); drafting service; messenger service; television, computer, radio and appliance repair; stenographic service; telegraph office; answering service; private postal box service and similar services typically associated with administrative and professional offices. Automotive, boat, recreational vehicle or similar sales and/or service are specifically prohibited;

     3.     Information data processing facilities;

     4.     Storage, warehousing and warehousing uses which include a small percentage of office uses, such as general contractors, plumbing contractors, electrical contractors, etc., provided that there is no outdoor storage;

     5.     Finished product assembly such as computer assembly, bookbinding and garment manufacture;

     6.     Commercial uses or retail sales, including, but not limited to, commercial uses which may or may not manufacture their primary product on the premises such as drapery shop, cabinet shop, upholstery shop, carpet sales, spa sales, sales of building supplies, satellite dish sales, and furniture sales. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.470.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted only on the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830.

     A.    Single-Family (SF).

     1.     Those uses which are conditionally permitted in the R-1 zone district with the exception of attached housing, which shall be a permitted use as governed by Section 17.130.003(C).

     B.     General Commercial.

     1.     Auto service station, tire shop, repair shop, machine shop, auto seat and upholstery shop; billiard hall; bowling alleys; card room gaming; dance hall; laboratory-medical, dental, optical; meeting room-lodge fraternal hall, community facility; medical or dental office; hospital; restaurant or café, on or off-sale liquor establishments; recreation services such as bowling alley, skating rink and similar uses;

     2.     All drive-in, drive-thru establishments, building materials, garden supply, outdoor sales or display, automated car wash;

     3.     Other uses that the zoning administrator determines, because of type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure.

     C.     Planned Employment Center.

     1.     Hospitals; medical facilities; facilities for care of the elderly, including residential, congregate residential and convalescent care;

     2.     Restaurants;

     3.     Health club or recreational club;

     4.     Veterinary clinic;

     5.     Public and quasi-public use such as government office, library, employment office, utility offices, and similar uses, including day care facilities;

     6.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator.

     D.    Open Space/Golf Course.

     1.     Golf course and associated uses, including clubhouse, driving range, swimming and tennis facilities, and related uses. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.470.004 Residential densities and other uses.
     In no case shall residential densities or total permitted units exceed the number shown on the development plan and related exhibits. All other permitted uses shall be in locations as identified on the development plan and related exhibits. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.470.005 Density, lot area, yards, height, special provisions and other regulations for development—Development plan required.
     The development plan and related exhibits include development on approximately five hundred seventy acres of land bounded by Balfour and Briones Valley Roads, the city limit line and ECCID lateral No. 7. Before development can occur on approximately one hundred thirty-six acres bounded by the Delta Expressway, Balfour Road and ECCID lateral No. 7, this zone district shall be amended to include a development plan and accompanying regulations. This area is illustrated on the development plan and related exhibits. The development plan shall be approved by the planning commission and the city council. The plan shall establish standards for lot area, density, yards, height and parking, and may also contain provisions governing design and site review, landscaping plans, and related matters. Except as otherwise specified in the regulations so adopted, development of the PD-20 zone shall be in accordance with existing city standards as contained in Chapters 17.200 and 17.300.

     A.    SF-4000 and SF-4500.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Four thousand and four thousand five hundred square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Forty feet (SF-4000) and forty-five feet (SF-4500);

     3.     Minimum lot frontage: One-half of the required lot width;

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet as measured from the back of sidewalk to the face of the garage. Setback shall be fifteen feet to any porch or architectural projection;

     5.     Minimum side yard setbacks: Twelve feet aggregate, with five as a minimum, as measured from the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet;

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Fifteen feet with an average overall setback of twenty feet as measured from the building foundation;

     7.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet.

     B.     SF-5000 and SF-6000.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Five thousand and six thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Fifty feet (SF-5000) and sixty feet (SF-6000);

     3.     Minimum lot frontage: One-half of the required lot width for each particular subarea;

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet as measured from the back of sidewalk to the garage face and fifteen feet to any porch or projection;

     5.     Minimum side yard setbacks: Fifteen feet aggregate, with a minimum setback of five feet. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet;

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Fifteen feet with an average setback of twenty feet as measured from the building foundation;

     7.     Maximum building height: Thirty-five feet.

     C.     SF-7500 and SF-10000.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Seven thousand five hundred and ten thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Seventy feet (SF-7500) and eighty feet (SF-10000);

     3.     Minimum lot frontage: One-half of the minimum lot width;

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet;

     5.     Minimum side yard setbacks: Fifteen feet aggregate for single story, with five feet being minimum and twenty feet aggregate for two-story structures, with ten feet being minimum;

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet as measured from the house foundation;

     7.     Maximum building height: Thirty-five feet. Split-level lots and natural grade lots shall have a maximum of three stories.

     D.    Landscaping. The landscape standards for this development shall comply with the regulations contained in Chapter 17.630, Landscaping and Screening, except as provided below:

     1.     Street Trees. Street trees are required to be planed on all streets within the development area, as indicated on the development plan and related exhibits. Tree spacing shall be thirty feet on center on every street, including Balfour Road and Concord Avenue, except those areas having frontage along the golf course, park, or open space areas. Specific landscape plans shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect for those areas. A street tree master plan shall be approved for each tract map by the community development director;

     2.     Graded Slope Landscaping.

     a.     All graded slopes shall require re-vegetation with native plant species, which are indigenous to the Brentwood area. Native species shall match those existing on adjacent undisturbed land in both species and mix so as to appear natural once established,

     b.     To ensure safe fire protection, fuel modification zones which utilize plant materials that provide a gradual transition to natural vegetation to avoid hard planted edges shall be used,

     c.     Landscape and irrigation plans for all graded slope areas shall be reviewed by the fire chief and planning commission prior to implementation;

     3.     Transition Plantings. New landscape materials introduced as transition planting shall be used to integrate the manmade and natural environments, to screen and soften the visual impact of development. Plant materials shall be chosen from “Water Conserving Plants and Landscapes for the Bay Area,” published by the East Bay Municipal Utility District. Temporary irrigation systems will be required only where necessary to establish plant materials.

     E.     Parks and Open Space. The development area, as indicated on the development plan and related exhibits shall include a minimum of sixteen plus or minus acres of park area, the payment of in-lieu fees, or a combination thereof, as required by the city’s general plan. All park areas and any relevant open space areas shall require design review by the planning commission prior to final tract map approval, for each park in that tract. Facilities to be included in each park are as follows:

     1.     Mini-Park (Zero to Two Acres).

     a.     Free lawn play,

     b.     Shade landscaping,

     c.     Benches and low seat walls,

     d.     Picnic tables with barbecue,

     e.     Other facilities required at the time of park plan submittal;

     2.     Neighborhood Park (Two Plus Acres).

     a.     Play equipment such as swings, slides, jungle gyms, and climbing apparatus,

     b.     Softball and Little League field, including bleachers, dugouts, skinned infield, etc.,

     c.     Volleyball pit, par course, basketball,

     d.     Picnic tables, barbecue, drinking fountains, etc.,

     e.     Restrooms,

     f.      Other facilities required at the time of park plan submittal;

     3.     Open Space.

     a.     Areas to remain open space, as indicated on the development plan and related exhibits, may be required to be offered for dedication as part of a public open space or park system. Where such offer of dedication is not accepted, the development shall provide legal arrangements, acceptable to the council, sufficient to assure the maintenance and preservation of such open space for whatever purpose it is intended. Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify the ownership of the open space; method of maintenance; responsibility for maintenance, maintenance, taxes and insurance; compulsory membership and assessment provisions; guarantees that any association formed to own and maintain common open space will not be dissolved without the consent of the city council; and any specification deemed necessary to the city,

     b.     All ungraded open space areas should remain in their natural state, with no additional plantings,

     c.     All property described on the development plan and related exhibits as a golf course shall remain as open space, until such time as a golf course is deemed necessary for implementation. At no such time shall any residential development occur within that area designated as a golf course.

     F.     Hillside Development and Grading. This subsection pertains to the design and development of prominent hilltop and ridgeline areas as shown on the development plan and related exhibits. All requirements for development, as outlined in PD-20, shall be complied with in addition to this subsection.

     1.     Ridgeline Views. Off-site views of distant ridgelines on-site and beyond as seen from the intersection of Balfour Road and Fairview Avenue (looking southwest) shall not be impaired and shall be protected as shown on the development plan and related exhibits. The following guidelines shall be incorporated into design development submittals as outlined in the development plan and related exhibits;

     2.     Erosion Control. Slope and pads graded and left longer than ninety days shall be hydroseeded or planted with nonirrigated materials and allowed to naturalize. During the rainy season (October 15th through April 15th), slopes and pads graded and left longer than thirty days shall be hydroseeded or planted with nonirrigated materials and allowed to naturalize;

     3.     Hillside Development Objectives. In reviewing the preliminary development plans for hillside areas, the attainment of the following objectives will be paramount:

     a.     The preservation of natural topographic features and appearances by means of land sculpturing so as to blend any manmade or manufactured slope into the natural topography,

     b.     The preservation of natural topographic features and appearances through restrictions on successive padding and terracing of building sites in hillside areas,

     c.     The retention of natural skyline profiles so as to avoid abrupt changes in grades,

     d.     The retention of major natural topographic features such as canyons, drainage swales, steep slopes, watershed areas, flood plains, view corridors and scenic vistas,

     e.     The preservation and enhancement of prominent landmark features, such as natural rock outcroppings, prominent trees and plant materials and other special natural features,

     f.      The design and arrangement of building sites utilizing increased lot sizes, greater setbacks and setback variations and reduced residential densities on steeper terrain so as to limit the extent of grading alterations,

     g.     Utilization of clustered sites and buildings and increased densities on more gently sloping terrain so as to reduce gradient alterations on steeper, more pronounced terrain,

     h.     The utilization of varying setbacks, building heights, innovative building techniques and compatible building forms, materials and colors which serve to blend all buildings into the terrain,

     i.      The utilization of building designs, locations and arrangements which serve to avoid a continuous intrusive skyline effect and which afford view privacy and protection,

     j.      The preservation and introduction of plant materials so as to protect slopes from soil erosion and slippage and minimize the visual effects of grading and construction on hillside areas,

     k.     The introduction and utilization of permanent full coverage irrigation systems adequate to sustain existing and developed slope plantings and to protect against potential hazards due to fire,

     l.      The utilization of street designs and improvements which serve to minimize grading alterations and harmonize with the natural contours and character of the hillside, and

     m.    Mitigating measures in accordance with the approved soils report that will reduce underground water seepage problems which may occur because of increased irrigation or alteration of the natural contours to acceptable safety levels.

     4.     Contour Grading. Cut and fill slopes shall be designed without long uninterrupted flat surfaces, and without sharp angles of intersection at the top and bottom, and wherever constructed slopes blend with existing topography;

     5.     Pad Grading.

     a.     All interior lot slopes shall not exceed thirty feet in height between pads unless that slope is graded at a ratio of 3:1 or flatter. All slopes steeper than 3:1 shall not be visually prominent from the adjacent street. All plot plans shall give final pad elevations, toe of slope elevations and define slope gradient, i.e., 2:1, 3:1, etc., where necessary for each lot,

     b.     Consideration shall be given to provide split level lot pads, (vertical and horizontal) which correspond to the natural contour,

     c.     All lot pad grade elevation differences occurring within the front of street side yard areas shall be designed to fan or radiate over the affected yard space beginning at the front yard building set back line,

     d.     All graded flat building pads shall drain to the front of the lot and away from the building foundation,

     e.     All site grading shall be in substantial conformance with the preliminary grading plan which is a part of the vesting tentative map,

     f.      All building foundations shall be constructed as recommended by the soils engineering report.

     6.     Architectural Design. This subsection is to provide direction for the design and construction of homes.

     a.     A variety of roof orientations and types which emphasize roof pitches reflecting the overall slope of the hillside and street are encouraged,

     b.     Large wall expanses which face public view shall be avoided, such wall expanses shall be enhanced through varied architectural elements,

     c.     Lots that have side splits shall locate the garage on the downhill (lower elevation) split,

     d.     Exterior finishes of dwelling units and structures shall blend in with natural surroundings of the area and shall not dominate the natural environment.

     G.    Streets, Lighting Standards.

     1.     Street Standards. All public streets within the development area shall conform to those standards as shown on the development plan and related exhibits. All road standards shall be shown on a vesting tentative map;

     2.     Light Standards. Street lights for the entire project shall be staggered on each side of the street, and the standards for public streets shall be approved by the department of public works. Lighting shall be shielded so as to not intrude onto adjacent properties of a residential nature.

     H.    General Commercial.

     1.     Minimum lot area: twenty-five thousand square feet, except that a master-planned shopping center may be subdivided into parcels having a minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet and a minimum lot width of one hundred feet;

     2.     Minimum street frontage: one hundred feet, except in the event of a subdivision pursuant to subsection (H)(1) of this section where frontage is not required provided perpetual access is provided by easements;

     3.     Minimum street frontage yards: twenty feet along Balfour Road and ten feet along John Muir Parkway, except for driveway approaches, shall be landscaped pursuant to Section 17.630;

     4.     Minimum interior side yards: none required;

     5.     Minimum rear yards: ten feet;

     6.     Maximum building height: the maximum height of all structures shall be two stories not to exceed thirty feet.

     I.      Planned Employment Center.

     1.     Minimum lot area: one acre, except that a master planned development may be subdivided into smaller parcels with the approval of the planning commission.

     2.     Minimum street frontage: one hundred feet, except in the event of a subdivision pursuant to the subsection above, no minimum frontage is required provided a reciprocal access easement is recorded between or among adjacent parcels within a master plan.

     3.     Minimum building setback requirements: fifteen feet on all sides unless more is required to mitigate any potential noise impacts.

     4.     Minimum building height: two stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet.

     J.      Development Standards for Subarea C.

     1.     Minimum lot area: one acre, except that a master planned development may be subdivided into smaller parcels with the approval of the planning commission.

 

     2.     Minimum street frontage: one hundred feet, except in the event of a subdivision pursuant to the subsection above, no minimum frontage is required provided a reciprocal access easement is recorded between or among adjacent parcels within a master plan.

     3.     Minimum building setback requirements: fifteen feet on all sides unless more is required to mitigate any potential noise impacts.

     4.     Minimum building height: two stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet; architectural elements may project to forty feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008; Ord. 789 § 3, 2004)

 

17.470.006 Oak tree preservation.
     A.    Purpose. The purpose of the oak tree preservation regulations is to preserve and protect native oak species to the extent feasible. Preserving oak trees will maintain the scenic qualities and open space that contribute to a sense of place.

     B.     Location of Existing Trees. The location of all existing oak trees of four-inch caliper or greater, as measured four and one-half feet from the ground, shall be shown on the preliminary and final grading pans. Existing species which are of poor health, as determined by an arborist, may be removed due to associated hazards. A tree report shall be submitted and approved for each grading plan.

     1.     Fences. Trees to be preserved shall be protected during construction/grading with an adequate fence installed one foot outside the tree dripline to assure that no grading activity will impact the existing tree. (See the development plan and related exhibits for an illustration of an oak tree dripline;)

     2.     Grade Cuts. No grade cuts shall occur within ten feet of their trunk, and no grading greater than one foot shall occur within the dripline;

     3.     Fills. No fill shall occur within ten feet of their trunk, and no fill greater than one foot shall occur within the dripline. Any fill or paving to be used shall consist of porous materials selected by a registered landscape architect;

     4.     Trenching. No trenching shall be allowed within the driplines of oak trees. If it is necessary to install underground utilities within the driplines, the trench shall either be hand dug, bored or drilled;

     5.     Structures. No structures, swimming pools, buildings, etc., shall be allowed within the driplines of any oak trees. An envelope shall be recorded on the lot which outlines the entire buildable area. This envelope shall be shown on the tentative map. Each homeowner who has an existing oak tree shall receive a copy of the following guide:

 

Living Among the Oaks—A Management Guide for Landowners. University of California Cooperative Extension at Berkeley, 163 Mulford Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720. (510) 642-2360.

 

     6.     Irrigation. No irrigation systems shall be installed or operated within the driplines of oak tree(s) which may be detrimental to the preservation of the oak tree(s) unless authorized by the community development director;

     7.     Landscaping. The developer will be responsible and shall submit landscape plans for the entire yard area (front, side(s) and rear) where existing oak trees are to remain, to be approved by the community development director. Landscape installation shall occur prior to occupancy of the home. Landscaping beneath oak trees may include nonplant materials such as boulders, cobbles, wood chips, mulch, etc. The only plant species which shall be planted within the driplines of oak trees are those which are tolerant of the natural semiarid environs of the trees. Landscaping shall be prohibited within ten feet of the trunk. Permitted plants include, but are not limited to the following:

     a.     Iris douglasiana hybrids (native iris),

     b.     Heuchera species (coral bells),

     c.     Aloe species,

     d.     Dudleya species,

     e.     Sisyrinchium bellum (blue-eyed grass),

     f.      Hemerocallis hybrids (day lily),

     g.     Cyclamen neopolitanum,

     h.     Mimulus aurantiacus and hybrids (monkey flowers),

     i.      Artemisia species,

     j.      Achillea species,

     k.     Symphoricarpos millis (prostrate snowberry),

     l.      Symphoricarpos rivularis (snowberry),

     m.    Mahonia repens (creeping Mahonia),

     n.     Mahonia nervosa (long-leaf Mahonia),

     o.     Mahonia aquifolium compacts (compact Oregon grape),

     p.     Archtostaphylos edmundsii “Camel Sur” (Sue manzanita),

     q.     Archtostaphylos hookeri “Monterey Carpet,”

     r.      Archtostaphylos hookeri “Wayside,”

     s.      Archtostaphylos densiflora “Howard McMinn,”

     t.      Sollya heterophylla (Australian bluebell creeper),

     u.     Ribes viburnifolium (Catalina fragrance),

     v.     Daphne odora (winter daphne),

     w.    Rhamnus californica “Eve Case” (California coffeeberry),

     x.     Heteromoles arbutifolia (toyon),

     y.     Choisya ternata (Mexican orange or mock orange).

     C.     Replacement of Existing Oak Trees. Healthy oak trees that are removed in accordance with the development plan shall be replaced with forty-eight-inch box blue oak trees with a canopy width of seven to eight feet and a height of sixteen feet. All trees shall planted be in public lands, the golf course, open space areas or view easements.

     1.     Survival Through First Year. To guarantee survival through the first year following planting, a maintenance bond, cash, or other financial security acceptable by the community development director shall be deposited by the developer based on a cost estimate provided by a registered landscape architect. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.470.007 Other regulations.
     A.    All uses within the general commercial zone shall comply with Chapter 17.200, development and performance standards.

     B.     All light industrial uses within the PEC area shall comply with Chapter 17.300, development and performance standards.

     C.     All commercial and office uses within the PEC zone shall comply with Chapter 17.200.

     D.    Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620.

     E.     Within the PEC, the minimum lot area shall not apply under the following circumstances:

     1.     Subdivision map would create lots for condominium units for industrial or commercial uses and the area of the map is twenty thousand square feet;

     2.     Parking, driveways, landscaping and other facilities are owned in common and maintained by an association.

     F.     Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004.

     G.    The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     H.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660, however, no structures will be permitted within open space easements or view easements.

     I.      Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     J.      Design review applications for the homes shall be limited to one hundred lots, in one hundred-lot increments, or the first phase of development, whichever is less.

     K.    Fifty percent of the homes along Balfour Road shall be single story.

     L.     The development of PD-20 shall be substantially in accord with the development plan and related exhibits.

     M.    A master plotting plan, illustrating the placement of the house plans, shall be submitted for each phase or tract of development.

     N.    The use of model home complexes shall be allowed within a tract and subsequent tracts throughout the development plan area subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit as required by Chapter 17.850.

     O.    All development shall comply with Chapter 17.805, Phased Development Plan, and that all adequate agreements between the developer(s) and the city are in place (financing, mechanisms, phasing, etc.) prior to the approval of any tract map(s).

 

P.  Signs: all signage shall be in accordance with Section 17.640. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.470.008 Map for PD-20.
 



(Ord. 960 § 9, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.471 PD-21 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT TWENTY-ONE) ZONE
17.471.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, applicable law, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-21 (planned development twenty-one) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. This zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. A purpose of this zone is to permit and regulate the development of the two hundred eleven acres described on the development plan and related exhibits. Another purpose of the PD-21 zone is to supersede and replace all prior zoning regulations applicable to the property, including Ordinance No. 512—Planned Development Zone 15 (PD-15), Chapter 17.465. Further, in recognition of the very large size of the Brentwood Country Club, its predominant age-restricted occupancy and its probable construction over a number of years, it is also the purpose of this zone to allow flexibility in the design and development standards to encourage construction of a high quality community and to facilitate ease of adapting the housing product to market demands which change over time, and to allow construction of streets and other improvements consistent with reduced demand levels associated with age-restricted occupancy.

     C.     Intent. In order to achieve the purpose of the PD-21 zone, it is intended that development be in accordance with land uses and acreage shown on the development plan and related exhibits. The boundaries of the PD-21 zoning district and its sub-areas are as shown on the map in Section 17.471.006. The following three development areas are contained within this planned development:

     1.     Areas A1, A2, and A3: residential and golf course uses;

     2.     Area B: commercial uses;

     3.     Area C: public service uses. (Ord. 1004 § 1, 2018; Ord. 926 § 2, 2014; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.471.002 Areas A1, A2, and A3 residential and golf uses.
     Areas A1, A2, and A3 of the development plan and related exhibits shall be subject to the following:

     A.    Permitted Residential Uses.

     1.     Within Area A1, single-family single-story detached and attached homes for age-restricted occupancy shall be a permitted use;

     2.     Within Area A2, single-family detached homes for non-age-restricted occupancy shall be a permitted use.

     3.     Within Area A3, single-family single-story, two-story, and single-story homes with a loft included within the roofline of a single-story home for age-restricted occupancy shall be a permitted use.

     B.     Additional Permitted Uses. The following shall be permitted within Areas A1, A2, and A3:

     1.     Model home sales facilities;

     2.     Golf course and related facilities including clubhouse, tennis courts, maintenance structures and related recreation facilities;

     3.     Homeowners’ association recreation buildings, tennis courts, swimming pools, bocce courts, other common-use facilities and related facilities, and open area;

     4.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation zoning review pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     5.     The keeping of domestic pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     6.     Other uses determined by the community development department to be similar to and compatible with the preceding permitted uses.

     C.     Conditionally Permitted Uses. The following uses may be permitted within Areas A1 and A2 pursuant to approval of a conditional use permit:

     1.     Uses ancillary to a golf clubhouse, which will serve persons other than users of the golf course, such as a restaurant or bar;

     2.     Other uses determined by the community development department to be similar to the ancillary use.

     D.    Maximum Number of Units and Minimum Lot Area.

 

     1.     Maximum Units. A maximum of five hundred eleven dwelling units shall be permitted within the land of Areas A1 and A2. Additionally, a maximum of eighty-seven dwelling units shall be permitted within the boundaries of Area A3;

     2.     Lot Area. Minimum lot area shall be four thousand square feet within Areas A1, A2, and A3; provided, that within Area A1 two thousand five hundred square feet is the permitted minimum per attached duet dwelling unit. A variety of lot sizes, larger than the minimums, shall be included within the land of Areas A1, A2, and A3 to provide a variety of housing products and yard conditions;

     3.     Setbacks, Height and Parking. Each yard setback below shall be measured from its respective property line, except that for Areas A1 and A2, measurement shall be from the back of sidewalk wherever a street’s sidewalk lies inside a lot. All yard setbacks shall be measured to the nearest specified wall of the dwelling. Allowable projections into yard setbacks shall be as set forth in Section 17.660.005 of Chapter 17.660, Encroachments into Required Yards.

 

 

 

Area A1 Age-Restricted Home

Area A1 Age-Restricted Home

Area A2 Non-Restricted Home

Area A3 Age-Restricted Home

 

Duet Lot

All Other Lots

All Lots

All Lots

A. Minimum Front Yard

 

 

 

 

1. To door of a front-entry garage

18′

18′

20′

18′

2. To wall of a side-entry garage

N/A

10′

10′

10′

3. To wall of a habitable room

13′

13′

20′

13′

B. Minimum Side Yard Adjoining a Street

N/A

12′

15′

10′

C. Minimum Side Yard at Interior Lot Line

 

 

 

 

1. To the wall of a garage

5′*

5′

5′

5′

2. To wall of a habitable room

5′*

6′

5′

5′

3. Aggregate, both side yards

5′*

12′

10′

10′

4. Aggregate, both side yards, non-garage

5′

12′

10′

10′

D. Minimum Rear Yard

5′**

15′ Min–20′ Ave

15′ Min–20′ Ave

15′ Min–18′ Ave

15′ Min Adjacent to Golf Course

E. Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces

 

 

 

 

1. In a garage

1

2

2

2

2. In a driveway

2

N/A

N/A

N/A

F. Maximum Building Height

35′

35′

35′

35′***

G. Maximum Lot Coverage

N/A

N/A

N/A

52%

 

*      A 0′ setback is permitted at one side yard of a duet lot.

**    Every duet unit shall include patio area of not less than 15′ x 10′.

*** Homes in Area A3 that are adjacent to existing development along Upton Pine Drive and Wickson Way are limited to single-story and single-story-profile designs as described in subsection A.3 herein.

 

     E.     Construction Standards.

     1.     Area A1, Variety in Building Mass. Variety in building mass shall be accomplished by:

     a.     Inclusion in the floor plans available for purchase, varying front façade design, such as optional side-entry garages and varying the entryway location and design;

     b.     Avoidance of using of a single floor plan more than twice in any group of four or more contiguous homes;

     c.     Inclusion of floor plan purchase-options, such as additional golf cart garage space, which alters the visual mass of a floor plan;

     d.     At the time site design and development review multiple floor plans, incorporating design variations such as those described above, shall be submitted.

     2.     Area A2, Variety in Building Mass.

     a.     In each group of four or more contiguous homes, twenty-five percent shall be constructed with one or more of:

     i.      Single-story units; or

     ii.     Side-entry garages; or

     iii.    Minimum front setback of thirty feet.

 

     b.     Single-story homes shall be constructed on lots adjoining the arterial street Fairview Avenue.

     3.     Area A3, Variety in Building Mass. Variety in building mass shall be accomplished by:

     a.     Inclusion in the floor plans available for purchase, varying front façade design, and varying the entryway location and design;

     b.     Avoidance of the use of a single floor plan more than twice in any group of four or more contiguous homes;

     c.     Inclusion of floor plan purchase options, which alter the visual mass of a floor plan.

     4.     Acoustical Analysis. Dwellings in Areas A1, A2, and A3 adjacent to Fairview Avenue, Balfour Road and the State Route 4 Bypass shall be designed to meet the city’s interior noise level standard 45 dBA Ldn.

     F.     Design Review. Within Areas A1, A2, and A3 design review shall be required as follows:

     1.     Residential Buildings. Design and site development review shall be required pursuant to Chapter 17.820, except that for Areas A1 and A2, authority to review and approve or deny an application for design and site development review is hereby delegated to the community development department;

     2.     Landscaping, Fencing and Walls. Landscaping, fencing and walls in areas adjoining a public or private street shall conform to a plan to be approved by the community development department prior to issuance of building permits for the lots to be landscaped, fenced or walled. The plan shall specify colors, materials and spacing of elements;

     3.     Recreation Facilities and Conditional Use Permit Uses. Design and site development review approval by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 17.820 shall be required for the following:

     a.     Golf clubhouse and related buildings;

     b.     Recreation buildings and accompanying outdoor facilities such as pools;

     c.     Buildings for which approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission is required. (Ord. 1004 § 1, 2018; Ord. 926 § 2, 2014; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.471.003 Area B general commercial uses.
     Area B of the development plan and related exhibits shall be subject to the following:

     A.    Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted within Area B:

     1.     Commercial retail including sales or rentals of new merchandise or services, or personal or financial services such as:

     a.     Convenience retail uses such as a bakery, pastry shop, coffee shop, candy store, newsstand, ice cream parlor;

     b.     Clothing stores;

     c.     Pharmacies/drug stores;

     d.     Small grocery stores (twenty thousand square feet maximum floor area), delicatessens, bakeries or pastry shop;

     e.     Hardware stores;

     f.      Restaurants, including those which provide outdoor use of designated seating areas;

     g.     Bookstores and video stores;

     h.     Florist;

     i.      Stationary store/gift shop;

     j.      Printing or copying stores;

     k.     Office supply store;

     l.      Barber shops and beauty parlors;

     m.    Banks and savings and loans with ATM;

     n.     Clothes cleaning, laundry pickup stations, launderettes, pressing shops and shoe repair;

     o.     New auto retail with secondary service and repair uses;

     p.     Studios and instructional facilities, such as dance studios, music studios or similar establishments;

     q.     Public and quasi-public uses, such as government office, library, employment office, utility offices and similar uses;

     r.      Professional and business offices including medical offices;

     s.      Health/fitness center;

     t.      Veterinary clinic with indoor medical boarding facilities;

     u.     Drapery shop, upholstery shop, carpet sales, spa sales, satellite dish sales and furniture sales provided that they do not manufacture their primary product on the premises, and there is no outdoor storage;

     v.     Incidental and accessory buildings and uses on the same lot with and necessary for the operation of any permitted uses; such uses may include a parking lot.

     2.     A one-hundred-twenty-room hotel;

     3.     Senior apartments at thirty dwelling units per acre only if associated with a residential care facility campus located within the entirety of subareas B and D of this zone;

     4.     Convalescent hospitals; large residential care facilities, including residential, congregate residential, convalescent care, and assisted care; facilities for the care of the sick or elderly, health club or recreational club, dining room, entertainment area, library, art and craft room and private dining room, full service main kitchen and laundry areas reflecting industry standards of density and design.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses. The following uses may be permitted within Area B pursuant to approval of a conditional use permit:

     1.     Selling of alcoholic beverages associated with a permitted use;

     2.     Operation of a drive-through associated with a permitted use;

     3.     Outdoor sales or display;

     4.     Tasting rooms or boutique wineries;

     5.     Temporary and interim uses including a nursery, produce market, auction gallery, flea market, or craft and art fairs;

     6.     Churches and religious institutions;

     7.     Other similar uses as determined by the community development director.

     C.     Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited within Area B:

     1.     Merchandise and/or general retail sales greater than seventy-five thousand square feet in gross floor area;

     2.     RV sales and service;

     3.     Motels (a transient residence without twenty-four-hour guest services);

     4.     Gas station;

     5.     Outdoor kennels;

     6.     Large individual corporate establishments;

     7.     Light industrial complexes;

     8.     Computer software companies;

     9.     Research laboratories;

     10.   Warehousing;

     11.   Cabinet makers;

     12.   Equipment repair;

     13.   Wholesale home furnishings;

     14.   Light manufacturing;

     15.   Wineries (and associated orchards, row crops, production facilities, packaging and shipping facilities, amphitheater and related uses, and catering facilities);

     16.   Non-age-restricted multifamily housing units.

     D.    Minimum Lot Area and Setbacks.

     1.     Lot Area. Minimum lot area shall be one acre (forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet) within Area B;

     2.     Setbacks, Height and Parking. The yard setback shall be measured from its respective property line. All yard setbacks shall be measured to the nearest specified wall of the building. Allowable projections into yard setbacks shall be as set forth in Section 17.660.005 of Chapter 17.660, Encroachments into Required Yards.

     a.     Minimum setbacks from property lines are as follows:

     i.      Internal property line: zero feet.

     ii.     Balfour Road: ten feet.

     iii.    State Route 4: fifty feet.

     iv.    Summerset Drive: fifteen feet.

     b.     Maximum building height: fifty feet.

     c.     Parking. Pursuant to Chapter 17.620 or as approved with a shared parking plan.

     E.     Design Review. Within Area B design review shall be required as follows:

     1.     Commercial Buildings. Design and site development review shall be required for uses outlined in subsections A and B pursuant to Chapter 17.820;

     2.     Landscaping, Fencing and Walls. Landscaping, fencing and walls in areas adjoining a public or private street shall conform to a plan to be approved by the community development department prior to issuance of building permits for the structure to be landscaped, fenced or walled. The plan shall specify colors, materials and spacing of elements. (Ord. 1004 § 1, 2018; Ord. 926 § 2, 2014; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.471.004 Area C public service uses.
     Area C of the development plan and related exhibits shall be subject to the following:

     A.    Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted within Area C:

     1.     Agriculture;

     2.     Public service uses including fire prevention and public emergency service land uses.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses. Land uses determined by the community development department to be similar to and compatible with agriculture and public service uses may be permitted within Area C pursuant to approval of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 1004 § 1, 2018; Ord. 926 § 2, 2014; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.471.005 Exceptions.
     A.    Exceptions to Zoning Regulations. The community development department may permit exceptions to the regulations of this chapter and the remainder of Title 17 upon finding that granting of the exception will constitute an insignificant deviation from the land uses, activities and construction otherwise resulting from strict application of the regulations of this chapter.

     B.     Exceptions to Engineering Standards. Adopted city engineering standards are contained in the city’s Title 17 Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, the Engineering Design Standards, the Standard Plans and Specifications, the Standard Drawings and in policy determinations made by the director of public works and the city engineer. (Ord. 1004 § 1, 2018; Ord. 926 § 2, 2014; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.471.006 Map for PD-21.


(Ord. 1004 § 1, 2018; Ord. 926 § 2, 2014; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.472 PD-22 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT TWENTY-TWO) ZONE
17.472.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-22 (planned development twenty-two) zone is as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-22 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-22 zone is to permit and regulate development of the special planning area for the project (as designated by the city of Brentwood general plan).

     C.     Intent. It is intended that in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-22 zone of implementing the development of single-family housing, the zone shall be divided into several uses as designated on the development plan and related exhibits, and as further described below. The primary uses intended for this area shall consist of single-family residential, park and open space uses. The boundaries of the PD-22 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.472.016. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.472.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-22 zone:

     A.    Those uses which are permitted within the R-1 (single-family residential) and R-2 zoning districts in Title 17;

     B.     Parks and playgrounds (public and private);

     C.     Bicycle and pedestrian trails;

     D.    Open space;

     E.     Family day care—small;

     F.     Private recreational facilities owned and maintained by an individual homeowner, a homeowners’ association or other form of community association or maintenance district;

     G.    Similar use subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.472.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses require special consideration and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Those conditionally permitted uses within the R-1 (single-family residential) zone;

     B.     Other uses similar in character to those uses listed above, as approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.472.004 Accessory uses and structures permitted.
     A.    Arbors, trellises, gazebos and similar shade structures of open construction;

     B.     Fences and walls;

 

     C.     Garages;

     D.    Patio covers;

     E.     Swimming pools and spas;

     F.     Additional accessory uses and structures necessary or incidental to a principal use as approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.472.005 Residential densities and other uses.
     In no case shall the total number of permitted units exceed the number shown on the development plan and related exhibits. All other permitted uses shall approximately be in locations as identified on the development plan and related exhibits. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.472.006 Regulations for lot area, yards, height and other regulations for development—Four thousand five hundred square foot lots.
     A.    Single-Family Residential.

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be four thousand five hundred square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width, as measured from the front yard setback line, shall be forty-five feet. Cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum average lot width of thirty feet measured at the right-of-way.

     3.     Minimum Front Yard Setback. The front yard setback shall be not less than five feet nor no greater than eighteen feet as measured from the property line to the face of the garage and fifteen feet to any building façade or side entry garage.

     4.     Minimum Side Yard Setbacks. Side yard setbacks shall be fifteen feet aggregate, with five being the minimum as measured from the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of fifteen feet. Minimum distance between houses shall be fifteen feet with a five-foot minimum and fifteen-foot aggregate.

     5.     Minimum Rear Yard Setback. The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of fifteen feet.

     6.     Projections into Setback Areas. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplaces and canopies may not project more than two feet into any required front, side or rear yard setback.

     7.     Setbacks from Sidewalks. Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside line of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     8.     Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet in height. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.472.007 Regulations for lot area, yards, height and other regulations for development—Six thousand square foot lots.
     A.    Single-Family Residential.

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be six thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width shall be sixty feet at the front yard setback. Cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum lot width of forty-five feet measured at the right-of-way.

     3.     Minimum Front Yard Setback. The front yard setback shall be not less than five feet nor no greater than eighteen feet as measured from the property line to the face of the garage and twenty feet to any building façade or side entry garage.

     4.     Minimum Side Yard Setbacks. Side yard setbacks shall be fifteen feet aggregate, with five being the minimum as measured from the building foundation. Corner lots shall have a minimum side yard on the street side of fifteen feet.

     5.     Minimum Rear Yard Setback. The rear yard setback for adjacent lots shall be a minimum of twenty feet.

     6.     Projections into Setback Areas. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplaces and canopies may not project more than two feet into any required front, side or rear yard setback.

     7.     Setback from Sidewalks. Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside line of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line locations.

     8.     Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty-five feet in height measured from the low side of the lot. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.472.008 Grading standards.
     A.    General.

     1.     Engineering Guidance.

     a.     Grading designs shall conform to the city of Brentwood grading ordinance.

     b.     Slopes shall be designed and grades in accordance with the recommendations of an engineering geologist or soils engineer.

     2.     Graded Slopes.

     a.     Cut and fill slopes shall be designed using landform grading concepts without long uninterrupted flat surfaces, and without sharp angles of intersection at the top and bottom, and wherever constructed slopes blend with existing topography.

     b.     Wherever possible, stepped pads or terraces shall be used to reflect natural terrain slopes.

     3.     Landscaping on Graded Slopes.

     a.     Interim erosion control measures during construction, including temporary desilting basins, interceptor dikes and sandbagging shall be implemented to minimize siltation runoff.

     b.     All common areas shall be maintained by the developer until such time that the responsibility is shifted over to a homeowners’ association or landscape maintenance district or similar entity.

     4.     Erosion Control. Slope graded and left longer than ninety days shall be hydroseeded or planted with nonirrigated landscape materials and allowed to naturalize. During the rainy season (October 15th through April 15th), slopes graded and left longer than thirty days shall be hydroseeded or planted with nonirrigated landscape materials and allowed to naturalize.

     B.     Custom Lots.

     1.     Graded Area. Grading shall be limited to roads and garage pads not to exceed a distance of forty feet from the front property line.

     2.     Foundations. Stepped and built-up foundations shall be used wherever possible to minimize changes to the natural topography.

     3.     Retaining Walls. Retaining and crib walls shall be limited to a maximum height of four feet wherever possible. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.472.009 Street standards.
     A.    General. Except as noted below, all public and private streets within the development area shall conform to those standards adopted by the public works department for residential streets.

     B.     Entry Collector Street. Entry collector street shall extend from the intersection with San Jose Avenue to the east side of the PG & E easement. The street shall conform to the public works department standards. In addition, there shall be a fifteen-foot parkway strip on one side of the street to provide an aggregate twenty-five-foot wide landscape strip measured from face of curb to lot line.

     C.     Collector Streets. Collector streets shall conform to the public works department standards.

     D.    Local Streets. Local streets shall conform to the public works department standards. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.472.010 Utility standards.
     A.    General. The location and construction of all utilities within the development area shall conform to those standards adopted by the public works department for residential development.

     B.     Underground. All utility service lines shall be underground.

     C.     Above Grade Components. Transformers, control points and other utility housings shall be located so as to minimize their visual impact and shall be screened in a manner approved by the city.

     D.    Light Standards. Street lights for the parkways and local residential streets, pedestrians, and lights for walkways shall be staggered on each side of the street, and the light standards for the public streets shall be selected by the public works department. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.472.011 Landscaping standards.
     A.    General. The landscaping for this development shall comply with the regulations contained in Chapter 17.630 “Landscaping and Screening,” except as otherwise specified below.

     B.     Street Trees. Street trees are required to be planted on all streets within the development area. Tree spacing shall be an average of thirty feet on center on collector roads shown on the development plan and related exhibits and an average of twenty-five feet on center on other residential streets. A street tree master plan shall be prepared and approved for each tract map.

     C.     Entryway Design. The design of the entryways shall consist of signage, landscaping, monumentation, hardscape and other materials. The planning commission shall review entryway design.

     D.    Graded Slope Landscaping.

     1.     All graded slopes shall require revegetation with native plant species, which are indigenous to the region whenever possible, to retain natural character, maintain views and contribute towards slope stabilization.

     2.     To ensure safe fire protection, fuel modification zones shall utilize plant materials that provide a gradual transition to natural vegetation to avoid hard planted edges.

     3.     Landscape plans for all graded slope areas shall be reviewed by the planning commission, fire chief and other interested parties prior to implementation.

     4.     Landscaping, other than street trees, shall be planted in random massings or groupings rather than in linear patterns in order to mimic native vegetation patterns.

     E.     Front yard Landscaping. All front yards shall be constructed with drought-tolerant “xeriscape” landscaping, with a maximum of twenty-five percent turf. Landscape and irrigation plans for each typical lot shall be submitted for each phase of development. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.472.012 Parks and open space standards.
     A.    Design Review. All park areas and any relevant open space areas shall require design review by the planning commission prior to final map approval.

     B.     Permitted Uses. Permitted uses in park and open space areas include:

     1.     Public parks and playgrounds;

     2.     Drainage channels;

     3.     Greenbelt areas which are formed by land development;

     4.     Pedestrian trails;

     5.     Access for maintenance and emergency vehicles;

     6.     Wetlands restoration;

     7.     Other permitted uses in park and open space areas, which do not detract from the basic intent, include:

     a.     Public streets, park drives, utility and emergency access roads and hiking/riding trails,

     b.     Structures/buildings within privately owned or public recreational areas, parks, playgrounds,

     c.     Utility facilities, such as pump stations, transmission towers, water reservoirs and similar structures,

     d.     Other uses, similar in character to those uses listed above, as approved by the planning commission.

     C.     Open Space Area Restrictions.

     1.     Areas to remain as open space may be required to be offered for dedication as part of a public open space or park system. Where such offer of dedication is not accepted, the development shall provide legal arrangements, approved by the city, sufficient to assure the maintenance and preservation of such open space for whatever purpose it is intended. Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify the ownership of the open space; method of maintenance; responsibility for maintenance; maintenance; taxes and insurance; compulsory membership and assessment provisions; guarantees that any association formed to own and maintain common open space will not be dissolved without the consent of the council; and any specification deemed necessary to the city.

     2.     All ungraded open space areas, not part of the Highway 4 Bypass right-of-way, shall remain in their natural state, with no additional plantings.

     D.    Trails. A master trail plan shall be prepared with the tentative map to include trail along the southern boundary of the property connecting the valley open space to the PG & E easement.

     E.     Park and Open Space Requirements. The development plan area shall include two and one-half acres of park area, the payment of in-lieu fees, or a combination thereof, as required by the city’s general plan. All park areas and any relevant open space areas shall require design review by the planning commission prior to final tract map approval, for each park in that tract. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.472.013 Off-street parking standards.
     A.    Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620.

     B.     Corner Lots. Where it is possible, garages on corner lots shall have their entries oriented to the side street.

     C.     Boats, Trailers and Similar Vehicles. Spaces will be provided in a designated RV storage area. There will be one space for every ten lots. Spaces will be allocated on a first come, first-served basis. Space will be one-third for large RVs at eight feet by twenty feet and two-thirds for boats and trailers seven feet by ten feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.472.014 Architectural design standards.
     A.    One Story Units. Where four or more lots are contiguous along a street frontage, a minimum of twenty-five percent of the lots shall be one story in height, where possible. The use of side entry garages may be considered as an option in satisfying all or part of this requirement during the site development and design review.

     B.     Delta Expressway. Special attention shall be given to variations in orientation, height and façade treatment for structures on lots overlooking the future Delta Expressway to eliminate the appearance of a row of houses along this edge of the project.

     C.     Roof Orientation. A variety of roof orientations shall be utilized with emphasis placed on roof ridges parallel to the ground contours of the slope of hill forms.

     D.    Fences, Hedges and Walls. Prior to issuance of any building permits, an overall plan or plans for landscaping, fences and walls shall be submitted for approval. The overall plan(s) shall establish the materials, colors and appearance of walls and fences to be used throughout the project and plant materials and their spacing to be used adjacent to streets throughout the PD-22 zone. All developers of subareas or portions thereof shall construct fences, walls and landscaping adjacent to streets in accordance with the approved overall plans. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.472.015 Other standards and regulations.
     A.    The development of PD-22 shall be substantially in accordance with the development plan shown on the development plan and related exhibits. Variations in the development plan, including street and lot patterns, may be approved through the subdivision map process.

     B.     Design and site development review shall be required for all housing developments pursuant to Sections 17.100.003, 17.100.004(H) and Chapter 17.820.

     C.     The use of model home complexes shall be allowed within a recorded tract and subsequent tracts throughout the development plan area subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit as required by Chapter 17.850.

     D.    A master plotting plan, illustrating the placement of the house plans, shall be submitted for each phase or tract of development. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.472.016 Map for PD-22.
 



(Ord. 960 § 10, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.473 PD-23 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT TWENTY-THREE) ZONE
17.473.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-23 (planned development twenty-three) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-23 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-23 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the area shown on the development plan and related exhibits, and to provide a mix of housing types which increase in density as they approach Brentwood Boulevard, in accordance with the Brentwood general plan.

     C.     Intent. To achieve the foregoing purpose, the PD-23 zone shall be divided into two subareas. Subarea A is intended to provide a neighborhood of single-family houses on minimum four thousand six hundred seventy-five square foot lots. Subarea B is intended to provide for multifamily residential uses between the single-family homes and Brentwood Boulevard and to provide an appropriate area for apartments or condominiums in close proximity to commercial uses, in conformance with the Brentwood general plan. The boundary of the PD-23 zoning district and the subareas is as shown on the map in Section 17.473.006. (Ord. 889 § 2, 2011; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.473.002 Permitted uses.
     A.    Subarea A. The permitted uses in Subarea A of the PD-23 zone are those uses permitted within the R-1 (single-family residential) zoning district in Title 17, except parks and playgrounds are added as permitted uses.

     B.     Subarea B. The permitted uses in Subarea B of the PD-23 zone are those uses permitted within the R-3 (high density multifamily residential) zoning district, with a maximum density not to exceed twenty dwelling units per gross acre. (Ord. 889 § 2, 2011; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.473.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     A.    Subarea A. Upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830, those uses identified as conditionally permitted uses in the R-1 (single-family residence) zone, may be permitted in Subarea A of the PD-23 zone.

     B.     Subarea B. Upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830, those uses identified as conditionally permitted uses in the R-3 (high density multifamily residential) zone, may be permitted in Subarea B of the PD-23 zone. However, no project shall exceed the maximum density of twenty dwelling units per gross acre. (Ord. 889 § 2, 2011; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.473.004 General development standards.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Subarea A.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Four thousand six hundred seventy-five square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Fifty-five feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: Eighty-five feet;

     4.     Minimum lot frontage: Thirty feet for all lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets;

     5.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for a street facing garage; twelve feet for a turned garage; fifteen feet for any living space and twelve feet for front porches;

     6.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of thirteen feet for both sides;

     7.     Corner lots, on the street side, shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of ten feet;

     8.     Minimum rear yard setback: Fifteen feet;

     9.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     10.   Side-loading garages: Ten percent of the total lots shall have side-loading garages;

     11.   Corner lots: Fifty percent of the corner lots shall be single story plans;

     12.   Single-story units: Twenty-five percent of the total lots shall be single-story plans;

     13.   A forty percent maximum lot coverage;

     14.   Maximum number of units: One hundred thirty-three dwelling units.

     B.     Subarea B.

     1.     Minimum lot area: three acres;

     2.     Minimum lot width: three hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum front yard: ten feet;

     4.     Minimum side yards: fifty feet;

     5.     Minimum rear yard: fifty feet;

     6.     Maximum allowable density: the maximum density shall be twenty dwelling units per gross acre;

     7.     Maximum lot coverage: The main building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than forty percent of the lot area;

     8.     Maximum building height: two stories not to exceed thirty feet. (Ord. 889 § 2, 2011; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.473.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Subarea A.

     1.     Design and site development shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     2.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     3.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     4.     Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of this code.

     5.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of this code.

     6.     The development of this zoning district shall be substantially in accordance with the development plan. Variations in the development plan including street and lot pattern may be approved through the subdivision map process.

     B.     Subarea B.

     1.     Design and site development shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Section 17.100.003.

     2.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Section 17.620.007(C).

     3.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be prohibited outside of a fully-enclosed garage.

     4.     Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of this code.

     5.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of this code.

     6.     The development of this zoning district shall be substantially in accordance with the development plan. Variations in the development plan including street alignment and building pattern may be approved through the design review process.

     7.     Usable Open Space. Residential projects shall provide and maintain private and shared open space as follows:

     a.     A minimum of five hundred square feet of usable open space shall be provided for each dwelling unit on a lot.

     b.     A minimum of seventy-five percent of the dwelling units on a lot shall be provided with private usable open space as follows:

     i.      Private usable open space shall be directly accessible from the unit served and be available only to that unit.

     ii.     Ground-level private usable open space shall have a minimum area of one hundred square feet and a minimum dimension of eight feet.

     iii.    Above-ground-level private usable open space shall have a minimum area of sixty square feet and a minimum dimension of six feet.

     c.     Shared usable open space shall be available and accessible to all occupants of the residential project for purposes of active and/or passive outdoor recreation, exclusive of driveways, areas for off-street parking and services, and exclusive of the required front yard setback as follows:

     i.      A minimum of seventy-five percent of the shared usable open space shall be at ground level, the remainder may be located above ground on a balcony or roof deck.

     ii.     Ground level shared usable open space shall have a minimum dimension of twelve feet and shall not be covered by any roof, balcony or other such covering.

     iii.    Above-ground-level shared usable open space shall have a minimum dimension of ten feet and a minimum area of two hundred square feet, which shall be unobstructed and shall not serve as access to any residential unit. A maximum of twenty-five percent of the above-ground-level shared open space may be covered. (Ord. 889 § 2, 2011; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.473.006 Map for PD-23.
 



(Ord. 960 § 11, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.474 PD-24 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT TWENTY-FOUR) ZONE
17.474.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-24 (planned development twenty-four) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-24 (planned development twenty-four) zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of this code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-24 zone is to permit and regulate the development of Subarea A as 4.34 acres (APN 010-150-034) designated as BP (mixed use business park) by the general plan, Subarea B as 0.67 acres (APN 010-480-056) designated as BP (mixed use business park), Subarea C to permit and regulate the development of single-family detached homes in the fourteen-lot Paradise Cove neighborhood in accordance with the general plan, Subarea D as 13.8 acres, Subarea E as 2.81 acres, and Subarea F as 18.5 acres.

     C.     Intent. It is intended that in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-24 zone of implementing the development of Subareas A and B, as mixed use business park in conformance with the general plan, the primary character of the area is intended to be a mix of commercial, office, service and light industrial uses, Subarea C as a development of single-family detached homes in the fourteen-lot Paradise Cove neighborhood, in accordance with the general plan, Subarea D as a development of single-family detached homes in the eighty-four lot Sellers Pointe neighborhood, in accordance with the general plan, Subarea E as a development of one single-family residence (Stonebarger property), in accordance with the general plan, and Subarea F as a development of single-family detached homes in a ninety-six lot development.

     The regulations contained within the PD-24 zone replace land use and development regulations previously contained within the city of Brentwood’s Zoning Ordinance for this district. In the event of a conflict between other provisions of Title 17 and this chapter, this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 876 § 2, 2009; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.002 Permitted uses for Subarea A.
     The following uses are permitted within this subarea of the PD-24 (planned development twenty-four) zone:

     A.    The following uses shall be permitted within Subarea A:

     1.     General office uses;

     2.     Business and professional offices, such as software developers, architects, attorneys, accountants and office uses that are supplementary to industrial, business or commercial uses;

     3.     Research and development space that includes office, support, and warehouse/research areas (i.e., flex-tech);

     4.     Service uses, such as coffee and sandwich shops, dry cleaners, laundry facilities, and similar services;

     5.     Medical or dental laboratories;

     6.     Medical or dental offices or clinics;

     7.     Service uses including, but not limited to, appliance, television and radio repair, and small equipment repair or service;

     8.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.003 Conditionally permitted uses for Subarea A.
     The following uses are permitted upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830 within this subarea of the PD-24 (planned development twenty-four) zone:

     A.    The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within Subarea A:

     1.     Public and quasi-public uses appropriate to and compatible with the area such as hospitals, outpatient care facilities, business and technical schools, and full service financial institutions;

     2.     Restaurants;

     3.     Commercial uses including, but not limited to, uses that may or may not manufacture their primary product on the premises such as a drapery shop, cabinet shop, or upholstery shop;

     4.     Health clubs and recreation clubs;

     5.     Churches;

     6.     Light metal fabrication, machine shops, small welding shops, small assembly, and printing shop;

     7.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.004 Development standards for Subarea A.
     A.    All nonresidential permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within Subarea A shall conform to the development standards set forth as follows:

     1.     Minimum lot area: twenty thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: one hundred feet, street frontage not required with access easement;

     3.     Minimum street frontage yard: ten feet;

     4.     Minimum non-street frontage yard: zero feet;

     5.     Maximum building height: thirty feet.

     B.     Other Regulations.

     1.     Refuse Disposal Enclosure. All facilities shall provide masonry refuse disposal enclosures to city standards and specifications.

     a.     Refuse pick-up shall be prohibited between the hours of six p.m. and seven a.m.

     2.     Illumination of Parking Facilities and Structures. All facilities shall provide adequate lighting or illumination of parking facilities and structures pursuant to Chapter 17.620 of this code.

     3.     Parking Lot Design and Development Standards. All facilities shall comply with the design and development standards of Chapter 17.620 of this code.

     4.     Open Storage or Display. Open storage and/or outdoor display of merchandise is prohibited.

     5.     Landscaping and Screening. Landscaping and screening shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.630 of this code, except as follows:

     a.     The minimum width of landscaping (including sidewalk) along Guthrie Lane shall be twenty feet. The minimum width of landscaping along adjacent parcels shall be five feet when separating parking and ten feet when separating a building. All other secondary streets/drives shall have a minimum landscaping width of five feet except where parking is directly off-street (this is only allowed at one hundred feet minimum distance to major intersections and twenty feet minimum from secondary intersections). Widths shall be measured from the face of curb to the edge of a building or parking lot. A public sidewalk is typically included within this required width, with the following exception: when widths are less than ten feet, no sidewalk shall be allowed.

     b.     At the time of development, landscaping shall be installed along any property line abutting a residentially zoned area. The required landscaping shall consist of the following:

     i.      Minimum width of the landscaped area shall be five feet;

     ii.     Landscape fingers or tree wells perpendicular to the perimeter landscaping shall be provided no more than ten parking spaces apart;

     iii.    Evergreen trees shall be planted in areas identified in subsections (i) and (ii) such that a visual screen is created.

     6.     Advertising Signs. All signs shall be subject to an approved master sign program.

     7.     Yards. All required yards shall be utilized for landscaping only, except for access drives to the property. Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of this code.

     8.     Accessory structures and buildings shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of this code.

     9.     Security Measures. All facilities shall provide security measures in accordance with city standards and subject to design review.

     10.   Energy Conservation. All facilities shall, to the greatest extent possible, incorporate energy conservation measures in conformance with city standards and subject to design review.

     11.   Manufacturing and Storage Areas. All manufacturing processes shall be within a structure and all open storage areas shall be screened with a minimum six-foot-high view-obscuring fence. No storage shall exceed the height of the fence. Solid walls shall be utilized for screening areas visible from a public street. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.005 Performance standards for Subarea A.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the performance standards set forth below:

     A.    Noise. All uses shall comply with Chapter 9.32 of this code.

     B.     Heat, Glare and Humidity.

     1.     Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner so as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.

     2.     Any operation of activity producing glare shall be performed within a completely enclosed building and be conducted so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one foot candle when measured at the lot line. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded and flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled so as not to cause nuisance across lot lines.

     3.     Any use producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat, shall be carried on in such a manner that steam, humidity or heat is not perceptible at any lot line.

     C.     Vibration. Any industrial operation or activity that shall cause, at any point along the property line of the subject use, earth-borne vibrations that are discernable without the use of instruments is prohibited.

     D.    Fire, Safety and Explosion. All uses shall provide adequate safety devices against fire, explosion and other hazards and adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment in compliance with applicable fire prevention and building codes.

     E.     Soundproofing. Offices, retail activities and other acoustically sensitive activities shall be designed so that interior noise levels due to exterior noise sources do not exceed the peak hour Leq of 55 dBA.

     F.     Solid and Liquid Waste.

     1.     No discharge at any point into public sewer, system or bay into the ground shall be permitted, except in accord with standards approved by the State Department of Health, or standards specified in applicable local ordinances for similar uses of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements.

     2.     No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any property in such form or manner that natural causes or forces may transfer them off the property.

     3.     Any wastes which might be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers.

     G.    Electrical and Radioactive Radiation. No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbances adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbances.

     H.    Air Pollution. All uses shall comply with regulations of the San Francisco Bay Area Air Pollution Control District.

     1.     Smoke. For the purpose of determining the density or equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines in Circular No. 7718 (August, 1995) shall be employed. The emission of smoke from any chimney, stack, vent, opening, or combustion process shall not exceed Ringlemann No. 1.

     2.     Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the property line of the subject use.

     3.     Toxic and Noxious Matter. No use shall be permitted which creates any emission which endangers human health, can cause damage to animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause soiling at any point beyond the boundaries of the site. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.006 Design and site development review for Subarea A.
     The design and site development of all new structures shall comply with Chapter 17.820 of this code. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.007 Permitted uses for Subarea B.
     The following uses are permitted within this subarea of the PD-24 (planned development twenty-four) zone:

     A.    The following uses shall be permitted within Subarea B:

     1.     General office uses;

     2.     Business and professional offices, such as software developers, architects, attorneys, accountants and office or similar uses;

     3.     Research and development space that includes office and support areas only with no warehousing;

     4.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.008 Conditionally permitted uses for Subarea B.
     The following uses are permitted upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830 of this code within this subarea of the PD-24 (planned development twenty-four) zone:

     A.    The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within Subarea B:

     1.     Public and quasi-public uses appropriate to and compatible with the permitted uses;

     2.     Medical and dental office uses;

 

     3.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.009 Development standards for Subarea B.
     A.    All nonresidential permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within Subarea B shall conform to the development standards set forth as follows:

     1.     Minimum lot area: twenty thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: one hundred feet, street frontage not required with access easement;

     3.     Minimum street frontage yard: ten feet;

     4.     Minimum nonstreet frontage yard: zero feet;

     5.     Maximum building height: one story not to exceed thirty feet.

     B.     Other Regulations.

     1.     Illumination of Parking Facilities and Structures. All facilities shall provide adequate lighting or illumination of parking facilities and structures pursuant to Chapter 17.620 of this code;

     2.     Parking Lot Design and Development Standards. All facilities shall comply with the design and development standards of Chapter 17.620 of this code;

     3.     Open Storage or Display. Open storage and/or outdoor display of merchandise are prohibited;

     4.     Landscaping and Screening. Landscaping and screening shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.630 of this code;

     5.     Advertising Signs. All signs shall be subject to the city of Brentwood sign ordinance;

     6.     Security Measures. All facilities shall provide security measures in accordance with city standards and subject to design review;

     7.     Energy Conservation. All facilities shall, to the greatest extent possible, incorporate energy conservation measures in conformance with city standards and subject to design review. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.010 Performance standards for Subarea B.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the performance standards set forth in this section:

     A.    Noise. All uses shall comply with Chapter 9.32 of this code.

     B.     Heat, Glare and Humidity.

     1.     Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner so as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.

     2.     Any operation of activity producing glare shall be performed within a completely enclosed building and be conducted so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one foot candle when measured at the lot line. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded and flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled so as not to cause nuisance across lot lines.

     3.     Any use producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat, shall be carried on in such a manner that steam, humidity or heat is not perceptible at any lot line.

     C.     Vibration. Any industrial operation or activity that shall cause at any point along the property line of the subject use, earth-borne vibrations that are discernable without the use of instruments is prohibited.

     D.    Fire, Safety and Explosion. All uses shall provide adequate safety devices against fire, explosion and other hazards and adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment in compliance with applicable fire prevention and building codes.

     E.     Soundproofing. Offices, retail activities and other acoustically sensitive activities shall be designed so that interior noise levels due to exterior noise sources do not exceed the peak hour Leq of 55 dBA.

     F.     Solid and Liquid Waste.

     1.     No discharge at any point into public sewer, system or bay into the ground shall be permitted, except in accord with standards approved by the State Department of Health, or standards specified in applicable local ordinances for similar uses of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements.

     2.     No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any property in such form or manner that natural causes or forces may transfer them off the property.

     3.     Any wastes which might be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers.

     G.    Electrical and Radioactive Radiation. No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbances adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbances.

     H.    Air Pollution. All uses shall comply with regulations of the San Francisco Bay Area Air Pollution Control District.

     1.     Smoke. For the purpose of determining the density or equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines in Circular No. 7718 (August, 1995) shall be employed. The emission of smoke from any chimney, stack, vent, opening, or combustion process shall not exceed Ringlemann No. 1.

     2.     Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the property line of the subject use.

     3.     Toxic and Noxious Matter. No use shall be permitted which creates any emission which endangers human health, can cause damage to animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause soiling at any point beyond the boundaries of the site. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.011 Design and site development review for Subarea B.
     The design and site development of all new structures shall comply with Chapter 17.820 of this code. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.012 Permitted uses for Subarea C.
     The following uses are permitted within Subarea C of the PD-24 (planned development twenty-four) zone:

     A.    One single-family dwelling unit per parcel;

     B.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003 of this title;

     C.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660 of this title;

     D.    Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850 of this title;

     E.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840 of this title;

     F.     Small family residential care facilities;

     G.    The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670 of this title;

     H.    Accessory dwelling units subject to Section 17.100.005 of this title. (Ord. 991 § 4, 2017; Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.013 Conditionally permitted uses for Subarea C.
     The following uses are permitted upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830 of this code within this subarea of the PD-24 (planned development twenty-four) zone:

     A.    The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within Subarea C:

     1.     Large residential care facilities and day care centers. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.014 Development standards for Subarea C.
     A.    Unit density: unit density shall not be greater than five dwelling units per acre;

     B.     Lot area: minimum six thousand six hundred fifty square feet;

     C.     Lot width: minimum fifty feet for interior lots and fifty-five feet for corner lots. Minimum of thirty-five feet at the street for cul-de-sac lots;

     D.    Lot depth: minimum ninety-four feet;

     E.     Height: no main building shall exceed the height of two stories or thirty feet;

     F.     Rear yard: minimum fifteen feet;

     G.    Front yard: minimum twelve feet for house and twenty feet to garage door;

     H.    Side yard: minimum five feet, sum of both yards twelve feet. Corner lots shall have a minimum ten feet on street side;

     I.      Garage: maximum forty-five percent of the lot width;

     J.      Parking: two covered spaces in garage;

     K.    Coverage: not more than forty percent lot coverage. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.015 Other regulations for Subarea C.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Chapter 17.100;

     B.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers, and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.620;

     C.     Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.620;

     D.    Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.016 Permitted uses for Subarea D.
     The following uses are permitted within Subarea D of the PD-24 zone:

     A.    One single-family dwelling unit per parcel;

     B.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003 of this title;

     C.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660 of this title;

     D.    Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850 of this title;

     E.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840 of this title;

     F.     Small family residential care facilities;

     G.    The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670 of this title;

     H.    Accessory dwelling units subject to Section 17.100.005 of this title. (Ord. 991 § 4, 2017; Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008).

 

17.474.017 Conditionally permitted uses for Subarea D.
     The following uses are permitted upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830 within Subarea D of the PD-24 zone:

     A.    The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within Subarea D:

     1.     Large residential care facilities and day care centers. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.018 Development standards for Subarea D.
     A.    Unit density: overall project density shall not be greater than 6.09 dwelling units per acre;

     B.     Lot area: minimum four thousand square feet;

     C.     Lot width: minimum fifty feet;

     D.    Lot depth: minimum eighty feet;

     E.     Building height: maximum two stories or thirty feet;

     F.     Front yard setback: minimum eighteen feet for front loading garage, twelve feet for side loading garage, twelve feet for living space, ten feet for porch;

     G.    Side yard setback: minimum four feet. Corner lots shall have a minimum ten feet on street side;

     H.    Rear yard setback: minimum ten feet with an overall average of twelve and one-half feet;

     I.      Coverage: not more than fifty percent lot coverage. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.474.019 Permitted uses for Subarea E.
     A.    The following uses are permitted within Subarea E:

     1.     Single-family dwellings including manufactured homes;

     2.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     3.     Duplex, triplex, apartments and other small multi-family structures; townhouses and single-family attached homes; all not exceeding a density of 5.1 to 11, with a mid-range of 8, dwelling units per acre;

     4.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     5.     Temporary uses related to the primary use subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Section 17.850;

     6.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     7.     Small family residential care facilities are permitted by right. Family home day care, large subject to the conditions stated in Ordinance No. 560, are permitted by right in all single-family residential zones subject to the following conditions:

     a.     That a use permit be issued administratively by the zoning administrator, subject to compliance with the zoning standards of the city, and

     b.     A fee to be collected, and

     c.     The three hundred-foot radius notification process shall apply to all new large family home day care processed after the effective date of Ordinance No. 560. The notification shall be not less than ten days prior to the date of the zoning administrator’s decision. The notice shall inform the owners of their rights to an administrative hearing, and

     d.     Actions of the zoning administrator may be appealed pursuant to the appeal process in Chapter 17.880 of the zoning ordinance;

     8.     Agriculture, animal husbandry and limited animal husbandry subject to Chapter 17.670;

     9.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     10.   Signs subject to Chapter 17.640. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016)

 

17.474.020 Conditionally permitted uses for Subarea E.
     The following uses require special consideration and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Public facilities including parks, playgrounds, public schools and other public buildings;

     B.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     C.     Community buildings, clubs and activities of quasi-public, social, fraternal or recreational character such as golf, tennis and swimming clubs intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residential project;

     D.    Large residential care facilities;

     E.     Mobile home parks provided the density does not exceed that specified in the general plan for the property on which the mobile home park is proposed and subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.710;

     F.     Dog fancier’s license in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.670.009. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016)

 

17.474.021 Development standards for Subarea E.
     The following regulations shall apply to Subarea E:

     A.    Minimum lot area: six thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: fifty feet;

     C.     Minimum front yard: fifteen feet;

     D.    Minimum side yards: five feet, sum of both sides; fifteen feet;

     E.     Minimum rear yard: twenty feet;

 

     F.     Corner lots shall maintain a side yard on the street side of ten feet.

     G.    Maximum building height: two stories or thirty feet. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016)

 

17.474.022 Permitted uses for Subarea F.
     The following uses are permitted within Subarea F:

     A.    Single-family dwellings including manufactured homes;

     B.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     C.     Duplex, triplex, apartments and other small multi-family structures; townhouses and single-family attached homes; all not exceeding a density of 5.1 to 11, with a mid-range of 8 dwelling units per acre;

     D.    Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     E.     Temporary uses related to the primary use subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Section 17.850;

     F.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     G.    Small family residential care facilities are permitted by right. Family home daycare, large subject to the conditions stated in Ordinance No. 560, are permitted by right in all single-family residential zones subject to the following conditions:

     1.     That a use permit be issued administratively by the zoning administrator, subject to compliance with the zoning standards of the city, and

     2.     A fee be collected, and

     3.     The three hundred-foot radius notification process shall apply to all new large family home day cares processed after the effective date of Ordinance No. 560. The notification shall be not less than ten days prior to the date of the Zoning Administrator’s decision. The notice shall inform the owners of their rights to an administrative hearing, and

     4.     Actions of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed pursuant to the appeal process in Chapter 17.880 of the zoning ordinance;

     H.    Agriculture, animal husbandry and limited animal husbandry subject to Chapter 17.670;

     I.      The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     J.      Signs subject to Chapter 17.640. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016)

 

17.474.023 Conditionally permitted uses for Subarea F.
     The following uses require special consideration and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Public facilities including parks, playgrounds, public schools and other public buildings;

     B.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     C.     Community buildings, clubs and activities of quasi-public, social, fraternal or recreational character such as golf, tennis and swimming clubs intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residential project;

     D.    Large residential care facilities;

     E.     Mobile home parks provided the density does not exceed that specified in the General Plan for the property on which the mobile home park is proposed and subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.710;

     F.     Dog fancier’s license in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.670.009. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016)

 

17.474.024 Development standards for Subarea F.
     A.    Minimum lot area: four thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: forty feet;

     C.     Minimum front yard setback:

     1.     Twenty feet for street-facing garages,

     2.     Fifteen feet for turned garages,

     3.     Fifteen feet for living space;

     D.    Minimum side yard setbacks:

     1.     Four feet,

     2.     Ten feet on the street side of a corner lot;

     E.     Minimum rear yard setback: fifteen feet;

     F.     Maximum building height: two stories not to exceed thirty feet. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016)

 

17.474.025 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Chapter 17.100;

     B.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers, and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.620;

     C.     Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.620;

     D.    Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660. (Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016)

 

17.474.026 Map for PD-24
 



 

(Ord. 968 § 2, 2016; Ord. 967 § 2, 2016)

 

Chapter 17.475 PD-25 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT TWENTY-FIVE) ZONE
17.475.001 Authority and purpose.
     The authority and purpose for the adoption of the PD-25 (planned development twenty-five) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-25 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-25 zone is to permit and regulate the development of single-family detached homes and public uses in accordance with the Brentwood general plan. The boundary of the PD-25 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.475.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.475.002 Permitted uses.
     Permitted uses in the PD-25 zone are those uses permitted under the R-1 (single-family residential) zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.475.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified as conditionally permitted in the R-1 zoning district in Title 17 which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.475.004 Regulations for lot area density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the PD-25 zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Five thousand five hundred twenty square feet.

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty feet.

     C.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet to a front-entry garage. Fifteen feet to a habitable living space. Fifteen feet to the front wall of a side-entry garage. Twelve feet to a porch or other architectural feature.

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Sixty feet.

     E.     Minimum side yard: Five feet; minimum aggregate average fifteen feet.

     F.     Minimum rear yard: Fifteen feet; average twenty feet.

     G.    Maximum building height limit: No main building shall exceed thirty feet in height.

     H.    Exceptions:

     1.     The lot width for lots on culs-de-sac and curvilinear streets shall be fifty-five feet as measured fifteen feet from the front property line.

     2.     Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet.

     I.      Maximum density: Three and seven tenths dwelling units per acre. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.475.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

 

     F.     The development of the PD-25 zone district shall be substantially in accord with the development plan shown on the planned development 22 subarea map found in Section 17.472.016.

     G.    The maximum number of dwelling units shall be eighty-two. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.475.006 Map for PD-25.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.476 PD-26 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT TWENTY-SIX) ZONE
17.476.010 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-26 (planned development twenty-six) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-26 (planned development twenty-six) zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450 of this code, entitled “Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.”

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-26 (planned development twenty-six) zone is to permit and regulate development of special planning area L as designated by the city of Brentwood general plan.

     C.     Intent. In order to achieve the purpose of the PD-26 (planned development twenty-six) zone in implementing the development of single-family housing, the zone shall entail a spectrum of individual lot sizes distributed according to the allocation of units represented on the development plan and related exhibits. The primary uses of this area shall consist of single-family, park, and open space uses. The planning areas shall be as shown in Section 14.476.150 of this chapter and made a part of this chapter, and as further described below. The boundaries of the PD-26 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.476.150. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-26 (planned development twenty-six) zone:

     A.    Those uses which are permitted within the R-1 (single-family residential) zoning district in Title 17;

     B.     Low density single-family homes (one to five units per acre) with the average gross density for SPA-L not exceeding three units per acre;

     C.     Parks;

     D.    Bicycle and pedestrian trails;

     E.     Other similar or compatible uses including park-and-ride lots, small family day care, home occupations, and model home sales facilities. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.030 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses require special consideration and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Brentwood Municipal Code Section 17.130.003:

     A.    Public and private schools, libraries and churches;

     B.     Those conditionally permitted uses within the R-1 (single-family residential) zoning district in Title 17;

     C.     Other uses similar in character to those uses listed above, as approved by the planning commission and zoning administrator. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.040 Permitted accessory uses and structures.
     The following uses are permitted accessory uses and structures in accordance with Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.660:

     A.    Arbors, trellises, gazebos and similar structures of open construction;

     B.     Fences and walls;

     C.     Garages;

     D.    Patio covers;

     E.     Swimming pools and spas;

     F.     Additional accessory uses and structures necessary or incidental to a principal use as approved by the community development department. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.050 Residential densities and planning area unit allocations.
     A.    The overall density for the entire SPA-L shall be three units per acre as stipulated by the general plan and as shown on the development plan and related exhibits. To assure that the character of each parcel within SPA-L is articulated successfully, each development plan will demonstrate how the combination of integrated common open space, lot layout, building siting, walls, fences, landscape, lighting and architectural solutions will result in a positive, enjoyable and visually pleasing development.

     B.     SPA-L is divided into planning areas (see the development plan and related exhibits). The quantity of units allowed by individual planning area are listed below, followed by the zoning regulations and other conditions or comments applicable to the specific planning area. All residential planning areas are zoned low density residential (LDR).

 

1.  Planning areas 8, 11, 12 and 15 have been assigned minimum lot sizes (SF-4,500 to SF-20,000). Each minimum lot size designation has a corresponding set of development standards and applicable design guideline regulations.

2.  Planning area 1:

35 units-LDR:

Future application.

3.  Planning area 2:

1 unit

Church, PG&E, EBMUD.

4.  Planning area 3:

116 units-LDR:

Future application with required buffer areas of SF-10,000 fronting Fairview and school land uses.

5.  Planning area 5:

 

Park, five acres.

6.  Planning area 6:

20 units-LDR:

Future application.

7.  Planning area 7:

183 units-LDR:

SF less than 8,000, 8,000—9,000, and greater than 10,000.

8.  Planning area 8:

71 units-LDR:

SF-5,000 with required buffer areas of SF-10,000 fronting Fairview north of Apricot and SF-20,000 fronting Fairview south of Apricot.

9.  Planning area 9:

74 units-LDR:

Future application with required buffer areas of SF-20,000 fronting Fairview.

10.  Planning area 10:

 

Park, five acres.

11.  Planning area 11:

95 units-LDR:

SF-4,500.

12.  Planning area 12:

179 units-LDR:

SF-4,500.

13.  Planning area 13:

58 units-LDR:

Future application.

14.  Planning area 14:

64 units-LDR:

Future application with required buffer areas of SF-10,000 fronting Minnesota Avenue and along the south boundary.

15.  Planning area 15:

138 units-LDR:

SF-4,500 with required buffer areas of SF-10,000 fronting Minnesota and adjacent to properties in NW corner.

16.  Planning area 16:

134 units-LDR:

Future application with required buffer areas of SF-10,000 fronting Minnesota and SF-20,000 at the southern property line adjacent to Randy Way properties.

(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.060 Prevailing minimum lot size.
     A.    Within the PD-26 zone, prevailing minimum lot sizes are to be established for each planning area.

     1.     The minimum lot size shall constitute no more than fifty percent of the total number of lots proposed in each planning area.

     2.     The balance of the proposed lots shall increase by five hundred square foot increments, or thirty percent at plus five hundred square feet, and twenty percent at plus one thousand square feet, or greater.

     3.     Deviation from the above regulation shall be reviewed on a case by case basis by the planning commission as a part of the subdivision map review process.

     B.     The general plan requires a transition buffer where smaller lots would be proposed adjacent to existing larger properties.

     1.     The transition buffer shall also be implemented where a significant lot size differential results between or within the proposed planning areas.

     2.     Transition buffering shall consider lot size, number of resultant homes and general privacy issues with a preference for having no more than two lots abutting an existing lot.

     3.     Such transition buffering shall be reviewed on a case by case basis as a part of the tentative map process.

     C.     Planning Areas 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 13, 14, and 16. Before development plan processing may occur in these planning areas, the zoning district shall be amended to include development plan standards and accompanying regulations.

     1.     Except as otherwise specified in the regulations so adopted, development of the PD-26 zone shall be in accordance with existing city standards as contained in Brentwood Municipal Code Chapters 17.130 and 17.140.

     2.     To assure that the character of each parcel within SPA-L is articulated successfully, each development plan will demonstrate how the combination of integrated common open space, lot layout, building siting, walls, fences, landscape, lighting and architectural solutions will result in a positive, enjoyable and visually pleasing development.

     3.     The plan shall establish standards for lot area, setbacks, yards, height and parking, and may also contain provisions governing design and site review, landscape plans and related matters.

     4.     The development plan shall be approved by the planning commission and city council. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.061 Regulations for planning areas 1 and 2—Lot area, yards, height and other regulations for development.
     A.    Single-Family Residential. Greater Than Fourteen Thousand Square Feet.

     1.     Minimum lot area: The minimum lot area shall be fourteen thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width shall be eighty-five feet as measured from the front building line.

     3.     Minimum street frontage: The minimum street frontage shall be eighty-five feet, except that the minimum street frontage on culs-de-sac shall be fifty feet.

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: The standard building setback shall be a minimum of twenty feet. Thirty percent or more of the setbacks must randomly deviate from the average overall setback.

     5.     Minimum side yard setbacks: Side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of twenty-five feet aggregate, with ten feet as a minimum (as measured from the property line to the building foundation at the front and rear setback lines). Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard setback on the street side of fifteen feet.

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of thirty feet with the exception of Lots 1, 2 and 3 of tentative subdivision map 8453, which shall be a minimum of twenty feet, (as measured from the property line to the building foundation).

     7.     Building height The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet.

     8.     Driveways: Homes shall have a concrete driveway that provides access to the garage for a minimum distance of twenty feet behind sidewalk.

     9.     Design: Five floor plans with three elevations per plan shall be developed for the fifty-three lots within these planning areas, with no one plan being utilized more than twenty-five percent of the time. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.063 Regulations for planning area 3—Lot areas, yards, height and other regulations for development.
     A.    Authority, Purpose, and Intent. The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of development standards for PA-3 are as follows:

     1.     Authority. PA-3 was created through the implementation of the PD-26 (planned development twenty-six) zone pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450 of this code, entitled Planning Development Zones—General Regulations;

     2.     Purpose. The purpose of PA-3 is to permit and regulate development standards within the PA-3 area in special planning area SPA-L;

     3.     Intent. In order to achieve the purpose of the PD-26 (planned development twenty-six) zone in implementing the development of single-family housing, development standards shall consist of single-family detached housing and open space uses.

     B.     Permitted Uses. The entirety of uses as defined within Section 17.476.020 of this code shall be permitted within PA-3.

     C.     Conditionally Permitted Uses. The entirety of uses as defined within Section 17.476.030 of this code shall be permitted within PA-3.

     D.    Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The entirety of uses as defined within Section 17.476.040 of this code shall be permitted within PA-3.

     E.     Residential Densities. In no case shall residential densities or total permitted units exceed the numbers shown in Final Maps 8055 and 8176.

     F.     Regulations for Lot area, Yards, Structure Height, and Other Regulations for Development.

     1.     SF-7000 and SF-10000.

     a.     Minimum lot area: The minimum lot area shall be seven thousand square feet. On Fairview Avenue, the minimum lot size shall be ten thousand square feet.

     b.     Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width shall be sixty-five feet as measured at the front building line.

     c.     Minimum street frontage: The minimum street frontage shall be sixty-five feet, except that the minimum street frontage on knuckles shall be forty feet.

     d.     Minimum front yard setback: The standard building setback shall be a minimum of twelve feet with an average overall setback of fifteen feet. Homes. Front-facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet. Thirty percent or more of setbacks must randomly deviate from the average overall setback.

     e.     Fairview Avenue front yard setback: The Fairview Avenue standard front yard setbacks shall be a minimum of twenty feet. Front-facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five feet.

     f.      Driveways: Homes shall have a concrete driveway which provides access to the garage for a minimum distance of twenty feet behind the sidewalk. Lots fronting Fairview Avenue shall be designed with driveways that do not require backing onto Fairview Avenue.

     g.     Minimum side yard setback: Side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of fifteen feet aggregate, with five feet as a minimum (as measured from the property line to the building foundation at the front and rear setback lines). Corner lots stall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet.

     h.     Minimum side yard setback for Fairview Avenue: For lots on Fairview, the side yard setback shall be twenty-five feet aggregate, with nine feet as a minimum. Rear yard garages may be located within the side yard up to a five-foot setback. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of fifteen feet.

     i.      Minimum rear yard setback: The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of fifteen feet with an average overall setback of at least twenty feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation. For lots on Fairview Avenue, the rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty feet. Rear yard garages may be located with at least a five-foot setback.

     j.      Projections into setback areas: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplaces, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required setback, as per Chapter 17.660 of this code, except that in no circumstance shall any portion of the house be less than ten feet from the front property line.

     k.     Building height: The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet.

     l.      Side loading garages: A minimum of ten percent of the lots shall have side-entry garages.

     m.    Single-story houses: Fifty percent of the corner lots and fifty percent of the lots backing up to or siding onto city arterial streets shall have single-story houses on them. Two-thirds of the lots on Fairview Avenue shall have single-story houses on them. Four-way intersections shall have a minimum of two single-story houses.

     n.     Design: Five floor plans with three elevations per plan shall be developed for the one hundred fifteen lots within this subdivision, with no one plan being utilized more than twenty-five percent of the time. All homes shall be constructed with post tension slaps or structural slabs. If there is no porch, a seven-inch transition step up onto a landing with a minimum horizontal distance of three feet from the front door is to be provided. The express purpose is to create a raised entry area to the home and to visually “finish” any exposed foundation. All second-story windows visible from arterial streets shall have mullions or grids.

     2.     Landscaping and Lighting Standards.

     a.     Lighting and landscaping for PA-3 shall conform to the standards of 17.476.100(C) and 17.476.110, or as modified through the design review process.

     b.     Homes shall have a back-lighted illuminated house number.

     c.     One street tree shall be provided for each lot within this subdivision. Each lot abutting Fairview Avenue shall be developed with a minimum of two twenty-four-inch boxed trees along the Fairview Avenue frontage. On corner lots, street trees shall be provided on thirty-foot intervals within the side street mow strip or parkway. Street trees shall be: (i) a species selected from the Brentwood master tree list, (ii) a minimum fifteen-gallon in size, and (iii) planted with branches above the average human eye level. The trees selected shall be deep-rooted and drought-resistant. Location and species shall be approved by the city’s landscape architect.

     d.     Any proposed monument sign at the entrance shall have obtained building permits to the satisfaction of the city’s community development department and traffic engineer with regards to sight-distance issues.

     e.     CCRs, if any, shall preclude the parking of boats, trailers and recreational vehicles on public rights-of-way or between a building and a street in the front setback area or in the street-side side yard setback on corner lots.

     3.     Other Regulations.

     a.     Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620 of this code.

     b.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016 of this code.

     c.     Accessory buildings and structures will be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of this code.

     d.     All residential units shall be provided with sectional garage doors with automatic openers.

     e.     Residential densities and planning area unit allocations shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.476.050 of this code. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.064 Regulations for planning area 6—Lot area, yards, height and other regulations for development.
     A.    Minimum lot area: The minimum lot area shall be twelve thousand square feet.

     B.     Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width shall be seventy feet as measured from the front building line.

     C.     Minimum front yard setback: The standard building setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five feet.

     D.    Minimum side yard setbacks: Side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of ten feet.

     E.     Minimum rear yard setback: The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of thirty feet (as measured from the property line to the building foundation).

     F.     Building height: The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty-five feet and/or two stories.

     G.    Design: All homes shall be designed with a minimum square footage of two thousand five hundred square feet. None of the homes shall have the same floor plan and/or exterior elevation. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.065 Regulations for planning area 7—Lot area, yards, height and other regulations for development.
     A.    Single-Family Residential. Less Than Eight Thousand Square Feet.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Five thousand five hundred square feet.

     2.     Minimum lot width: Fifty feet, as measured at the front building line.

     3.     Minimum street frontage: Thirty feet, with the exception of flag lots, which shall maintain a minimum of eighteen feet at the point of access, and difficult cul-de-sac lots, which may be allowed slight variation with the approval of the community development department.

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Twelve feet, with an average overall setback of fifteen feet. The standard for lots facing “landscape medians” or open space areas shall be a minimum of ten feet. Thirty percent or more of setbacks must randomly deviate from the average overall setback. Front facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet as measured from the back of the sidewalk.

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet, with a fifteen feet aggregate, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within the side yard up to a three-foot setback.

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Fifteen feet, with an average overall setback of at least twenty feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within the rear yard up to a three-foot setback.

     7.     Projections into setback areas: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplaces, porches and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setbacks as per Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than ten feet from the front property line.

     8.     Setbacks from sidewalks: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet.

     B.     Single-Family Residential. Eight Thousand to Nine Thousand Nine Hundred Ninety-Nine Square Feet.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Eight thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum lot width: Seventy feet, as measured at the front building line.

     3.     Minimum street frontage Thirty feet.

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Twelve feet, with an average overall setback of fifteen feet. Thirty percent or more of setbacks must randomly deviate from the average overall setback. Front facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet.

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Seven feet, with a twenty feet aggregate, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within the side yard up to a five-foot setback.

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Fifteen feet, with an average overall setback of at least twenty feet, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within the rear yard up to a three-foot setback.

     7.     Projections into setback areas: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplaces, porches and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setbacks as per Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than ten feet from the front property line.

     8.     Setbacks from sidewalks: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet.

     C.     Single-family residential: Ten Thousand Square Feet or Greater.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Ten thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum lot width: Ninety feet, as measured at the front building line.

     3.     Minimum street frontage: Forty-five feet.

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Fifteen feet, with an average overall setback of twenty feet. Thirty percent or more of setbacks must randomly deviate from the average overall setback. Front facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet.

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Twelve feet, with a thirty feet aggregate, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of fifteen feet. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within the side yard up to a ten-foot setback.

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet, with an average overall setback of at least twenty feet, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within the rear yard up to a three-foot setback.

     7.     Projections into setback areas: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplaces, porches and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setbacks as per Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than ten feet from the property line.

     8.     Setbacks from sidewalks: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.070 Regulations for Planning Areas 8, 11, 12 and 15—Lot area, yards, height and other regulations for development.
     A.    Single-Family Residential. Four thousand five hundred (SF-4,500).

     1.     Minimum lot area: Four thousand five hundred square feet.

     2.     Minimum lot width: Forty-five feet, as measured at the front building line.

     3.     Minimum street frontage: Thirty feet, with the exception of flag lots, which shall maintain a minimum of eighteen feet at the point of access, and difficult cul-de-sac lots, which may be allowed slight variation with the approval of the community development department.

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Twelve feet, with an average overall setback of fifteen feet. The standard for lots facing “landscape medians” or open space areas shall be a minimum of ten feet. Thirty percent or more of setbacks must randomly deviate from the average overall setback. Front facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet.

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet, with a fifteen feet aggregate, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet. Minimum distance between houses shall be twelve feet. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within the side yard up to a “zero” setback (three feet, per Uniform Building Code).

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Fifteen feet, with an average overall setback of at least twenty feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation, except for rear yards adjacent to the Southern Pacific Railroad in which case the minimum setback shall be one hundred feet from the RR right-of-way. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within the rear yard up to a “zero” setback (three feet, per Uniform Building Code).

     7.     Projections into setback areas: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplaces, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setbacks as per Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than ten feet from the front property line.

     8.     Setbacks from sidewalks: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet.

     B.     Single-Family Residential. Five Thousand (SF-5,000).

     1.     Minimum lot area: Five thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum lot width: Fifty feet, as measured at the front building line.

     3.     Minimum street frontage: Thirty feet, with the exception of flag lots, which shall maintain a minimum of eighteen feet at the point of access, and difficult cul-de-sac lots, which may be allowed slight variation with the approval of the community development department.

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Twelve feet, with an average overall setback of fifteen feet. The standard for lots facing “landscape medians” or open space areas shall be a minimum of ten feet. Thirty percent or more of setbacks must randomly deviate from the average overall setback. Front facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet.

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet, with a fifteen feet aggregate, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within the side yard up to a “zero” setback (three feet, per Uniform Building Code).

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Fifteen feet, with an average overall setback of at least twenty feet, as measured from the property line to the building foundation, except for rear yards adjacent to the Southern Pacific Railroad, in which case the minimum setback shall be one hundred feet from the RR right-of-way. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within the rear yard up to a “zero” setback (three feet, per Uniform Building Code).

     7.     Projections into setback areas: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplaces, porches and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setbacks as per Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than ten feet from the front property line.

     8.     Setbacks from sidewalks: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet.

     C.     Single-Family Residential. Five Thousand Five Hundred/Six Thousand (SF-5,500/SF-6,000).

     1.     Minimum lot area: Five thousand five hundred square feet and six thousand square feet, respectively.

     2.     Minimum lot width: Fifty-five feet and sixty feet, respectively, as measured at the front building line.

     3.     Minimum street frontage: Thirty feet, with the exception of flag lots, which shall maintain a minimum of eighteen feet at the point of access, and difficult cul-de-sac lots, which may be allowed slight variation with the approval of the community development department.

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Twelve feet, with an average overall setback of fifteen feet. The standard for lots facing “landscape medians” or open space areas shall be a minimum of ten feet. Thirty percent or more of setbacks must randomly deviate from the average overall setback. Front facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet.

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Fifteen feet aggregate, with five feet as a minimum, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within the side yard up to a “zero” setback (three feet, per Uniform Building Code).

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of fifteen feet, with an average overall setback of at least twenty feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation, except for rear yards adjacent to the Southern Pacific Railroad, in which case the minimum setback shall be one hundred feet from the RR right-of-way. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within the rear yard up to a “zero” setback (three feet, per Uniform Building Code).

     7.     Projections into setback areas: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplaces, porches and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setbacks as per Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than ten feet from the front property line.

     8.     Setbacks from sidewalks: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet.

     D.    Single-Family Residential. Ten Thousand (SF-10,000).

     1.     Minimum lot area: Ten thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum lot width: Eighty feet, as measured at the front building line.

     3.     Minimum street frontage: Thirty feet.

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Fifteen feet, with an average overall setback of twenty feet. Thirty percent or more of setbacks must randomly deviate from the average overall setback. Front facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet.

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Nine feet, with a twenty-five feet aggregate, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within the side yard up to a five-foot setback.

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet, as measured from the property line to the building foundation, except for rear yards adjacent to the Southern Pacific Railroad, in which case the minimum setback shall be one hundred feet from the RR right-of-way line. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within the rear yard up to a “zero” setback (three feet, per Uniform Building Code).

     7.     Projections into setback areas: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplaces, porches and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setbacks as per Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than ten feet from the front property line.

     8.     Setbacks from sidewalks: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet.

     E.     Single-Family Residential. Twenty Thousand (SF-20,000).

     1.     Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet, as measured at the front building line.

     3.     Minimum street frontage: One-half of the minimum lot width.

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet, with an average overall setback of twenty-five feet. Thirty percent or more of setbacks must randomly deviate from the average overall setback. Front facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet.

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet, with a twenty-five feet aggregate, as measured from the property line to building foundation. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within five feet of the property line.

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Thirty feet, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Rear yard garages: the proposed garage structure may be located within five feet of the property line.

     7.     Projections into setback areas: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplaces, porches and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setbacks as per Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than ten feet from the front property line.

     8.     Setbacks from sidewalks: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.075 Regulations for planning area 9—Lot area, yards, height and other regulations.
     A.    Single-Family Residential. Six Thousand Five Hundred/Seven Thousand Nine Hundred Ninety-Nine (SF-6,500/7,999).

     1.     Minimum lot area: The minimum lot area shall be six thousand five hundred square feet respectively.

     2.     Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width, as measured at the building line, shall be fifty-five feet/sixty feet respectively.

     3.     Minimum street frontage: The minimum street frontage shall be thirty feet with the exception of difficult cul-de-sac lots, which may be allowed slight variation with the approval of the community development department.

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: The standard building setback shall be a minimum of twelve feet with an average overall setback of fifteen feet. The standard for lots facing “landscape medians” or open space areas shall be a minimum of ten feet. Thirty percent or more of setbacks must randomly deviate from the average overall setback. Front-facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet from front property line.

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Side yard setbacks shall be fifteen feet aggregate, with five feet as a minimum, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard setback, on the street side, of ten feet.

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of fifteen feet with an average overall setback of twenty feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     7.     Projections into setback areas: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setback as per Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than ten feet from the property line.

     8.     Setbacks from sidewalks: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum building height: The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet.

     B.     Single-Family Residential. Eight Thousand/Thirteen Thousand (SF-8,000/13,000).

     1.     Minimum lot size: The minimum lot size shall be eight thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width, as measured at the front building line, shall be seventy feet.

     3.     Minimum street frontage: The minimum street frontage shall be thirty feet.

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: The standard building setback shall be a minimum of fifteen feet with an average overall setback of twenty feet. Thirty percent or more of setbacks must randomly deviate from the average overall setback. Front-facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet.

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Side yard setbacks shall be twenty feet aggregate, with seven feet as a minimum, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard setback, on the street side, of ten feet.

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of twenty feet, as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     7.     Projections into setback areas: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setbacks as per Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than ten feet from the property line.

     8.     Setbacks from sidewalks: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum building height: The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet.

     C.     Single-Family Residential. Twenty Thousand and Over (SF-20,000).

     1.     Minimum lot area: The minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width, as measured at the front building line, shall be one hundred feet.

     3.     Minimum street frontage: The minimum street frontage shall be one-half of the minimum lot width.

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: The standard building setback shall be a minimum of twenty feet with an average overall setback of twenty-five feet. Thirty percent or more of setbacks must randomly deviate from the average overall setback. Front facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five feet.

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Side yard setbacks shall be twenty-five feet aggregate, with ten feet as a minimum, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard setback, on the street side, of ten feet.

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of thirty feet, as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     7.     Projections into setback areas: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setback as per Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstance shall any portion of the house be less than ten feet from the property line.

     8.     Setbacks from sidewalk: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum building height: The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet.

     D.    Other Regulations.

     1.     All other development standards for PD-26 will apply to this proposed project within planning area 9 including Section 17.476.050 pertaining to residential densities and planning area unit allocations. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.076 Regulations for planning area 13—Lot area, yards, height and other regulations.
     A.    Single-Family Residential. Seven Thousand Square Feet.

     1.     Minimum lot area: The minimum lot area shall be seven thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width shall be seventy feet.

     3.     Minimum lot depth: The minimum lot depth shall be one hundred five feet.

     4.     Minimum street frontage: One-half the required lot width. The lot width for cul-de-sac lots shall be measured thirty feet from the property line.

     5.     Minimum front yard setback: Front facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet from front property line. Side entry garages/primary building walls shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet.

     6.     Minimum side yard setback: Side yard setbacks shall be fifteen feet aggregate, with five feet as a minimum, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard setback, on the street side, of ten feet.

     7.     Minimum rear yard setback: The rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     8.     Projections into setback areas: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setback as per Brentwood Municipal Code Section 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than ten feet from the property line.

     9.     Setbacks from sidewalks: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     10.   Maximum building height: The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.077 Regulations for planning area 14—Lot area, yards, height and other regulations.
     A.    Single-Family Residential. Seven Thousand Square Feet (Lots 22—64).

     1.     Minimum lot area: The minimum lot area shall be seven thousand square feet respectively;

     2.     Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width shall be sixty-five feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: The minimum lot depth shall be ninety-eight feet;

     4.     Minimum street frontage: One-half the required lot width. The lot width for cul-de-sac lots shall be measured thirty feet from the property line;

     5.     Minimum front yard setback: Front-facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet from front property line. Side entry garages/primary building walls shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet;

     6.     Minimum side yard setback: Side yard setbacks shall be fifteen feet aggregate, with five feet as a minimum, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard setback, on the street side, of ten feet;

     7.     Minimum rear yard setback: The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of fifteen feet with an average overall setback of twenty feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation;

     8.     Projections into setback areas: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setback as per Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than ten feet from the property line;

     9.     Setbacks from sidewalks: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location;

     10.   Maximum building height: The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet.

     B.     Single-Family Residential. Ten Thousand Square Feet (Lots 1—21).

     1.     Minimum lot size: The minimum lot size shall be ten thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width shall be sixty-five feet;

     3.     Minimum street frontage: One-half the required lot width. The lot width for cul-de-sac lots shall be measured thirty feet from the property line;

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Front-facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet. Side-entry garages/primary building walls shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet;

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Side yard setbacks shall be twenty feet aggregate, with ten feet as a minimum, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard setback, on the street side, of ten feet;

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of twenty feet, as measured from the property line to the building foundation;

     7.     Projections into setback areas: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setbacks as per Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than ten feet from the property line;

     8.     Setbacks from sidewalks: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location;

     9.     Maximum building height: The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.078 Regulations for planning area 16—Lot area, yards, height and other regulations.
     A.    Seven Thousand to Ten Thousand Square Foot Lot Size.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Seven thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Sixty-five feet as measured at the front setback line;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: Ninety feet as measured at the side setback line;

     4.     Minimum lot frontage: Thirty-five feet;

     5.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages, fifteen feet to any primary building wall or side-entry garage;

     6.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of fifteen feet for both sides. For corner lots the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet;

     7.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     8.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet.

     B.     Ten Thousand to Twenty Thousand Square Foot Lot Size.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Ten thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Sixty feet as measured at the front setback line;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: Ninety feet as measured at the side setback line;

     4.     Minimum lot frontage: Thirty-five feet;

     5.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages, fifteen feet to any primary building wall or side-entry garage;

     6.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of fifteen feet for both sides. For corner lots the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet;

     7.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     8.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet.

     C.     Twenty Thousand Square Foot Plus Product.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Sixty-five feet as measured at the front setback line;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet as measured at the side setback line;

     4.     Minimum lot frontage: Fifty feet;

     5.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages, fifteen feet for living space and side-entry garage, and ten feet for front porches;

     6.     Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet and a total of twenty feet for both sides. For corner lots the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet;

     7.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty-five feet;

     8.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories for main residence.

     D.    Duet Units.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Four thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Thirty-five feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: Fifty-five feet;

     4.     Minimum lot frontage: Thirty feet;

     5.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for front facing garages, fifteen feet for living space;

     6.     Minimum side yard setback: Zero feet and a total of seven and one-half feet for both sides. Five feet and a total of fifteen feet for both sides on corner lots. For corner lots the street side shall be a minimum of ten feet;

     7.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet.

     E.     Other Regulations.

     1.     Design and site development shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     2.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     3.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     4.     Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 provided lot coverage does not exceed fifty percent.

     5.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provision of Chapter 17.660.

     6.     Fencing on Corner Lots. All fencing shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the street side yard property line; all other fencing shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 17.660 of the Municipal Code

     7.     No building permit for a primary dwelling unit shall be issued until a residential growth management program (RGMP) allocation is received for the unit. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.080 Grading standards.
     A.    Engineering Guidance.

     1.     Grading designs shall conform with the city of Brentwood grading ordinance.

     2.     Grades shall be designed in accordance with the recommendations of a licensed civil engineer or soils engineer. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.090 Street standards.
     All public and private streets within the development area shall conform to those standards in the adopted city’s roadway infrastructure master plan and/or proposed as a part of PD-26 and approved by the public works department. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.100 Utility standards.
     A.    General. The location and construction of all utilities within the development area shall conform to those standards adopted by the public works department, or proposed as a part of PD-26 and approved by the public works department. All infra-structure shall be improved incrementally and concurrently with development of all parcels within SPA “L.”

     B.     Underground. All utility service lines, transformers, control points and other utility housings shall be underground with the exception of portions of the ECCID Lateral Line No. 6, which may remain open as approved by ECCID and the city.

     C.     Lighting Standards. All light standards for public streets within the development area shall conform to those standards adopted and approved by the public works department and/or proposed as a part of PD-26 as follows:

     1.     Sand Creek Road, and on Minnesota and Fairview Avenues south of Sand Creek Road. Cobra heads.

     2.     Residential Collector. Decorative fixtures with a pole height of eighteen feet to twenty feet.

     3.     Residential. Decorative fixtures with a pole height of sixteen feet to eighteen feet.

     4.     Residential Cul-de-sac. Decorative fixtures with a height of fourteen feet will be used on the residential side of the street.

     5.     Residential Streets With Landscaped Medians. Decorative fixtures with a height of fourteen feet shall alternate between the residential frontage and the “landscaped medians.”

     6.     Park/Open Space Entrances. Decorative lighting, on pedestrian scale of ten to twelve feet in height. All decorative light fixtures shall be consistent with city standards for the type, model and make. Consideration will be given to complimentary smaller scale fixtures at residential streets with landscaped medians/culs-de-sac and at park/open space entrances. Lighting shall be shielded so as not to intrude onto adjacent residential properties. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.110 Landscaping standards.
     A.    General. The landscaping for SPA “L” shall comply with the regulations contained in Chapter 17.630 entitled “Landscaping and Screening” and/or as approved as a part of PD 26. Required landscape plans shall be prepared and submitted by a registered landscape architect. The design and landscape plans shall be submitted with each tract map application within the zone, and must be approved by the community development department.

     B.     Street Trees. Street trees are required to be planted on all streets within the development area. Tree spacing on Fairview Avenue and Minnesota Avenue shall be uniformly spaced at thirty feet on center, and double lined where the frontage width will allow it. Tree spacing on all other residential streets shall average thirty-five feet on center with at least one tree provided per lot. A street tree master plan shall be prepared and submitted with each tract map application. The SPA “L” master street tree list is presented in the development plan and related exhibits.

     C.     Entryway Design. The design of individual development entryways shall consist of a combination of signage, landscaping, lighting, monumentation, hardscape and other materials. Entryway design shall be reviewed by the planning commission.

     D.    Front yard Landscaping. All developer-provided front yard landscaping shall be installed with water conserving materials, as per applicable water conservation ordinances. Landscape and irrigation plans for each typical lot shall be submitted with each tract map application.

     E.     Neighborhood Open Space/Commons. All development plans shall include neighborhood open space evenly dispersed within the individual planning area. Commons shall be landscaped with a combination of large scale canopy trees and neutral walk-on ground cover, of a design to fulfill the intent of the commons theme. Lighting and landscaping districts, homeowner associations, or other financing mechanisms acceptable to the city shall be set up to maintain the landscaping in these areas. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.120 Parks and open space.
     A.    Compliance with Park and Recreation Master Plan. PD-26 shall contain park areas within its boundaries as designated by the park and recreation master plan.

     B.     Open Space Areas. Open space areas may be required to be offered for dedication as part of the public open space or park system. Where such offer of dedication is not accepted, the development shall provide legal arrangements, approved by the city, sufficient to assure the maintenance and preservation of such a space for whatever purpose it is intended. Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify: the ownership of the open space; method of maintenance; responsibility for maintenance; taxes and insurance; compulsory membership and assessment provisions; guarantees that any association formed to own and maintain common open space will not be dissolved without the consent of the city council; and any other specification deemed necessary by the city.

     Open space consistent with the commons theme, shall be provided as an integrated part of the developed plan. Open space shall be eight to ten percent of the acreage for each planning area and shall include: landscaped medians, expanded frontage and parkway landscape, trails/pathways and the linear open space/commons connecting the neighborhood parks.

     C.     Permitted Uses. Permitted uses in park and open space areas include:

     1.     Public parks, facilities, rest rooms, play fields, parking and playgrounds;

     2.     Drainage channels;

     3.     Greenbelt areas which are formed by land development;

     4.     Pedestrian and/or bicycle trails;

     5.     Access for maintenance and emergency vehicles;

     6.     Neighborhood open space/commons.

     D.    Park Requirements. The properties included in PD-26 shall provide for ten acres of neighborhood park area, the payment of “in-lieu” fees, or a combination thereof, as required by the city’s general plan. The park area shall consist of two five-acre neighborhood parks as required by the city of Brentwood park and recreation master plan. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.130 Off-street parking standards.
     A.    Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and/or as approved as a part of PD-26 and as approved by the public works department.

     B.     Corner Lots. Where it is possible, garages on corner lots may have their entries oriented to the side street.

     C.     Boats, Trailers and Similar Vehicles. The parking and storage of boats, trailers and other similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.140 Other standards and regulations.
     A.    The development of PD-26 shall be substantially in accordance with the SPA “L” plan and the “commons” theme. Variations may be allowed in subsequent development plans, including street sections, ingress/egress, and the open space boundary configuration, with approval of the zoning administrator.

     B.     Design and site development review shall be required for all housing development pursuant to Chapters 17.100 and 17.800.

     C.     To achieve the desired lot layout, including flag lots, lot sizes may vary within each planning area provided that minimum requirements contained in the zoning and development standards of this document are satisfied, and the total number of units per planning area is not exceeded.

     D.    A master plotting plan, illustrating the placement of the house plans, shall be submitted for each phase or tract of development.

     E.     Except as otherwise specified in regulations with in this document, development of the PD-26 zone shall be in accordance with existing city standards as contained in Chapters 17.130 through 17.140.

     F.     Development applications within all planning areas shall comply with the Brentwood Municipal Code with respect to development and performance standards, landscaping and screening, parking, signage and lighting.

     G.    Minor modifications to the planning area boundaries may be approved by the zoning administrator.

     H.    The use of model home complexes shall be allowed within a recorded tract and subsequent tracts throughout SPA “L,” subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit as required by Chapter 17.850.

     I.      Prior to the final map approval of the first implementing subdivision map, a concept plan shall be prepared and submitted to the city showing designs, location, size, materials, colors and appearance for all entry monumentation and landscaping, including city signage.

     J.      Where the Sand Creek Regional Trail crosses streets, at-grade trail crossings may occur provided signage, striping and other appropriate traffic control devices are installed.

     K.    Improvements and conveyance of land for the purposes of implementing the Sand Creek Regional Trail shall be in accordance with the city’s adopted trails master plan, and shall include a channel crossing at Marsh Creek near the railroad.

     L.     Bus turnouts shall be provided at major intersections to accommodate future bus service in the area. As development is proposed, project plans will be reviewed by Tri-Delta Transit to insure appropriate design and location of bus turnouts and bus shelters.

     M.    In accordance with the city’s community design policy of minimizing the use of soundwalls along the thoroughfares, developments within SPA “L” should be designed with a combination of earth berms, extensive landscaping, decorative wall features, stepped wall patterns, and other design features aimed at minimizing the visual impact of any required soundwalls.

     N.    If the construction of Sand Creek Road includes a sound attenuating wall, it shall be consistent with the SPA “L” design and “commons” theme.

     O.    Where possible, the architecture shall mix hip and gable roof forms. Where lots back up to major thoroughfares, rear yard architectural elevations should be designed with enhanced window trim and other features such as balconies and trellises to provide greater articulation and variety. The city would prefer to see one-story structures developed immediately adjacent to arterial thoroughfares. Structures taller than one story should be designed on wider and/or deeper lots with greater setbacks, developed facing the thoroughfare off of a frontage road, or designed in such a manner as to resemble a one-story profile. Deviations from these suggested alternatives will require special consideration.

     P.     Each development plan shall go through formal design review and, to assure that the character of each parcel within SPA “L” is articulated successfully, shall demonstrate how the combination of integrated common open space, lot density, lot layout, building situation, walls, fences, landscape, lighting and architectural solutions will result in a positive, enjoyable, and visually pleasing development.

     Q.    ECCID Canals.

     1.     Where ECCID canal and pipeline operating and maintenance points are adjacent to city streets and require operator attendance, vehicle turnouts may be required at such points to provide temporary district parking out of the regular traffic lanes.

     2.     Along the ECCID canal, barriers or fencing as approved by ECCID and the city may be required to prevent human and animal access to the canal waterway.

     3.     Along the ECCID pipelines, no trees or shrubbery that would impair the operation or maintenance of the pipeline are to be planted.

     4.     The design of the ECCID canal as a “meandering waterway” within the linear park shall include features to minimize safety hazards, water losses and other adverse impacts on the district’s use of the facility for delivery of irrigation water.

     R.     All half-street sections shall include (at a minimum) one travel lane, shoulder and bike lane.

     S.     In order to encourage the development of affordable multifamily residential housing within SPA “L,” a density bonus in excess of the state mandated standard (twenty-five percent) shall be entertained on a maximum of two sites within SPA “L.”

     T.     The rights-of-way for those portions of Fairview and Minnesota Avenues north of Sand Creek Road are established at sixty-four feet and sixty feet, respectively.

     U.    If either the school, park or linear trail sites are relocated within the SPA “L” area, there can be a transfer of units from the new school, park and trail sites to the planning areas that lost these amenities, as long as the maximum unit count of one thousand one hundred thirty-four units is maintained for the SPA.

     V.    If either the school, park or trail sites are relocated outside the SPA “L” area, the city would entertain a general plan amendment on the affected planning areas that reflects residential densities comparable to those on abutting properties.

     W.    If the school, park or trail sites are relocated, the general plan’s density transition policy would still apply.

     X.    Planning areas not developed to their maximum density shall create a “pool” of units that could be allocated to the remaining planning areas as long as the maximum unit count of one thousand one hundred thirty-four units is maintained for the SPA.

 

Table 2

PLANNING AREA RESIDENTIAL DENSITIES AND TOTAL ALLOWED UNITS

 

     The average density of SPA “L” is not to exceed three units/acre (the mid-point for low density residential zoning of one to five units/acre). Total units permitted by planning area shall be as follows:

 

Area

Owner

Residential Acreage

Other Acreage

Units

Density in du/ac

Min. Lot Size

PA 1

Shaffer/Sanchez Detention Basin

22.24

10.70

35

1.57

—

0

PA 2

Episcopal Church, PG&E, EBMUD

5.00

8.92

1

0.20

N/A

0

4.20

0

PA 3

Giannini/Hoffman

31.88

 

116

3.64

—

PA 5

Park/Hoffman

 

4.00

0

 

 

Park/Cox

1.00

0

PA 6

Tittle/Frisbey/Bonnano/Hanberg/Newmann

15.33

 

20

1.32

—

PA 7

Cox

45.26

 

183

4.13

—

PA 8

Perkins/Continente

20.00

 

71

3.55

5,000 sq. ft.

PA 9

Sciortino

21.52

 

74

3.44

—

PA 10

Park/Carlisle

 

5.00

0

 

N/A

PA 11

Continente

20.64

 

95

4.60

4,500 sq. ft.

PA 12

Continente/Kruse

39.31

 

179

4.55

4,500 sq. ft.

PA 13

Carlisle

15.30

 

58

3.79

—

PA 14

Tachella

19.36

 

64

3.31

—

PA 15

Venoble/Sanders/Kruse/Gasner

32.19

 

138

4.29

4,500 sq. ft.

PA 16

Neff/Biederman

42.98

 

134

3.12

—

 

Sand Creek Road R-O-W

 

13.56

 

 

N/A

 

Subtotals

320.81

 

1,134

3.53

 

 

All Other Properties

 

57.38

 

 

 

 

TOTAL SPA “L”

 

378.19

1,134

3.00

 

 

(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.476.150 Map for PD-26.
 



(Ord. 960 § 13, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.477 PD-27 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT TWENTY-SEVEN) ZONE
17.477.001 Authority, purpose, and intent.
     The authority and purpose for the adoption of the PD-27 (planned development twenty-seven) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. This zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. Purposes of this zone are to replace the zoning districts previously applicable to the property and to permit and regulate the development of the approximately four hundred thirty-two acres described on the development plan and related exhibits. Further, in recognition of the very large size of the Brentwood Country Club, its age-restricted occupancy, and its probable construction over a number of years, it is also the purpose of this zone to allow flexibility in the design and development standards, to encourage construction of a high-quality community, to facilitate ease of adapting the housing product to market demands which change over time, and to allow construction of streets and other improvements consistent with reduced demand levels of age-restricted occupancy.

     C.     Intent. In order to achieve the purpose of the PD-27 zone, it is intended that development be in accordance with the land uses and acreage of the development plan and related exhibits. The boundaries of the PD-27 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.477.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.477.002 Area A—Residential and golf uses.
     A.    Permitted Uses—Area A.

     1.     Single-family, single-story detached and attached homes for age-restricted occupancy consistent with the provisions of Section 51 of the California Civil Code;

     2.     Model home sales facilities;

     3.     Golf course and related facilities including, tennis courts, maintenance structures and related recreation facilities;

     4.     Homeowners’ association recreation buildings, tennis courts, recreational vehicle parking lots, other common-use facilities and open area;

     5.     Other uses determined by the zoning administrator to be similar to and compatible with the preceding permitted uses.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses—Area A. The following uses may be permitted with the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     1.     Uses determined by the zoning administrator to be similar to and to be ancillary to a permitted use.

     C.     Maximum Number of Units and Minimum Lot area—Area A.

     1.     Maximum Units. A maximum of one thousand, one hundred twenty-six dwelling units may be developed.

     2.     Lot Area. Minimum lot area shall be four thousand square feet, provided that two thousand five hundred square feet is the permitted minimum per attached duet dwelling unit. A variety of lot sizes, larger than the minimums, shall be included to provide a variety of housing products and yard conditions.

     3.     Setbacks, Height and Parking. Each yard setback specified in Tables A and B shall be measured from its respective property line, except that measurement shall be from the back of sidewalk wherever a street’s sidewalk lies inside a lot. All yard setbacks shall be measured to the nearest specified wall of the dwelling. Allowable projections into yard setbacks shall be as set forth in Section 17.660.005 of Chapter 17.660, Encroachments Into Required Yards.

 

Table A

 

Setbacks, Height and Parking

Age-Restricted Home

Age-Restricted Home

Properties Within Tentative Subdivision Map No. 7940

Duet Lot

All Other Lots

A.  Min. Front Yard

 

 

(1)  To door of a front-entry garage

18′

18′

(2)  To a wall of a side-entry garage

NA

10′

(3)  To a wall of a habitable room

13′

13′

B.  Min. Side Yard Adjoining a Street

NA

12′

C.  Min. Side Yard at Interior Lot Line

 

 

(1)  To a wall of a garage

5′*

5′

(2)  To a wall of a habitable room

5′*

6′

(3)  Aggregate, both side yards

5′*

12′

D.  Min. Rear Yard

5′**

15′ where the yard adjoins a golf course; 15′ minimum and 20′ average elsewhere

E.  Min. Off-Street Parking Spaces

 

 

(1)  In a garage

1

2

(2)  In a driveway

1

 

F.  Max. Building Height

35′

35′

 

*      A 0′ setback is permitted at one side yard of a duet lot.

**    Every duet unit shall include patio area of not less than 15′ x 10′.

 

Table B

 

Setbacks, Height and Parking

Age-Restricted Home

Age-Restricted Home

Properties Within Tentative Subdivision Map No. 8089

Duet Lot

All Other Lots

A.  Min. Front Yard

 

 

(1)  To door of a front-entry garage

20′

20′

(2)  To a wall of a side-entry garage

NA

10′

(3)  To a wall of a habitable room

13′

13′

B.  Min. Side Yard Adjoining a Street

NA

12′

C.  Min. Side Yard at Interior Lot Line

 

 

(1)  To a wall of a garage

5′*

5′

(2)  To a wall of a habitable room

5′*

6′

(3)  Aggregate, both side yards

5′*

12′

D.  Min. Rear Yard

5′**

15′ where the yard adjoins a golf course; 15′ minimum and 20′ average elsewhere

E.  Min. Off-Street Parking Spaces

 

 

(1)  In a garage

1

2

(2)  In a driveway

1

 

F.  Max. Building Height

35′

35′

 

*      A 0′ setback is permitted at one side yard of a duet lot.

**    Every duet unit shall include patio area of not less than 15′ x 10′.

 

     D.    Construction Standards—Area A.

     1.     Age-Restricted Homes, Variety in Building Mass. Variety in building mass shall be accomplished by:

     a.     Inclusion in the floor plans available for purchase, varying front façade design such as optional side-entry garages and varying the entryway location and design;

     b.     Avoidance of using a single floor plan more than twice in any group of four or more contiguous homes;

     c.     Inclusion of floor plan purchase-options, such as additional golf cart garage space, which alter the visual mass of a floor plan; and

 

     d.     Multiple floor plans incorporating design variations such as those of subsections a, b and c of this subsection, shall be submitted at the time of site design and development review.

     2.     Acoustical Analysis. Dwellings adjacent to Fairview Avenue and the State Route 4 bypass shall be designed to meet the city’s interior noise level standard of forty-five dBA Ldn.

     E.     Design Review—Area A.

     1.     Residential Buildings. Design and site development review shall be required pursuant to Chapter 17.820, except that authority to review and approve or deny an application for design and site development review is hereby delegated to the zoning administrator;

     2.     Landscaping, Fencing and Walls. Landscaping, fencing and walls in areas adjoining a public or private street shall conform to a plan to be approved by the zoning administrator prior to issuance of building permits for the lots to be landscaped, fenced or walled. The plan shall specify colors, materials and spacing of elements;

     3.     Recreation Facilities and Conditionally Permitted Facilities. Design and site development review approval by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 17.820 shall be required for the following:

     a.     Golf clubhouse and related buildings,

     b.     Recreation buildings and accompanying outdoor facilities such as pools, and

     c.     Buildings for which approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission is required. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.477.003 Area B—Future transportation and interim uses.
     A.    Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted within area B:

     1.     Agriculture;

     2.     Transportation and public service uses;

     3.     Other uses determined by the zoning administrator to be similar to and compatible with agriculture, transportation, and public service uses.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses. The following uses may be conditionally permitted within area B with the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     1.     Recreational commercial uses, including golf course and golf-related facilities;

     2.     Recreational vehicle storage lots;

     3.     Other land uses determined by the zoning administrator to require minimal construction of permanent buildings and otherwise possessing economic and physical characteristics consistent with termination of the use upon construction of highway improvements within area B. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.477.004 Area C—Public service uses.
     A.    Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted within area C:

     1.     Agriculture;

     2.     Public service uses, including park.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses. Land uses determined by the zoning administrator to be similar to and compatible with agriculture and public service uses may be permitted within area C, with the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.477.005 Area D—Single-family residential uses.
     A.    The purpose, regulations, and standards affecting this area shall be those contained within Chapter 17.130, R-1 (Single-Family Residential) Zone. This area and all existing single-family residential uses therein shall not be considered to be a part of the Brentwood Country Club and shall be allowed to continue, subject to said purposes, regulations, and standards of the typical R-1 zoning district. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.477.006 Map for PD-27.
 



(Ord. 960 § 14, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.478 PD-28 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT TWENTY-EIGHT) ZONE
17.478.001 Authority and purpose.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of planned development twenty-eight (PD-28) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-28 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, planned development zones, general regulations.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-28 zone is to permit and regulate the development of single-family detached homes on the McDonald Property in accordance with the Brentwood general plan.

     C.     Intent. The boundary of the PD-28 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.478.007. It is intended that in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-28 zone, the development of the McDonald Property will be undertaken in accordance with the Brentwood general plan as follows:

     1.     A maximum of sixty-eight homes will be developed on the property;

     2.     A minimum four thousand five hundred square foot lots will be created. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.478.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the PD-28 zone. Those uses permitted under the R-1 zone, Section 17.130.002. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.478.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a use permit, those uses identified in Section 17.130.003 may be permitted in the PD-28 zone. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.478.004 Residential type permitted.
     The residential type permitted in the McDonald Property is as follows: Single-family dwellings, detached S-F(D). (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.478.005 General development standards.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Development Standards.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Four thousand five hundred square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Forty-five feet;

     3.     Minimum front yard:

     a.     No more than fifteen percent of the lots shall have a minimum setback of fifteen feet,

     b.     No more than fifteen percent of the lots shall have a minimum setback of eighteen feet,

     c.     No less than seventy percent of the lots shall have a minimum setback of twenty feet;

     4.     Minimum side yard setback: Twelve feet aggregate; five feet minimum;

     5.     Minimum rear yard setback:

     a.     All single story homes shall have a minimum setback of fifteen feet with a twenty-foot average depth,

     b.     All two-story homes shall have a minimum setback of twenty feet;

     6.     Exceptions:

     a.     Cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum thirty feet of street frontage and forty-five feet at the building setback,

     b.     Corner lots shall maintain a side yard setback on the street side of ten feet as measured from the property line,

     c.     Garages that front onto a street shall have a minimum setback of twenty feet. Garages that side onto a street shall have a minimum setback of ten feet;

     7.     Maximum building height shall be thirty feet;

     8.     Maximum lot coverage shall be forty percent. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.478.006 Other regulations.
     A.    All homes along Sunset Road, Marsh Creek and on corner lots shall be single story. In addition, the homes constructed on lots #11 and 12 shall be single story. No more than sixty percent of the homes shall be two-story.

     B.     Twenty percent of the homes shall have the second story stepped back four and one-half feet from the first floor façade.

     C.     Twenty percent of the homes shall have the second story stepped forward two and one-half feet from the first floor façade.

     D.    All dwelling units shall have an enclosed two-car garage having an inside clear width of eighteen feet and depth of twenty feet. Garages shall be constructed with material identical to or compatible with the external material of the housing unit. Garage doors shall have a minimum width of fifteen feet except where two doors are provided, in which case the doors shall have a minimum width of eight feet.

     E.     Ten percent of the lots shall have side loading garages.

     F.     Fencing along the lots abutting the creek shall be open-view fencing to be approved as part of design review.

     G.    Encroachments into required yards shall be in conformance with Chapter 17.660.

     H.    Vehicle storage shall be in conformance with Section 17.620.016.

     I.      All homes within this development area shall require design and site development review as contained in Chapter 17.820.

     K.    All two-story homes designed for side-by-side and back-to-back construction shall pay special attention to privacy issues such that occupants do not peer directly into neighbor’s home. Final decisions will be resolved during design review. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.478.007 Map for PD-28.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.479 PD-29 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT TWENTY-NINE) ZONE
17.479.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-29 (planned development twenty-nine) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-29 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-29 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of single-family detached homes, and public uses in accordance with the goals of the city of Brentwood’s planned development regulations. The boundaries of the PD-29 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.479.008. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.479.002 Permitted uses.
     Permitted uses in the PD-29 zone are those permitted under R-1 (single-family residential) zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.479.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified as conditionally permitted uses in the R-1 zoning district in Title 17, which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.479.004 Regulations for subarea A.
     The following regulations shall apply to subarea A:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Seven thousand square feet;

     B.     Average lot area: Nine thousand square feet;

     C.     Minimum lot width: Seventy feet. The lot width for lots on culs-de-sac, curvilinear streets, etc. shall be a minimum of forty feet at the front property line;

     D.    Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet;

     E.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet to the garage; except twelve feet to the garage for a swing driveway. Fifteen feet to any living space. Twelve feet for porches;

     F.     Minimum lot frontage: One-half the required lot width;

     G.    Minimum side yard: Minimum five feet; sum of both sides, fifteen feet. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street of ten feet. Driveways and/or flatwork shall be allowed within the setback area;

     H.    Minimum rear yard: Twenty feet;

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent;

     J.      Maximum building height: No main building shall exceed the height of two stories and thirty feet. The single-story detached garage unit shall not exceed fifteen feet in height. The two-story detached garage unit shall not exceed twenty-five feet in height;

     K.    Detached garages and outbuildings will have a minimum setback of five feet from all property lines. The two-story scheme B detached garage unit shall only be constructed on lots 5, 12, 15, 24, 25, 26, 36, 37, 48, 49, 52, 55, 66, 69, 76, 80, 82, 84, 87, 89, 101, 131, and 136 within subdivision No. 8226 and lots 2, 4, 14, 20, 23, 44, 45, 48, 51, 53, 54, 55, 57, 72, 74, 96, 98, 99, 101, and 107 within subdivision No. 8402. The scheme C detached unit can include a kitchen area. Such detached garage/outbuildings shall not be constructed with a foundation footprint larger than twenty-one feet by twenty-one feet (four hundred forty-one square feet);

     L.     The development of this zoning district shall be substantially in accordance with the development plan. Variations in the development plan including street and lot pattern may be approved through the subdivision map process;

     M.    Maximum number of dwelling units shall be two hundred forty-five;

     N.    A minimum of fifty percent of the homes abutting O’Hara Avenue shall be single-story;

     O.    Side-loading garage: Ten percent of the lots shall have side-loading garages;

     P.     Corner lots: Fifty percent of corner lots shall have single-story units;

     Q.    A minimum of twenty-five percent of the lots shall have single-story units;

     R.     The city’s decorative street light standard shall be utilized throughout the subdivision. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.479.005 Regulations for subarea B.
     The following regulations shall apply to subarea B:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Fifteen thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Ninety feet with the exception that cul-de-sac and knuckle lots shall have at least a thirty-foot width at the front property line;

     C.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet;

     D.    Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet, the sum of both sides shall be twenty feet. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum fifteen-foot setback street side yard setback;

     E.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     F.     Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent.

     G.    Maximum building height: Two stories and thirty-five feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.479.006 Regulations for subarea C.
     The following regulations shall apply to subarea C:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Fourteen thousand five hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet with the following exception: a cul-de-sac lot shall have a width of not less than one hundred feet measured thirty feet from the front property line and no less than forty-foot width at the front property line;

     C.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet;

     D.    Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet, the sum of both sides shall be twenty-five feet. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum fifteen-foot setback street side yard setback;

     E.     Minimum rear yard setback: Thirty feet;

     F.     Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent;

     G.    Maximum building height: No principal structure shall exceed two stories and thirty feet in height. Accessory buildings shall not exceed one story and fifteen feet except that barns, utilized within those subdivisions for large livestock, may be constructed to a height of thirty-five feet if approved in accordance with the conditional use permit procedures. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.479.007 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing unit pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004 (H).

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.479.008 Map for PD-29.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.480 PD-30 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT THIRTY) ZONE
17.480.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-30 (planned development thirty) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-30 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.480, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-30 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the area shown on the development plan and related exhibits in accordance with the Brentwood general plan. The area is comprised of four subareas, one set aside for a senior apartment project and the other three set aside for single-family homes and related uses.

     C.     Intent. This zoning district is intended to provide a neighborhood of single-family homes on smaller lots and senior housing in conformance with the Brentwood general plan in order to enhance the viability of downtown Brentwood. The boundaries of the PD-30 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.480.009. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.480.002 Permitted uses for each subarea.
     A.    Subarea A.

     1.     Those uses permitted within the single-family residential (R-1) zoning district in Title 17.

     2.     Parks and playgrounds.

     B.     Subarea B.

     1.     Apartments, condominiums, and townhomes for seniors aged fifty-five or older developed at a density not to exceed the mid-range of high density residential land use category.

     2.     Swimming pools, spas, and other recreational amenities serving seniors.

     3.     Temporary uses related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660.

     4.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670.

     5.     Signs subject to Chapter 17.640.

     C.     Subarea C.

     1.     Those uses permitted within the single-family residential (R-1) zoning district in Title 17.

     2.     Parks and playgrounds.

     D.    Subarea D.

     1.     Those uses permitted within the single-family residential (R-1) zoning district in Title 17.

     2.     Parks and playgrounds. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.480.003 Conditionally permitted uses for each subarea.
     A.    Subarea A. Those conditionally permitted uses within the Ranchette Estate (RE) zoning district in Title 17.

     B.     Subarea B.

     1.     Apartments, condominiums, and townhomes for seniors aged fifty-five or older developed at a density exceeding the mid-range of the high density residential land use category.

     2.     Community buildings, clubs and activities of quasi-public, social, fraternal or recreational character intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residential project.

     3.     Group homes for seniors that provide services in a group setting to individuals fifty-five or older who need or desire care and supervision.

     C.     Subarea C. Those conditionally permitted uses within the Ranchette Estate (RE) zoning district in Title 17.

     D.    Subarea D. Those conditionally permitted uses within the Ranchette Estate (RE) zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.480.004 General development standards for subarea A.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Five thousand two hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Fifty feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Thirty feet for all lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for a street facing garage; twelve feet for a turned garage; ten feet for any living space and five feet for front porches;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of twelve feet for both sides. Zero feet for garage using a shared driveway with the adjacent lot;

     G.    Corner lots, on the street side, shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of ten feet;

     H.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet with an average of twenty-five feet;

     I.      Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     J.      Side loading garages: Ten percent of the total lots shall have side-loading garages;

     K.    Corner lots: Fifty percent of the corner lots shall have single story plans;

     L.     Single story units: A minimum twenty-five percent of the total lots shall have single story plans;

     M.    Maximum lot coverage shall be forty percent;

     N.    Maximum number of units: One hundred thirteen dwelling units. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.480.005 Development standards for subarea B.
     A.    Minimum building setback from property lines to be fifteen feet;

     B.     Minimum distance between buildings to be fifteen feet;

     C.     Maximum building height, thirty-five feet or two stories;

     D.    Maximum building coverage shall be twenty-five percent;

     E.     Maximum number of dwelling units: Eighty;

     F.     There shall be one coverage parking stall provided per dwelling unit. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.480.006 General development standards for subarea C.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Four thousand seven hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Forty-seven feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet, except for lots 172—174 where ninety-foot minimum is acceptable;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Forty feet for all lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets.

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for a street-facing garage; twelve feet for a turned garage; ten feet for any living space and five feet for front porches;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Four feet with an aggregate of ten feet on lots less than fifty-three feet wide, five feet with an aggregate of twelve feet on the fifty-three-foot or wider lots, and five feet with an aggregate of fifteen feet on all corner lots. Zero feet for garage using a shared driveway with the adjacent lot;

     G.    Corner lots, on the street side, shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of ten feet;

     H.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet average with a minimum of fifteen feet for habitable portion of dwelling: Five feet for detached garages;

     I.      Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     J.      Side loading garages: Ten percent of the total lots shall have side-loading garages;

     K.    Corner lots: Fifty percent of the corner lots shall have single story plans;

     L.     Single story units: A minimum twenty-five percent of the total lots shall have single story plans;

     M.    Maximum lot coverage shall be forty percent;

     N.    Maximum number of lots: One hundred seventy-five. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.480.007 General development standards for subarea D.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Five thousand one hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Eighty-five feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Forty feet for all lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for a street-facing garage; twelve feet for a turned garage; ten feet for any living space; and five feet for front porches;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet with an aggregate of fifteen feet. Zero feet for a garage using a shared driveway;

     G.    Corner lots, on the street side, shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of ten feet;

     H.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet average with a minimum of fifteen feet for habitable portion of dwelling. Five feet for detached garage;

     I.      Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     J.      Side loading garages: Ten percent of the total lots shall have side loading garages;

     K.    Corner lots: Fifty percent of the corner lots shall have single story plans;

     L.     Single story units: A minimum twenty-five percent of the total lots shall have single story plans;

     M.    Maximum lot coverage shall be forty percent;

     N.    Maximum number of lots: Seventy-seven. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.480.008 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H) except for subarea B that has its own specific standard.

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provision of Chapter 17.660 with the exception that no feature may project into the maximum front yard setback.

     F.     The development of this zoning district shall be substantially in accordance with the development plan. Variations in the development plan including street and lot pattern may be approved through the subdivision map process. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.480.009 Map for PD-30.
 



(Ord. 960 § 15, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.481 PD-31 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT THIRTY-ONE) ZONE
17.481.001 Authority and purpose.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-31 (planned development thirty-one) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority: PD-31 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose and Intent. The purpose of the PD-31 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the Birchwood Estates development located north of Chestnut Street and east of Fourth Street (APN: 013212003).

     C.     Intent. Birchwood Estates consists of approximately 9.98 acres intended for the development of up to fifty-two residential dwelling units. The exact number of units will be determined through the tentative map procedure, Chapter 16.050 of the Brentwood Municipal Code. The density for this phase shall not exceed 5.2 dwelling units/acre. The boundary of the PD-31 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.481.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.481.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-31 zone:

     A.    One single-family dwelling per parcel;

     B.     Accessory uses subject to Section 17.650.003, excluding Rooming and boarding, transient housing, and non-residential accessory uses (i.e., Christmas tree lot, fruit stand, etc.);

     C.     Accessory buildings subject to Section 17.660.006 of the Brentwood Municipal Code and accessory structures subject to Section 17.660.007 of the Brentwood Municipal Code. Temporary uses defined in Section 17.850.003 shall also be excluded;

     D.    Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to the Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.840;

     E.     Community and neighborhood parks as shown on an approved tentative map;

     F.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to the Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.670;

     G.    Small-family day care facilities limited to a maximum of six children. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.481.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a use permit, those uses identified in Section 17.30.003 of the Brentwood Municipal Code may be permitted in the PD-31 zone. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.481.004 Design Guidelines and development standards.
     A. Street Standards.

     1.     Street Standards: Street Widths will be sixty-foot right-of-way for major residential streets and fifty-six-foot right-of-way for minor residential streets. The location and design of the streets shall be as indicated on an approved tentative map.

     2.     Sidewalks, Crosswalks and Bike Trails.

     a.     Sidewalks: Continuous and linking with other paths rather than dead ending. They are to be generally straight with minimal meandering. There shall be a five-foot wide parkway strip placed between the back of curb and the sidewalk on all streets.

     b.     Bike paths: Concrete or A.C. paving to be consistent with City-wide bike path master plan.

     3.     Utility Location and Screening. All electrical and utility vaults are to be placed below ground where feasible.

     4.     Mailboxes. Individual or duplex mailboxes are strongly encouraged rather than ganged mailboxes of four, six or twelve. The post, stand and enclosure should be in keeping with the character of the homes. A design for the mail boxes shall be submitted for staff and Postmaster review and approval prior to construction.

     B.     Residential Standards.

     1.     Minimum setbacks: Building setbacks vary depending on the site plan configuration;

     2.     Minimum lot area: Four thousand five hundred eleven square feet. (Lot No. 21);

     3.     Minimum lot frontage: Thirty-five feet for cul-de-sac and knuckle lots; fifty feet for standard lots;

     4.     Minimum width: Fifty-five feet for corner lots;

     5.     Minimum lot depth: Ninety feet, except at culs-de-sac and corner flag lots;

     6.     Maximum height: Thirty feet, or two stories;

     7.     Minimum front yard: Fifteen feet to front porch and to the house; units to be staggered along the street, three feet to five feet where possible. twenty feet to the garage on a standard lot with a front-on garage; fifteen feet with a side-on garage with minimum of two parking spaces provided in the driveway.

     8.     Minimum side yard: House: five feet, twelve feet aggregate, to be staggered along the street. ten feet on the street side and five feet on the interior side of corner lots;

     9.     Minimum side yard: Five feet interior lot and five feet for side-on garage on a corner lot. Detached Garage twenty feet setback shall be maintained for garages accessed straight-on;

     10.   Minimum rear yard: Fifteen feet for a one-story house; twenty feet for a two-story house; ten feet minimum along Road “A” (Fairview Parkway) where “dual entry” units are planned to integrate with the Road “A” thirty-eight-foot right-of-way, with an additional fourteen feet. of landscaping area/pedestrian-bike path to be dedicated to the city of Brentwood;

     11.   Open space: An open space area with pedestrian/bike path access is to be located at the south-east corner of the property and will encompass a portion of the existing Chestnut Street right-of-way. This will be offered for dedication to the city of Brentwood;

     12.   Culs-de-sac: All culs-de-sac shall have access to pedestrian/bike path system;

     13.   Encroachment into yards: Encroachment into required yards shall be in conformance with Chapter 17.660 of the Brentwood Municipal Code;

     14.   Minimum building separation: Twelve feet between houses (not including roof overhangs), with seven feet/five feet side yard minimums;

     15.   Unit mix: A minimum of twenty-five percent single-story units will be provided;

     16.   Side-loading garages: A minimum of ten percent of the lots shall have side loading garages;

     17.   Lot coverage: Maximum lot coverage shall be forty percent;

     18.   Building configuration, orientation: (Note: The front yard setbacks are reduced to bring the entry/porch and living areas closer to the sidewalks, encouraging interaction with neighbors.)

     a.     Porches/entries: Front doors must be on the front façade and be visible from the street. Front porches must have a minimum square footage of fifty-five square feet. this does not apply to lots which have dual access along Road A,

     b.     Corner lots: Standard setbacks apply for corner lots. The area in front of the garage must allow for a minimum of two off-street parking spaces;

     19.   Architectural design: To ensure a certain amount of variation within the development, a minimum of three unit types, three variations on each unit type and three individual color schemes, and two roofing materials with two roof colors or one material and three colors are required;

     a.     Articulation and massing roofs: Combination of gables, and hip roof forms will be used. Roof slopes shall be 5:12 or greater for primary roofs. Articulation of the building façade should relate to the roof form of the building. No “bubble” skylights visible from the street allowed,

     b.     Materials: Horizontal board siding, shingles, or stucco is required for all homes. No plywood siding is allowed,

     c.     Windows: Front elevation windows shall be vertical in proportion, or divided by mullions, or divided into separate lights. Long horizontal sliding windows are strongly discouraged,

     d.     Fencing: Fencing may be of a different board siding than the homes. Side yard fencing will be recessed a min. of ten feet behind front façade of house. On corner lots, fencing will only enclose the rear yard on street side and be recessed a minimum of two feet behind the garage façade. Visible fencing for corner lots shall be of an upgraded material and stained or painted to match the siding of the homes;

     20.   Yard trees and landscaping: Two trees required per interior lot; minimum of three trees required per corner lot, to be planted between the sidewalk and the curb. Approximate spacing for trees shall be twenty feet on center. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.481.005 Other regulations.
     A.    The design and site development review procedure contained in Chapter 17.820 of the Brentwood Municipal Code shall apply to this development.

     B.     If not specifically covered in these PD Standards, it is then governed by title 17 “Zoning Ordinance” of the city of Brentwood Municipal Code.

     C.     Fencing details along Chestnut Street and future Road “A” shall be addressed at the design review stage.

     D.    All two-story homes designed for side-by-side and/or back-to-back construction shall pay special attention to privacy issues such that occupants do not peer directly into neighbors’ homes. Final issues will be resolved during design review. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.481.006 Map for PD-31.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.482 PD-32 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT THIRTY-TWO) ZONE
17.482.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose, and intent for the adoption of the PD-32 (planned development thirty-two) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-32 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones, General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-32 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of 4.05 acres located generally west of Brentwood Boulevard and south of Marsh Creek with medium density residential uses in accordance with the Brentwood General Plan. The area is divided into two subareas as shown on the subarea map.

     C.     Intent. The intent of creating the PD-32 zone is to ensure the coordinated development of the entire property in order to minimize impacts on adjacent properties. The boundaries of the PD-32 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.482.007. (Ord. 863 § 2, 2009)

 

17.482.002 Permitted uses for each subarea.
     Subarea A.

     A.    Single-family attached dwelling units;

     B.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     C.     Accessory structures shall be permitted subject to specific small-lot accessory structure development standards that shall be prepared by the developer and submitted for the review and approval of the community development director prior to recordation of the final map. All future accessory structures shall adhere to these development standards;

     D.    Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit subject to Chapter 17.850;

     E.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     F.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670.

     Subarea B.

     A.    Single-family detached dwelling units;

     B.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     C.     Accessory structures shall be permitted subject to specific small-lot accessory structure development standards that shall be prepared by the developer and submitted for the review and approval of the community development director prior to recordation of the final map. All future accessory structures shall adhere to these development standards;

     D.    Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit subject to Chapter 17.850;

     E.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     F.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     G.    Recreational trails and open space;

     H.    Secondary housing units in accordance with Chapter 17.100.005. (Ord. 863 § 2, 2009)

 

17.482.003 Conditionally permitted uses for each subarea.
     Subarea A. Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Section 17.140.003 (R-2 Zone) of the zoning ordinance, which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city.

     Subarea B. Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Section 17.140.003 (R-2 Zone) of the zoning ordinance, which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city. (Ord. 863 § 2, 2009)

 

17.482.004 General development standards for subarea A.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Two thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Thirty feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Seventy feet;

     D.    Minimum front yard setback:

     1.     Twelve feet for living space,

     2.     Five feet for porches;

     E.     Minimum side yard setback:

     1.     Zero feet on the side that is attached,

     2.     Five feet for living space on the exposed side,

     3.     Three feet for porches;

     F.     Minimum rear yard setback:

     1.     Fifteen feet where the back yard abuts a public street,

     2.     Twelve and one-half feet when the back yard is located within a private courtyard that has residences facing both sides of the courtyard;

     G.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet;

     H.    Maximum lot coverage: Fifty-five percent.

     I.      All residential development in the PD-32 zone is exempt from the city of Brentwood residential growth management program until a date five years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. (Ord. 883 § 2, 2010; Ord. 863 § 2, 2009)

 

17.482.005 General development standards for subarea B.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Two thousand five hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Forty feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Sixty feet;

     D.    Minimum front yard setback:

     1.     Twelve and one-half feet for garages when located within a private courtyard that has residences facing both sides of the courtyard,

     2.     Twenty-five feet for garages when located within a private courtyard that has residences facing only one side of the courtyard,

     3.     Twenty feet to the back of sidewalk for garages facing a public street,

     4.     Five feet for living space and porches;

     E.     Minimum side yard setback:

     1.     Zero feet for a garage,

     2.     Five feet for living space, except for lots 8 and 30 which shall maintain a minimum setback of three feet,

     3.     Total aggregate side yard setback must be five feet;

     F.     Minimum rear yard setback: Five feet;

     G.    Minimum private open space: Two hundred fifty contiguous square feet with a minimum dimension of ten feet. No future building additions are permitted within the required private open space;

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet;

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Fifty percent;

     J.      All buildings within a particular cluster shall be of the same elevation style and complimentary color schemes.

     K.    All residential development in the PD-32 zone is exempt from the city of Brentwood residential growth management program until a date five years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. (Ord. 883 § 3, 2010; Ord. 863 § 2, 2009)

 

17.482.006 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004;

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620;

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers, and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016;

     D.    All future replacement and maintenance of fences shall adhere to the approved fencing plan;

 

     E.     The development of the PD-32 zone shall be substantially in accordance with the development plan. Variations in the development plan, including street and lot patterns, may be approved through the subdivision map process. (Ord. 863 § 2, 2009)

 

Chapter 17.483 PD-33 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT THIRTY-THREE) ZONE
17.483.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for adoption of the PD-33 zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-33 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones, General Regulations, of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-33 zone is to permit and regulate the development of the Ferro/Ronconi property in accordance with the general plan for a maximum of one hundred sixty single-family residential lots.

     C.     Intent. The PD-33 zone is intended to provide a neighborhood with a mix of single-family homes on various lot sizes, recreational amenities and open space in conformance with the general plan. (Ord. 860 § 12, 2009)

 

17.483.002 Permitted uses.
     A.    Single-family dwelling units;

     B.     Parks, playgrounds and recreation trails;

     C.     Other permitted uses identified in Chapter 17.130 of the Brentwood Municipal Code (R-1 Zone). (Ord. 860 § 12, 2009)

 

17.483.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     A.    Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005 of the Brentwood Municipal Code;

     B.     Those uses identified in Chapter 17.130 of the Brentwood Municipal Code as being conditionally permitted (R-1 Zone). (Ord. 860 § 12, 2009)

 

17.483.004 General development standards.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Six thousand six hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet;

     D.    Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages, fifteen feet for side-loading garages and living space, and ten feet for front porches;

     E.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of ten feet for both sides, ten feet at corner lots with 5 feet for side porches;

     F.     Minimum rear yard setback: Fifteen-foot minimum, with a twenty-foot average (five-foot minimum at detached garage);

     G.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     H.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent for single-story units and forty percent for two-story units. (Ord. 860 § 12, 2009)

 

17.483.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H) of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H) of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers, and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660, with the following exceptions:

     1.     Pop-outs at garage doors may encroach two feet into the required front yard setback.

     2.     Setbacks are measured to building structure. Flatwork, column flairs, architectural elements, overhangs, and non-structural build-outs may encroach two feet into all required setbacks.

 

     3.     Setbacks for side loading garages are measured to structural walls. Built-out or recessed window elements may encroach up to two feet into required front yard setbacks.

     F.     Lot width for lots on culs-de-sac, curvilinear streets, etc. shall be measured thirty feet from the front property line.

     G.    The development of this zoning district shall be substantially in accordance with the development plan. Variations in the development plan including street and lot pattern may be approved through the subdivision map process.

     H.    Corner lot fences shall be set back a minimum of five feet from street side property lines. The homeowner shall be responsible for planting and maintaining attractive landscaping in the area between the fence and sidewalk. (Ord. 860 § 12, 2009)

 

17.483.006 Map for PD-33.


(Ord. 860 § 12, 2009)

 

Chapter 17.484 PD-34 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT THIRTY-FOUR) ZONE
17.484.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-34 (planned development thirty-four) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-34 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-34 zone is to permit and regulate the development of 8.3 acres located at the northwest corner of Balfour Road and Walnut Boulevard and designated by the city of Brentwood general land use map as neighborhood commercial.

     C.     Intent. The intent of creating the PD-34 zone is to insure the coordinated development of the entire property in order to minimize the impacts on the adjacent residential areas, while providing for the flexibility to maximize the potential for job creation while designing a project that is pedestrian friendly to serve the needs of surrounding residential neighborhoods. The boundary of the PD-34 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.484.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.484.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-34 zone:

     A.    Convenience retail uses such as bakeries, pastry shops, bookstores, candy stores, florists, newsstands, stationery/gift shop, ice-cream parlor and similar uses;

     B.     General retail sales with limited outdoor storage and display; professional offices uses; veterinarian or pet store (excluding kennels), supermarket and drugstores;

     C.     Service uses including, but not limited, to addressing and mailing service, appliance, television and radio repair; barber or beauty shop; butcher, meat market including frozen food locker; shoe repair, laundromat, dry cleaners and similar uses;

     D.    Financial institutions;

     E.     Restaurants with take-out service only, with no restriction on the number or area of such uses within the center;

     F.     Restaurants and cafés, with sit-down facilities only, limited to a total of five thousand square feet within the entire shopping center. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.484.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830, the following uses are permitted in the PD-34 zone:

     A.    Liquor stores, recreation services such as a billiard hall, bowling alley, skating rink and similar uses;

     B.     Auto service station, tire shop, auto seat and upholstery shops; laboratories for medical, dental, optical uses; meeting room/fraternal hall, neighborhood community center;

     C.     Restaurants and cafés with sit-down facilities only, when the total square footage of such uses within the shopping center exceeds five thousand square feet;

     D.    Nursery, child care, day care centers;

     E.     Other uses that the zoning administrator determines, because of type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

17.484.004 Regulations for lot area, yards, and building heights for PD-34.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed with the PD-34 zone shall comply with the following regulations:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Eight gross acres except that a master planned shopping center may be subdivided into smaller parcels that conform to an approved development plan for the entire center;

     B.     Minimum street frontage: Three hundred feet except in the event of a subdivision pursuant to subsection A of this section where minimal frontage is not required provided perpetual access is provided by reciprocal easements;

     C.     Minimum building setbacks:

     1.     Balfour Road street frontage: Five feet to encourage a pedestrian orientation,

     2.     Walnut Boulevard street frontage: None,

     3.     Interior side yard: Five feet,

     4.     Rear yard: Twenty-five feet,

     D.    Maximum building height: The maximum height of all structures within the PD-34 zone shall be thirty feet. Structural embellishments greater than thirty feet may be permitted subject to planning commission approval. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.484.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.620. Deviations may be permitted for shopping center developments subject to conditional use permit approval.

     B.     Development Standards. The uses within the PD-34 zone shall comply with Section 17.200.003.

     C.     Performance Standards. The uses within the PD-34 zone shall comply with Section 17.200.004.

     D.    Signs. All signage for uses within the PD-34 zone shall adhere to a planned sign program which is subject to conditional use permit approval. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.484.006 Map for PD-34.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.485 PD-35 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT THIRTY-FIVE) ZONE
17.485.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of planned development thirty-five (PD-35) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-35 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-35 zone is to permit and regulate the development of commercial sites and single-family neighborhoods within the boundaries of the zone in accordance with the Brentwood general plan.

     C.     Intent. It is intended that in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-35 zone, the coordinated development of the area encompassed by the zone will be undertaken in accordance with the Brentwood general plan. The boundaries of the PD-35 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.485.020. (Ord. 880 § 2, 2010; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the PD-35 zone:

     A.    The following uses are permitted in sub-areas A, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, and K:

     1.     Those uses permitted under the R-1 zoning district in Title 17;

     2.     The continuation of the existing year round Gursky Ranch operation;

     3.     Attached housing units in order to comply with the city’s adopted affordable housing provisions, Chapter 17.725.

     B.     The following uses are permitted in sub-area J:

     1.     Those uses permitted under the RE (Ranchette Estate) zoning district in Title 17.

     C.     The following uses are permitted in sub-area B:

     1.     Convenience retail uses such as bakeries, pastry shops, book stores, candy stores, florists, newsstands, stationery/gift shops, ice-cream parlors, and similar uses.

     2.     Supermarkets, drug stores, and similar uses.

 

     3.     Barber or beauty shops, shoe repair, laundromats, dry cleaners, and similar uses. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are conditionally permitted in the PD-35 zone:

     A.    The following uses are conditionally permitted in subareas A, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, and K:

     1.     Upon obtaining a use permit, those uses permitted under the R-1 zone, Section 17.130.003.

     B.     The following uses are conditionally permitted in subarea J:

     1.     Upon obtaining a use permit, those uses permitted under the RE zone, Section 17.110.003.

     C.     The following uses are conditionally permitted in subarea B:

     1.     On-sale or off-sale liquor establishments;

     2.     Fuel sale facilities, convenience stores, automated car washes, meeting rooms/fraternal halls, and neighborhood community centers;

     3.     Restaurants and cafés;

     4.     Nurseries, child care centers, day care centers, and similar uses;

     5.     Other uses that the community development director determines, because of the type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.004 General development standards for subarea A.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Single-Family Residential. (Eight Thousand Square Feet to Nineteen Thousand Nine Hundred Ninety-Nine Square Feet).

     1.     Minimum lot size: Eight thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Seventy feet as measured at the front building line;

     3.     Minimum street frontage: Thirty feet;

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Fifteen-foot minimum with an overall average setback of twenty feet. Front facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet;

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Seven-foot minimum with a seventeen-foot aggregate setback, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard setback, on the street side, of ten feet;

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty-foot minimum as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Rear yard garages shall be considered an accessory building and shall meet all requirements as shown in Section 17.660.006 of this title;

     7.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet.

     B.     Single-Family Residential. (Twenty Thousand Square Feet or Larger).

     1.     Minimum lot size: Twenty thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Ninety feet as measured at the front building line;

     3.     Minimum street frontage: Forty-five feet;

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty-foot minimum. Front facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet;

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Ten-foot minimum with a twenty-five-foot aggregate setback. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard setback, on the street side, of fifteen feet;

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty-foot minimum. Rear yard garages shall be considered an accessory building and shall meet all requirements as shown in Section 17.660.006 of the this title;

     7.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.005 General development standards for subarea B.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Twenty-five thousand square feet, except that a master planned shopping center may be subdivided into parcels having a minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet and a minimum lot width of one hundred feet;

     B.     Minimum street frontage: One hundred twenty feet, except in the event of a subdivision pursuant to subsection A of this section where frontage is not required provided perpetual access is provided by easements;

     C.     Minimum street frontage yards: None required;

     D.    Minimum non-street frontage yards: Five feet, except that buildings located along the southerly boundary of the subarea shall be set back at least twenty feet from such boundary. These yards shall be screened if required pursuant to Section 17.630;

     E.     Maximum building height: The maximum height of all structures in the PD-35 subarea B zone shall be two stories not to exceed thirty feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.006 General development standards for subarea C.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Minimum lot size: Nine thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Eighty feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred ten feet, except that lots on culs-de-sac shall have a minimum depth of eighty-five feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Forty feet at the front property line;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet to the garage, except fifteen feet for turned garages and fifteen feet to any living space;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet, with an aggregate of fifteen feet. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum street side setback of ten feet. A minimum of fifteen feet shall be maintained between houses;

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent;

     J.      Maximum number of dwelling units: Sixty-seven;

     K.    Garages at the rear of the lot shall have a minimum rear and side yard of five feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.007 General development standards for subarea D.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Single-Family Residential. (Eight Thousand Square Feet to Nineteen Thousand Nine Hundred Ninety-Nine Square Feet).

     1.     Minimum lot area: Eight thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Seventy feet as measured at the front building line;

     3.     Minimum street frontage: Thirty feet.

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Fifteen feet with an average overall setback of twenty feet. Thirty percent or more of setbacks must randomly deviate from the average overall setback. Front facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet as measured from property line to garage lip;

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Fifteen feet aggregate, with seven feet as a minimum, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet. A proposed detached garage structure may be located within the side yard up to a “zero” setback (three feet per Uniform Building Code). Side yard setback minimums for cul-de-sac or knuckle nonrectangular lots shall be seven feet at the front corners of the structure. When the side of the house is not parallel to a property line, the average aggregate side yard setback shall not be less than fifteen feet;

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation. The proposed garage structure may be located within the rear yard up to a “zero” setback (three feet as per the Uniform Building Code);

     7.     Setbacks from sidewalks: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location;

     8.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet;

     9.     Fences: Minimum clearance from any part of the residence to a side yard fence shall be five feet. Side yard fences on the street side of corner lots shall be five feet behind the back of walk, or one foot from the top of slope, whichever is greater.

     B.     Single-Family Residential. (Greater Than Twenty Thousand Square Feet.)

     1.     Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Ninety feet, as measured at the front building line;

     3.     Minimum street frontage: Forty-five feet;

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Fifteen feet with an average overall setback of twenty feet. Thirty percent or more of setbacks must randomly deviate from the average overall setback. Front facing garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet;

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Thirty feet aggregate, with twelve feet as a minimum, as measured from the property line to the building foundation. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of fifteen feet. The proposed garage structure may be located within the side yard up to a ten-foot setback;

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet with an average overall setback of at least twenty feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation. The proposed garage structure may be located within the rear yard up to a “zero” setback (three feet as per the Uniform Building Code);

     7.     Setbacks from sidewalks: Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location;

     8.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.008 General development standards for subarea E.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Minimum lot size: Eight thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Seventy feet

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred ten feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: One-half the required lot width;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet to the garage door face, fifteen feet to any primary building wall;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Seven feet; aggregate fifteen feet. All corner lots shall have a minimum of ten feet on the street side;

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.009 General development standards for subarea F.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Eight thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Seventy feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred ten feet.

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: One-half the required lot width;

     E.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet to the garage; twelve feet to any primary building wall;

     F.     Minimum side yard: Five feet; aggregate fifteen feet. All corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet;

     G.    Minimum rear yard: Twenty feet;

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories.

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.010 General development standards for subarea G.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Minimum lot size: Eight thousand square feet, with the exception of parcels A and B of minor subdivision No. 357-04, which shall have a minimum lot size of five thousand four hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Seventy feet, with the exception of parcels A and B of minor subdivision No. 357-04, which shall have a minimum lot width of fifty-five feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred five feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: One-half the required lot width;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet to the garage, fifteen feet to any primary building wall;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Seven feet with an aggregate of fifteen feet (ten feet on the street side of corner lots), with the exception of duet units, which shall have a common side yard setback of zero feet with an aggregate of fifteen feet (ten feet on the street side of corner lots);

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent for single-story units, provided that a minimum of thirty-five percent of the total number of lots have single-story units, otherwise the maximum lot coverage shall be forty percent; forty percent for two-story units. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.011 General development standards for subarea H.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Minimum lot size: Eight thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty-five feet (the width of all lots shall be measured thirty feet from the front property line);

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet.

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: One-half the required lot width;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: twenty feet to the garage, fifteen feet to any primary building wall;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet with an aggregate of fifteen feet (ten feet on the street side of corner lots), and a minimum of fifteen feet between houses;

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.012 General development standards for subarea I.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Minimum lot size: Five thousand eight hundred square feet; three thousand six hundred square feet for duets;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty feet; forty feet for duets; thirty feet for cul-de-sac lots, as measured at the front property line;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Eighty feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: One-half the required lot width;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet to front facing garage door and fifteen feet to any primary building wall;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet with an aggregate of twelve feet and ten feet on the street side of a corner lot (zero feet with an aggregate of fifteen feet for Lot 32 of VTSM 8982);

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet (zero feet for Lot 31 and ten feet for Lot 32 of VTSM 8982);

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent for single-story units, providing that a minimum of thirty-five percent of the total number of lots have single-story units, otherwise the maximum lot coverage shall be forty percent; forty percent for two-story units;

     J.      Corner lot fence setback: Five feet from the street side property line; all other fence regulations shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 17.660 of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.013 General development standards for subarea J.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Minimum lot area: One acre;

     B.     Minimum lot width: One hundred forty feet except as provided for in subsection (F)(1);

     C.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet;

     D.    Minimum side yards: Twenty feet, except as provided in subsection (F)(2);

     E.     Minimum rear yard: Forty feet;

     F.     Exceptions:

     1.     Cul-de-sac lots shall have a width of not less than one hundred feet measured thirty feet from the front property line and no less than sixty-foot width at the front property line,

     2.     Corner lots shall maintain a side yard on the street of twenty-five feet;

     G.    Maximum building height: No accessory or main building shall exceed a height of two stories and thirty-five feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.014 General development standards for subarea K.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Eight thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Seventy feet except as provided for in subsection (F)(1).;

     C.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet;

     D.    Minimum side yards: Seven feet, the sum of both sides, twenty feet, except as provided subsection (F)(2).;

     E.     Minimum rear yard: Twenty feet;

     F.     Exceptions:

     1.     Cul-de-sac lots shall have a width of not less than seventy feet measured thirty feet from the front property line,

     2.     Corner lots shall maintain a side yard on the street of ten feet;

     G.    Maximum building height: No main building shall exceed a height of two stories and thirty feet;

     H.    An open-space buffer of eighty feet shall be established along the southern extents of the subarea adjacent to Sand Creek Channel to provide for rehabilitation and restoration of the creek. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.015 Design review criteria for subareas A, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, and K.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing developments within PD-35 pursuant Chapters 17.100 and 17.800 of this title.

     B.     Where possible, the architect shall mix hip and gable roof forms. Where lots back up to major thoroughfares, rear yard architectural elevations should be designed with enhanced window trim and other features such as balconies, second story bay windows and second story bedroom popouts to provide greater articulation and variety to the rear elevation. Fifty percent of the lots adjacent to arterial thoroughfares shall be single story plans. Structures taller than one story should be designed on wider and/or deeper lots with greater setbacks, developed facing the thoroughfare off a frontage road, or designed in such a manner as to resemble a one-story profile. Deviations from these suggested alternatives will require special consideration. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.016 Other regulations for subareas A, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, and K.
     A.    Architectural features (such as cornices, eaves, bay windows and fireplaces) measuring two feet by five feet or less may project into any required setback. Any architectural feature greater than two feet by five feet may not project into any required setback. No portion of the house shall be less than ten feet from the front property line.

     B.     The landscaping for PD-35 shall promptly comply with the regulations contained in the city of Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.630 entitled “Landscaping and Screening” and/or as approved as a part of PD-35. Required landscape plans shall be prepared and submitted with each tract map application within the zone.

     C.     The design of the subdivision entryway shall consist of a combination of signage, landscaping, lighting, monumentation, hardscape and other materials. This subdivision entryway design shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission.

     D.    All developer-provided front yard landscaping shall be installed with water conserving materials, as per applicable water conservation ordinances. Landscape and irrigation plans for each typical lot shall be submitted with each tract map application.

     E.     PD-35 shall contain park areas within or near its boundaries as designed by the park and recreation master plan. Open space areas may be required to be offered for dedication as part of the public open space or park system. Where such offer of dedication is not accepted, the development shall provide legal arrangements, approved by the city, sufficient to assure the maintenance and preservation of such a space whatever purpose it is intended. Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify: the ownership of the open space; method of maintenance; responsibility for maintenance; taxes and insurance; compulsory membership and assessment provisions; guarantees that any association formed to own and maintain common open space will not be dissolved without the consent of the city council; and any other specification deemed necessary by the city.

     F.     Open space consistent with the commons theme shall be provided as an integral part of PD-35. Open space shall be eight to ten percent of the acreage for the entire PD-35 area and shall include landscape medians; expanded frontage and parkway landscape, trails/pathways and the linear open space/commons connecting the neighborhood parks.

     G.    Permitted uses in the park and open space areas include: public parks and facilities, restrooms, playing fields, parking, playgrounds, drainage channels, greenbelt areas which are formed by land development, pedestrian and/or bicycle trails, access for maintenance/emergency vehicles, and neighborhood open space/commons.

     H.    The properties included in PD-35 shall provide for a five-acre passive neighborhood park area, the payment of “in-lieu” fees, or a combination thereof, is required by the city’s general plan. The park area shall consist of one five-acre neighborhood park as required by the city of Brentwood and the park and recreation master plan.

     I.      Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Section 17.620 of this title. Where it is possible garages on corner lots shall be able to have their garage entries oriented to the side street, providing that the garage door is set back twenty feet from the property line.

     J.      The parking and storage of recreational vehicles, boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     K.    Except as otherwise specified in regulations within this document, development of the PD-35 zone shall be in accordance with existing city standards as contained in the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     L.     Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     M.    A minimum of ten percent of the lots shall have side-loading garages.

     N.    A minimum of twenty-five percent of the lots shall have single-story units.

     O.    Fifty percent of the corner lots shall have single-story units. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.017 Other regulations for subarea B.
     A.    Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620 of this title.

     B.     Development Standards. The uses within the PD-35 subarea “B” zone shall comply with Section 17.200.003 of this title.

     C.     Performance Standards. The uses within the PD-35 subarea “B” zone shall comply with Section 17.200.004 of this title.

     D.    Signs. All signage for uses within the PD-35 subarea “B” zone shall be in accordance with Section 17.640 of this title. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.485.018 Agricultural overlay zone.
     The agricultural overlay zone is established for a portion of the PD-35 zone. The overlay zone allows certain land uses with limitations per subsections A through D, in addition to the land uses permitted by the PD-35 zone. The area of this overlay zone is defined on the map in Section 17.485.019.

     A.    The following uses are permitted within the agricultural overlay zone: for parcels with a minimum lot size of forty thousand square feet, and which had existing agricultural operations at the time of annexation to the city: agricultural operations; farming; raising, keeping, dairying, poultry raising, animal breeding, and/or livestock production of more than twenty-four fowl, rabbits, other grain fed rodents, or four large livestock, or thirty small livestock; up to an additional two large livestock or fifteen small livestock shall be permitted for every additional twenty thousand square feet of lot area above the forty thousand square foot minimum lot size; aviaries; one single-family dwelling; and other similar uses as determined by the community development director.

     B.     The following uses are conditionally permitted within the agricultural overlay zone: for parcels with a minimum lot size of forty thousand square feet, and which had existing agricultural operations at the time of annexation to the city: riding academies; stables; dog kennels (up to twenty dogs); canneries; wineries; agricultural stands; U-pick operations; processing of agricultural products; and other similar uses as determined by the community development director.

     C.     The following uses are prohibited within the agricultural overlay zone: slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards, bone yards, rendering plants, or any other industrial use which may be objectionable due to odor, smoke, dust or fumes.

     D.    Definitions and Other Regulations. For the purposes of this section, the provisions of Chapter 17.670 shall be applicable to the keeping of animals, except that the number of animals permitted shall be pursuant to subsections A and B, rather than Section 17.670.005(A). (Ord. 880 § 3, 2010)

 

17.485.019 Agricultural overlay map.


(Ord. 880 § 4, 2010)

 

17.485.020 Map for PD-35.


(Ord. 892 § 2, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.486 PD-36 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT THIRTY-SIX) ZONE
17.486.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-36 (planned development zone thirty-six) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-36 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-36 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the area as shown on the development plan and related exhibits in accordance with the Brentwood general plan for mixed-use business park, regional commercial, single-family residential, and open space and recreation uses. The PD-36 zone is divided into five subareas as shown in Section 17.486.008.

     C.     Intent. The PD-36 zone is intended to provide a distinguished mixed-use area in conformance with the adopted general plan. The boundaries of the PD-36 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.486.008. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

17.486.002 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea A (mixed-use business park area).
     A.    Permitted Uses for Subarea A.

     1.     Business, professional, financial, and medical offices;

     2.     Light industrial uses, including by way of example, but not limited to, computer software and biotechnology companies, medical supply companies, medical, dental, and optical laboratories, and warehouses (distribution and wholesale);

     3.     Research and development facilities;

     4.     Light manufacturing uses, such as small assembly and printing shops, which generate minimal noise, odor, smoke, waste material, and other similar impacts;

     5.     Uses that manufacture their primary product on the premises, such as a drapery shop, cabinet shop, or upholstery shop, including ancillary retail sale of these products;

     6.     General retail sales less than seventy-five thousand square feet in gross floor area, including food service, that do not exceed ten percent of the respective building area;

     7.     Financial institutions;

     8.     Commercial services, including by way of example, but not limited to, barber and beauty shops, laundry and dry cleaning facilities, copying and printing facilities, electronic repair facilities, small equipment rental and repair, technology access and telecommuting centers, messenger and stenographic services, and travel agencies;

     9.     Other similar uses as determined by the community development director.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses for Subarea A.

     1.     Public and quasi-public uses such as hospitals, convalescent hospitals, and business and technical schools;

     2.     Health clubs;

     3.     Bars and lounges;

     4.     Industrial uses that would have a moderate to high impact on surrounding uses, including by way of example, but not limited to, metal fabrication, machine shops, and welding shops;

     5.     Conference facilities, meeting halls, and similar uses;

     6.     Outdoor storage yards or outdoor industrial yards;

     7.     Restaurants, excluding drive-throughs, subject to a parking analysis indicating current development and the availability of parking;

     8.     Manufacture of food products, pharmaceuticals, and similar products, excluding the production of fish or meat products, or similar products that create excessive sewage or odor problems, provided all manufacturing activities are performed completely within an enclosed building;

     9.     On- or off-site alcohol sales;

     10.   Retail uses equal to or greater than seventy-five thousand square feet in gross floor area;

     11.   Other uses that the community development director determines because of the type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances that require special consideration and conditioning through the conditional use permit process.

     C.     General Development Standards for Subarea A.

     1.     Minimum lot area: One acre, except that a master planned development may be subdivided into parcels having a minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet;

     4.     All development shall comply with Chapter 17.200 of this title;

     5.     All development shall comply with the adopted city of Brentwood design guidelines;

     6.     All lighting shall incorporate cut-off designs, and shall be included in details submitted with formal development plans;

     7.     Formal development plans shall include, as part of any application and to the satisfaction of the community development director, a photomontage of existing and proposed conditions;

     8.     Appropriate city entry signage shall be designed and submitted in conjunction with formal development plans to the satisfaction of the community development director;

     9.     Maximum building height: Four stories, not to exceed sixty feet;

     10.   Building setbacks:

     a.     Sand Creek Road: Thirty feet from right-of-way,

     b.     Brentwood/Antioch city limit line: Fifty feet,

     c.     Sand Creek: Sixty feet from top of bank,

     d.     State Route 4 Bypass: Fifty feet,

     e.     Public street frontage: Thirty feet,

     f.      Interior property lines: Ten feet and clear of any utility easements;

     11.   All pavement, hardscape, or any other impervious surfaces shall be set back a minimum of sixty feet from the top of the creek bank;

     12.   These development standards shall promote, and not limit or restrict, future restoration and/or enhancement efforts of Sand Creek, in accordance with the city’s general plan, the municipal code, the master plan for trails, parks, and recreation, and the Brentwood Creek trails and revegetation master plan. (Ord. 899 § 3, 2012; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.486.003 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea B (regional commercial area).
     A.    Permitted Uses for Subarea B.

     1.     Large-scale regional retail sales uses less than seventy-five thousand square feet in gross floor area, including by way of example, but not limited to, big-box stores, factory outlets, discount and similar retail uses requiring or best suited for operation within a warehouse-type facility; large department stores; large-scale general merchandise, sporting goods, home furnishings, home improvement and building materials (with or without lumber sales), home appliances, nursery, garden supply, hardware, electronics, office supply, and off-sale liquor sales stores; large-scale book, video, music, and toy stores; large-scale pet and pet supply stores, including on-site veterinary clinics (excluding kennels); and large-scale automobile, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, and boat parts and accessory stores;

     2.     Temporary outdoor display and/or sale of merchandise on sidewalks that front buildings, subject to Chapter 17.850 of this title. Sales and display areas are to cover no more than fifty percent of the sidewalk area in front of a user’s building or unit, and are to be maintained in an attractive, neat, and clean appearance;

     3.     General retail sales less than seventy-five thousand square feet in gross floor area, including by way of example, but not limited to, junior department stores; supermarkets; drugstores; general merchandise, sporting goods, home furnishings, home improvement, home appliance, nursery, garden supply, hardware, electronics, office supply and off-sale liquor sales stores; book, video, music, and toy stores; pet and pet supply stores, including on-site veterinary clinics (excluding kennels); and automobile, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, and boat parts and accessory stores;

     4.     Specialty merchandise and convenience sales, including by way of example, but not limited to, specialty foods, delicatessen, bakery, pastry, candy, ice cream, butcher, meat market, wine, tobacco, apparel and accessory, jewelry, cosmetics, gift, stationery, shoe, kitchenware, hobby and specialty interest stores;

     5.     Video arcades; bowling alleys; and skating rinks;

     6.     Commercial services, including by way of example, but not limited to, barber and beauty shops; electronic, appliance, watch and clock repair; small equipment rental and repair; technology and telecommuting centers; addressing and mailing service; blueprinting, photostatting, and desktop publishing service; drafting, messenger, answering, and stenographic service; telegraph office; private postal box service; and travel agency;

     7.     Financial institutions;

     8.     Business, professional, financial, and medical offices, including by way of example, but not limited to, large-scale single and/or multi-tenant office uses;

     9.     Studios and instructional facilities, such as dance studios, music studios, or similar establishments;

     10.   Health clubs, subject to a plan indicating current development and the availability of parking, to the satisfaction of the community development director;

     11.   Restaurants, excluding drive-throughs;

     12.   Other similar uses as determined by the community development director.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses for Subarea B.

     1.     Liquor stores, bars, lounges, and drive-through restaurants;

     2.     New or used car, boat, or recreational vehicle sales;

     3.     Hotels and motels;

     4.     Conference facilities, meeting halls, and similar uses;

     5.     Veterinary facilities, including kennels;

     6.     Retail uses equal to or greater than seventy-five thousand square feet in gross floor area;

     7.     Other uses that the community development director determines because of the type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances that require special consideration and conditioning through the conditional use permit processed by the community development director.

     C.     General Development Standards for Subarea B.

     1.     Minimum lot area: One acre, except that a master planned development may be subdivided into parcels having a minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet;

     4.     All development shall comply with Chapter 17.200 of the Municipal Code;

     5.     All development shall comply with the adopted city of Brentwood design guidelines;

     6.     All lighting shall incorporate cut-off designs, and shall be included in details submitted with formal development plans;

     7.     Formal development plans shall include, as part of any application and to the satisfaction of the community development director, a photomontage of existing and proposed conditions;

     8.     Maximum building height: Three stories, not to exceed forty-five feet;

     9.     Building setbacks:

     a.     Sand Creek Road: Thirty feet from right-of-way,

     b.     State Route 4 Bypass: Fifty feet from right-of-way,

     c.     Sand Creek: Sixty feet from top of bank,

     d.     Public street frontage: Thirty feet,

     e.     Interior property lines: Ten feet and clear of any utility easements;

     10.   All pavement, hardscape, or any other impervious surfaces shall be set back a minimum of sixty feet from the top of the creek bank;

     11.   These development standards shall promote, and not limit or restrict, future restoration and/or enhancement efforts of Sand Creek, in accordance with the city’s general plan, the municipal code, the master plan for trails, parks, and recreation, and the Brentwood Creek trails and revegetation master plan. (Ord. 899 § 3, 2012; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.486.004 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea C (single-family residential—five thousand square feet minimum lot size).
     A.    Permitted Uses for Subarea C.

     1.     Those uses permitted under the R-1 zone, Section 17.130.002.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses for Subarea C.

     1.     Those uses permitted under the R-1 zone, Section 17.130.003.

     C.     General Development Standards for Subarea C.

     1.     Minimum lot size: Five thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Fifty feet;

     3.     Minimum lot frontage: Thirty-five feet at the front property line for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles, or curvilinear streets;

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for front-facing garages; fifteen feet for building walls and porches;

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet, with the sum of both sides twelve feet; corner lots shall maintain a minimum setback of ten feet on the street side yard;

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Fifteen feet, with an average of twenty feet;

     7.     Maximum building height: Two stories, not to exceed thirty feet;

     8.     Corner lot fence setback: Five feet from the street side property line; all other fence regulations shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 17.660 of this title;

     9.     Lots adjacent to open space shall utilize a six-foot high open space fence along the common property line(s), as approved through VTSM 8506;

     10.   Accessory structures shall be prohibited in side or rear yards for areas exceeding a 3:1 slope;

     11.   Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent for two-story homes and forty-five percent for single-story homes;

     12.   Maximum number of primary dwelling units: One hundred twenty-four. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.486.005 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea D (single-family residential—ten thousand square feet minimum lot size).
     A.    Permitted Uses for Subarea D.

     1.     Those uses permitted under the R-l zone, Section 17.130.002.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses for Subarea D.

     1.     Those uses permitted under the R-l zone, Section 17.130.003.

     C.     General Development Standards for Subarea D.

     1.     Minimum lot size: Ten thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Ninety feet;

     3.     Minimum lot frontage: Forty-five feet at the front property line for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles, or curvilinear streets;

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for front-facing garages; fifteen feet for building walls and porches;

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet, with the sum of both sides fifteen feet; corner lots shall maintain a minimum setback of ten feet on the street side yard.

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Fifteen feet, with an average of twenty feet.

     7.     Maximum building height: Two stories, not to exceed thirty feet; except that the ten lots referenced on the approved residential site plan with Model 11 shall not exceed thirty-three and one-half feet;

     8.     Corner lot fence setback: five feet from the street side property line; all other fence regulations shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 17.660 of this title;

     9.     Lots adjacent to open space shall utilize a six-foot-high open space fence along the common property line(s), as approved through VTSM 8506;

     10.   Accessory structures shall be prohibited in side or rear yards for areas exceeding a 3:1 slope;

     11.   Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent for two-story homes and forty-five percent for single-story homes;

     12.   Maximum number of primary dwelling units: Forty-two. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.486.006 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea E (open space and recreation area).
     A.    Permitted Uses in Subarea E.

     1.     Active and passive public recreational areas including any structures incidental to such use;

     2.     Public or quasi-public rights-of-way for utility, irrigation, drainage, or similar areas utilized for or having the potential to be utilized for linear trails, bicycle, pedestrian or horse trails and similar uses;

     3.     Open space as a reserve for fire protection, seismic safety, water conservation, protection of view, or similar appropriate purposes;

     4.     Parks, playgrounds, and recreational trails;

     5.     Conservation easements for wetland and habitat preservation and mitigation related to development of SPA E.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses in Subarea E.

     1.     An addition to an existing structure which will increase the coverage of the structure by five hundred square feet, or any new structure in excess of five hundred square feet, except minor recreational structures such as playground equipment, trellises, and similar uses;

     2.     Any commercial use which may be conducted on open space land without substantially detracting from its value as open space such as golf courses, riding academies or stables, tennis or swim clubs, and similar recreational-related uses of a predominantly open nature.

     C.     General Development Standards in Subarea E.

     1.     All uses are subject to the design and site development review procedures established in Chapter 17.820. The setback, building height, parking, and other design and performance criteria shall be established at the time of the proposed development and in accordance with any development standards established by resolution for the type of use proposed. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.486.007 Other regulations.
     A.    Off-street parking, unless otherwise specifically addressed in this chapter, shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     B.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers, and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     C.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     D.    All signage for subareas A and B shall be in accordance with an approved master sign program.

     E.     The development of the PD-36 zone shall be substantially in accordance with the various approved plans for each subarea. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.486.008 Map for PD-36.
 



(Ord. 960 § 16, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.487 PD-37 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT THIRTY-SEVEN) ZONE
17.487.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose, and intent for the adoption of the PD-37 (planned development number thirty-seven) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. This zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-37 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of 9.84 acres located generally east of O’Hara Avenue, west of Adams Lane, and south of the future extension of Big Basin Drive with low density residential uses in accordance with the Brentwood General Plan.

     C.     Intent. The intent of creating the PD-37 zone is to ensure the coordinated development of the entire property in order to minimize impacts on adjacent properties. The boundaries of the PD-37 zoning district are as shown on the map in Section 17.487.005. (Ord. 939 § 2, 2015)

 

17.487.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the PD-37 zone:

     A.    Those permitted under the R-1 zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 939 § 2, 2015)

 

17.487.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830, the following uses are permitted:

     A.    Those uses conditionally permitted under the R-1 zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 939 § 2, 2015)

 

17.487.004 Development standards.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within the PD-37 zone shall comply with the following regulations:

     A.    Minimum lot size: Eight thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty-five feet;

     C.     Minimum lot width on curvilinear streets and knuckles shall be measured thirty feet from the front property line;

     D.    Minimum lot depth: One hundred ten feet;

     E.     Minimum lot frontage: Forty-five feet;

     F.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet to any street-facing garage, fifteen feet to the wall of any living space or the wall of a turned garage;

     G.    Minimum side yard: Five feet with an aggregate setback of fifteen feet and all corner lots must maintain a street-side side yard setback of ten feet;

     H.    Minimum rear yard: Twenty feet;

     I.      Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     J.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent for single-story units and forty percent for two-story units;

     K.    Corner lot fence setback: Five feet from the street-side property line; all other fence regulations shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 17.660 of this title;

     L.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660;

     M.    Side loading garage: Ten percent of the lots shall have side-loading garages;

     N.    A minimum of twenty-five percent of the lots shall have single-story units;

     O.    A minimum of fifty percent of corner lots shall have single-story units. (Ord. 939 § 2, 2015)

 

17.487.005 Map for PD-37.
 



(Ord. 939 § 2, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.488 PD-38 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT THIRTY-EIGHT) ZONE
17.488.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-38 (planned development thirty-eight) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-38 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-38 zone is to permit and regulate the development of business park, commercial, and residential uses within the zone as designated by the city of Brentwood general plan.

     C.     Intent. In order to achieve the purpose of implementing the development of business park, retail, and residential uses identified in the Brentwood general plan for PD-38 zone, such zone shall be divided into seven subareas as geographically designated on the map in Section 17.488.017, and as further described below. The boundaries of the PD-38 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.488.017. The primary character of the area is intended to be a mix of business park, retail, and residential uses.

     1.     Subarea A consists of eleven plus/minus acres intended for self-storage and retail uses to serve the needs of the Brentwood community.

     2.     Subarea B consists of thirteen plus/minus acres intended for a mix of general commercial and regional commercial uses.

     3.     Subarea C consists of seventeen plus/minus acres intended for business park uses. This area will also provide for uses ancillary to business park uses.

     4.     Subarea D consists of twenty plus/minus acres intended for medium density residential uses.

     5.     Subarea E consists of ten plus/minus acres intended for a mix of general commercial and regional commercial uses.

     6.     Subarea F consists of twenty plus/minus acres intended for a mix of general commercial and regional commercial uses.

     7.     Subarea G consists of eight plus/minus acres intended for medium density residential uses. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.488.002 Permitted uses in subarea A.
     The following uses are permitted in subarea A of PD-38:

     A.    Self-service storage facilities (mini-storage or warehouses), with or without resident manager dwelling unit;

     B.     Outdoor uses, including outdoor storage that is located at least two hundred feet north of Lone Tree Way or other such distance as approved by the community development director;

     C.     General retail uses, including liquor sales for off-site consumption that are ancillary to the primary retail use;

     D.    Business services, such as laundry, dry cleaning, and automotive repair, or service establishments, such as electronic, television repair, and small equipment rental or repair;

     E.     Day care facilities;

     F.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.488.003 Conditionally permitted uses in subarea A.
     The following uses are permitted in subarea A of PD-38 subject to securing a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Auto rental, leasing or sales, auto services and repair facility, boat and recreational vehicle sales, service and repair facility, and parts and accessory store;

     B.     Drive-in and drive-through establishments, including gas stations, but excluding all prohibited uses;

     C.     Businesses whose primary use is off-site liquor sales;

     D.    Outdoor sales/display uses and outdoor storage facilities that are located closer than two hundred feet to Lone Tree Way or other such distance as approved by the community development director;

     E.     Health club, reducing studios, recreational services and similar facilities;

     F.     Other uses that the community development director determines because of the type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances requiring special consideration and conditioning through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.488.004 Permitted uses in subarea B.
     The following uses are permitted within subarea B of PD-38:

     A.    General and regional retail uses;

     B.     Business, office, and service establishments under two thousand square feet, such as, but not limited to, laundromat, dry cleaning, travel agencies, insurance offices, electronic and television repair, small equipment rental or repair, optical or veterinary pet services (excluding kennels), and other similar business, office, and service establishments that are under two thousand square feet, excepting that the second story of an office over retail building is not limited to two thousand square feet and can be used for office uses up to one hundred percent;

     C.     Banks and financial institutions;

     D.    Restaurant, café, and other food service uses, including outdoor dining, but without drive-in or drive-through facilities providing the size of the food service use is fifteen percent or less of the floor area of the building;

     E.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013; Ord. 899 § 4, 2012; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.488.005 Conditionally permitted uses in subarea B.
     The following uses are permitted in subarea B of PD-38 subject to securing a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Drive-in and drive-through establishments, excluding drive-through restaurants and all prohibited uses;

     B.     Liquor sales for on- or off-site consumption that are ancillary to the primary retail use;

     C.     Businesses whose primary use is off-site liquor sales, other than as ancillary to a primary retail use;

     D.    Outdoor sales/display uses and outdoor storage facilities;

     E.     Business, office, and service uses over two thousand square feet, plus medical or dental offices, or clinics over two thousand square feet. Business and trade schools;

     F.     Restaurant, café, and other food service uses, including outdoor dining, that are larger than fifteen percent of the floor area of the building in which the restaurant or food service use is located;

     G.    Day care facilities;

     H.    Other uses that the community development director determines because of the type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances requiring special consideration and conditioning through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.488.006 Permitted uses in subarea C.
     The following uses are permitted within subarea C of PD-38:

     A.    Business, office, and service uses including medical, dental, and optical offices or clinics, and veterinary facilities (excluding kennels);

     B.     Public and quasi-public offices, such as government offices, library, employment office, utility office, and similar uses;

     C.     Business park uses, including, but not limited to, research and development uses, warehouse, distribution and wholesale uses, medical or dental laboratories, and other similar uses;

     D.    Light industrial and manufacturing uses, such as small assembly, printing shop, and similar uses, which generate minimal noise, odor, smoke, waste material, or other similar impacts;

     E.     Uses that manufacture their primary product on the premises, such as a drapery shop, cabinet shop, upholstery shop, and similar uses. Ancillary retail sale of these products is allowed;

     F.     General retail uses, including cafés and food service uses that do not exceed fifteen percent of the building area of an office, business park or industrial building, and are intended to primarily serve users of subarea C;

     G.    Day care facilities;

     H.    Other similar uses as determined by the community development director;

     I.      Emergency shelters, as defined in Section 17.030.030 and developed per the R-1 zoning regulations in Chapter 17.130. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 991 § 5, 2017; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.488.007 Conditionally permitted uses in subarea C.
     The following uses are permitted in the PD-38 subarea C subject to securing a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Public and quasi-public uses appropriate to and compatible with the area, such as hospitals, convalescent hospitals, and business and technical schools;

     B.     Animal boarding kennels;

     C.     Funeral services, mortuaries and crematoriums;

     D.    Health club, reducing studios, recreational services and similar facilities;

     E.     Restaurants, bars, lounges and food service uses that exceed fifteen percent of the building area of an office, business park or industrial building, or are a freestanding building;

     F.     Light or medium industrial uses that will have a moderate to high impact on surrounding uses, including, but not limited to, metal fabrication, machine shops, and welding shop;

     G.    Outdoor storage yard or outdoor industrial uses;

     H.    Manufacture of food products, pharmaceuticals, and similar products, excluding the production of fish or meat products, or similar products that create excessive sewage or odor problems, provided all manufacturing activities are performed inside a building;

     I.      Other uses that the community development director determines because of the type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances that require special consideration and conditioning through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.488.008 Permitted uses within subarea D.
     The following uses are permitted in subarea D of PD-38:

     A.    Attached and detached single-family dwellings, condominiums and townhomes;

     B.     Duplex, triplex, apartments and other small multi-family structures;

     C.     Parks, playgrounds, and recreation trails;

     D.    Other permitted uses identified in Chapter 17.140 of the Brentwood Municipal Code (R-2 zone). (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.488.009 Conditionally permitted uses within subarea D.
     The following uses are permitted in subarea D of PD-38 subject to securing a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005 of the Brentwood Municipal Code;

     B.     Those uses identified in Chapter 17.140 of the Brentwood Municipal Code as being conditionally permitted (R-2 zone). (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.488.010 Permitted uses within subarea E.
     A.    North of the extension of Fairview Avenue:

     1.     General and regional retail uses;

     2.     Business services, such as laundry, dry cleaning;

     3.     Automotive parts and sales without service or repairs;

     4.     Service establishments, such as electronics or television repair, and small equipment rental or repair;

     5.     Day care facilities;

     6.     Banks and financial institutions;

     7.     Health club, reducing studios, recreational services and similar facilities;

     8.     Restaurant, café, and other food service uses, including outdoor dining, but without drive-in or drive-through facilities providing the size of the food service use is fifteen percent or less of the floor area of the building;

     9.     Business or technical schools;

     10.   Carpet and flooring stores;

     11.   Business, office (medical and professional), and service establishments such as, but not limited to, laundromat, dry cleaning, travel agencies, insurance offices, electronic and television repair, small equipment rental or repair, optical or veterinary pet services (excluding kennels), and other similar business, office, and service establishments;

     12.   Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director.

     B.     South of the extension of Fairview Avenue:

     1.     General and regional retail uses;

     2.     Health club, reducing studios, recreational services and similar facilities;

     3.     Carpet and flooring stores;

     4.     Business, office (medical and professional), and service establishments such as, but not limited to, laundromat, dry cleaning, travel agencies, insurance offices, electronic and television repair, small equipment rental or repair, optical or veterinary pet services (excluding kennels), and other similar business, office, and service establishments;

     5.     Banks and financial institutions;

     6.     Restaurant, café, and other food service uses, including outdoor dining, but without drive-in or drive-through facilities providing the size of the food service use is fifteen percent or less of the floor area of the building;

     7.     Business and technical schools;

     8.     Automotive parts sales without auto service or repairs;

     9.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013; Ord. 899 § 4, 2012; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.488.011 Conditionally permitted uses within subarea E.
     A.    North of the extension of Fairview Avenue:

     1.     Auto rental, leasing or sales, boat and recreational vehicle sales;

     2.     Drive-in and drive-through establishments, excluding drive-through restaurants;

     3.     On- and off-site sales of alcohol;

     4.     Outdoor sales/display uses and outdoor storage facilities;

     5.     Restaurant, café, and other food service uses, including outdoor dining, that are larger than fifteen percent of the floor area of the building in which the restaurant or food service use is located;

     6.     Automotive repair and service;

     7.     Other uses that the community development director determines because of the type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances requiring special consideration and conditioning through the conditional use permit procedure.

     B.     South of the extension of Fairview Avenue:

     1.     Drive-in and drive-through establishments, excluding drive-through restaurants;

     2.     Alcohol sales for on- or off-site consumption;

     3.     Outdoor sales/display uses and outdoor storage facilities;

     4.     Restaurant, café, and other food service uses, including outdoor dining, that are larger than fifteen percent of the floor area of the building in which the restaurant or food service use is located;

     5.     Day care facilities;

     6.     Other uses that the community development director determines because of the type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances requiring special consideration and conditioning through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013; Ord. 899 § 4, 2012; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.488.012 Permitted uses within subarea F.
     A.    General and regional retail uses;

     B.     One full-service supermarket/grocery store or similar use, including the ancillary sale of alcohol under a Type 20 or 21 (or equivalent) license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control;

     C.     Business, professional, medical, dental, and veterinary offices (excluding kennels);

     D.    Personal services, including day spas;

     E.     Service uses including, but not limited to, laundromats and dry cleaners;

     F.     Small equipment rental and/or repair, including electronics;

     G.    Financial institutions;

     H.    Restaurants, including those that sell alcohol, subject to all restrictions associated with Type 41 or 47 (or equivalent) licenses issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control;

     I.      Outdoor dining when it is ancillary to an existing permitted use within the center and all ADA accessibility requirements are continuously met;

     J.      Indoor recreational facilities, including ancillary child care facilities;

     K.    Similar uses as determined by the community development director. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013)

 

17.488.013 Conditionally permitted uses within subarea F.
     A.    Drive-through features;

     B.     Alcohol sales for off-premises consumption including any sale of alcohol requiring a Type 20 or 21 (or equivalent) license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control;

     C.     Outdoor sales/display uses and outdoor storage facilities;

     D.    Child care facilities;

     E.     Educational, instructional and/or training facilities or campuses including classrooms, administrative office space, and student and faculty services;

     F.     Auto, boat, and recreational vehicle sales and repair of the same when ancillary to a sales use;

     G.    Gas stations;

     H.    Retail uses equal to or greater than seventy-five thousand square feet in gross floor area;

     I.      Other uses that the community development director determines because of the type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances requiring special consideration and conditioning through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 990 § 2, 2017; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013)

 

17.488.014 Permitted uses within subarea G.
     The following uses are permitted in subarea G of PD-38:

     A.    Attached and detached single-family dwellings, condominiums and townhomes;

     B.     Duplex, triplex, apartments and other small multi-family structures;

     C.     Parks, playgrounds, and recreation trails;

     D.    Other permitted uses identified in Chapter 17.140 of the Brentwood Municipal Code (R-2 zone). (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016)

 

17.488.015 Conditionally permitted uses within subarea G.
     A.    Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005 of the Brentwood Municipal Code;

     B.     Those uses identified in Chapter 17.140 of the Brentwood Municipal Code as being conditionally permitted (R-2 zone). (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016)

 

17.488.016 Prohibited uses.
     A.    The following uses shall be prohibited within subarea B:

     1.     Self-service storage facilities;

     2.     Public and quasi-public uses such as hospitals, medical laboratory, outpatient facilities, convalescent hospital, business and technical schools;

     3.     Health clubs, reducing studios, recreational services and similar activities;

     4.     Tire shop, auto seat and upholstery shop, billiard hall, bowling alleys, lodge, fraternal hall, and community facility;

     5.     Funeral services and crematoriums;

     6.     Automotive, boat, or machinery repair;

     7.     Auto sales, boat sales, camper, or recreational vehicle sales, and mobile or manufactured housing sales or rentals;

     8.     Gas stations and mini-marts;

     9.     Carpet and/or flooring sales;

     10.   Drive-through restaurants;

     11.   Motels.

     B.     The following uses shall be prohibited within subarea E:

     1.     Self-service storage facilities;

     2.     Public and quasi-public uses such as hospitals, medical laboratory, outpatient facilities, convalescent hospital;

     3.     Billiard hall, bowling alleys, lodge, fraternal hall, and community facility;

     4.     Funeral services and crematoriums;

     5.     Gas stations and mini-marts;

     6.     Drive-through restaurants;

     7.     Motels.

     C.     The following uses shall be prohibited within subarea F:

     1.     Bars, taverns, and nightclubs, including any alcohol sales requiring a Types 40, 42, 48, 50, 51, and 61 (or equivalent) license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control;

     2.     Self-service storage facilities and warehousing;

     3.     Funeral services and crematoriums;

     4.     Motels;

     5.     Automotive, boat, or machinery repair, unless it is ancillary to a sales use. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 990 § 2, 2017; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.488.017 Development standards.
     A.    All uses developed within subareas A, B, C, E, and F of PD-38 shall conform to the development standards set forth as follows:

     1.     Minimum lot area: Ten thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Fifty feet;

     3.     Minimum street frontage setback: Five feet for one story structures or less than twenty feet tall;

     4.     Minimum street frontage setback: Ten feet for two story structures or less than thirty-five feet tall;

     5.     Minimum street frontage setback: Twenty feet for three story structures or less than forty-five feet tall;

     6.     Minimum non-street frontage setback: Zero feet.*

     *Non-street frontage setbacks for parcels adjoining existing residential uses must be approved by the planning commission during the design review or conditional use permit process;

     7.     Maximum building height: Forty-five feet or three stories.**

     **Structures greater than forty-five feet or three stories may be permitted subject to conditional use permit approval, with a thirty-foot street frontage setback.

     B.     Other development standards for subareas A, B, C, E, and F:

     1.     Refuse Disposal Enclosure. All dumpsters, compactors, or semi-open trash containers shall be screened with masonry or cement refuse disposal enclosures to city standards and specifications.

     2.     Illumination of Parking Facilities and Structures. All facilities shall provide adequate lighting or illumination of parking facilities and structures pursuant to Chapter 17.620 of this title.

     3.     Parking Lot Design and Development Standards. All facilities shall comply with the design and development standards of Chapter 17.620.

     4.     Advertising Signs. All signs shall be subject to Chapter 17.640 of this title.

     5.     Landscaping and Screening. Landscaping and screening shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.630.

     6.     Accessory structures and buildings shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     7.     Security Measures. All facilities shall provide security measures in accordance with city standards and subject to design review.

     8.     Energy Conservation. All facilities shall, to the greatest extent possible, incorporate energy conservation measures in conformance with city standards and subject to design review.

     9.     Manufacturing and Storage Areas. All manufacturing processes shall be within a structure and all open storage areas (excluding outdoor sales areas) shall be screened with a minimum six-foot high view-obscuring fence. No storage shall exceed the height of the fence without securing a conditional use permit. Masonry walls shall be utilized for screening outdoor manufacturing and storage areas visible from a public street, while chain link with view-obscuring slats or other fencing materials, may be used for screening areas not visible from a public street.

     10.   Parking. Subarea E shall provide parking at a ratio of one space per two hundred fifty square feet of building floor area. All other subareas shall provide parking in accordance with Chapter 17.620 of this title.

     C.     General development standards for subarea D:

     1.     Minimum Lot area: Three thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Forty feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: Seventy feet;

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Four feet, five feet minimum for non-cluster conditions. Front yards are identified as the yard closest to the access alley or public street;

 

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Four feet;

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Four feet;

     7.     Minimum driveway apron: Twenty feet;

     8.     Minimum street frontage setback: Ten feet and five feet for porches.

     9.     Maximum building height: Two stories and thirty-five feet.

     10.   Maximum lot coverage ratio: Fifty percent for main home on lot.

     D.    Other regulations for subarea D:

     1.     Design and site development shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H) of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     2.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H) of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     3.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     4.     Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     5.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of the Brentwood Municipal Code with the following exceptions:

     a.     Pop-outs at garage doors may encroach two feet into the required yard setback.

     b.     Architectural features and/or elements on porches may encroach up to two feet into the required yard setback.

     6.     Fences along street frontages shall be set back a minimum of five feet from back of sidewalk. The homeowner or homeowner’s association shall be responsible for planting and maintaining attractive landscaping in the area between the fence and sidewalk.

     E.     General development standards for subarea G:

     1.     Minimum Lot area: Three thousand seven hundred square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Forty-five feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: Seventy-five feet;

     4.     Minimum front yard setback: Eighteen feet for front loading garages, twelve feet for side loading garages and living space, ten feet for porches;

     5.     Minimum side yard setback: Four feet;

     6.     Minimum rear yard setback: Ten feet with an average of twelve feet.

     F.     Other regulations for subarea G:

     1.     Design and site development shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H) of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     2.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H) of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     3.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     4.     Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     5.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of the Brentwood Municipal Code with the following exceptions:

     a.     Pop-outs at garage doors may encroach two feet into the required yard setback.

     6.     Corner lot fences shall be set back a minimum of five feet from back of sidewalk or at property lines, whichever is greater. The homeowner shall be responsible for planting and maintaining attractive landscaping in the area between the fence and sidewalk. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.488.018 Design and site development review.
     The design and site development review procedure contained in Chapter 17.820 of this title shall apply to new structures within PD-38. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 943 § 6, 2015; Ord. 916 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.488.019 Map for PD-38.
 



(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 987 § 2, 2017; Ord. 981 § 2, 2016; Ord. 960 § 17, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.489 PD-39 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT THIRTY-NINE) ZONE
17.489.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-39 (planned development thirty-nine) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-39 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-39 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of approximately one hundred twelve acres located between Lone Tree Way and Grant Street, just east of O’Hara Avenue, with a combination of very low and low density residential uses in accordance with the Brentwood general plan, for a maximum of two hundred forty lots and thirteen remainder parcels, including parks and a trail system.

     C.     Intent. The intent of creating the PD-39 zone is to ensure the coordinated development of the entire property in order to minimize impacts on adjacent areas, while providing for needed housing. The boundary of the PD-39 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.489.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.489.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the PD-39 zone:

     A.    Single-family dwelling units not exceeding a density of 2.14 units per gross acre, for a maximum of two hundred forty primary units;

     B.     Parks, playgrounds and recreational trails;

     C.     Those uses permitted under the R-1 zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.489.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are conditionally permitted in the PD-39 zone:

     A.    Those uses conditionally permitted under the R-1 zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.489.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within the PD-39 zone shall comply with the following regulations:

     A.    Subarea A. The Executives.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Ten thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Eighty-five feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred ten feet;

     4.     Minimum lot frontage: Thirty feet for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets at the front property line;

     5.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty-five feet (twenty feet for porches);

     6.     Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet (five feet for detached and semi-detached garages and porte cocheres);

     7.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     8.     Maximum building height: Two stories, not to exceed thirty feet;

     9.     Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent;

     10.   Corner lot fence setback: Five feet from the street side property line; all other fence regulations shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 17.660 of this title;

     11.   Maximum number of primary dwelling units: Eighty-five.

     B.     Subarea B. The Estates.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Fourteen thousand square feet;

 

     2.     Minimum lot width: Ninety-five feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred thirty feet;

     4.     Minimum lot frontage: Thirty feet for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets at the front property line;

     5.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty-five feet (twenty feet for porches);

     6.     Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet (five feet for detached and semi-detached garages and porte cocheres);

     7.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     8.     Maximum building height: Two stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet;

     9.     Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent;

     10.   Corner lot fence setback: Five feet from the street side property line; all other fence regulations shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 17.660 of this title;

     11.   Maximum number of primary dwelling units: One hundred forty-five.

     C.     Subarea C. Density Transition.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Ninety feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred twenty feet;

     4.     Minimum lot frontage: Eighty-five feet for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets at the front property line;

     5.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty-five feet (twenty feet for porches);

     6.     Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet (five feet for detached and semi-detached garages and porte cocheres);

     7.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     8.     Maximum building height: Two stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet;

     9.     Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent;

     10.   Corner lot fence setback: Five feet from the street side property line; all other fence regulations shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 17.660 of this title;

     11.   Maximum number of primary dwelling units: Ten. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.489.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H) of this title.

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H) of this title.

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016 of this title.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of this title.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of this title. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.489.006 Map for PD-39.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.490 PD-40 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FORTY) ZONE
17.490.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-40 (planned development forty) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-40 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-40 zone is to permit and regulate the development of the Sand Creek business center planned district, as designated in the city council’s planning and zoning ordinances as a mixed-use zone, permitting maximum flexibility in uses in order to accommodate a variety of diverse as well as complementary office, commercial retail, business, and light industrial uses.

     C.     Intent. It is intended that in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-40 zone of implementing the development of a planned employment center in conformance with the Brentwood general plan in accordance with the Sand Creek business center master plan, the zone shall be defined as geographically designated on the development plan and related exhibits and as further described below. The boundary of the PD-40 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.490.008. The primary character of the area is intended to be a mix of light industrial and office uses to accommodate the flex-space market. Commercial and retail uses may be allowed, provided that they are found compatible with the primary uses.

     1.     PD-40 consists of approximately 11.34 gross acres intended for the development of an approximate one hundred forty thousand square feet light industrial office flex-space and business center to serve the untapped needs of the Brentwood community. The business center will provide for the development of light industrial, office and flex-space for potential users that would provide employment and services to the community. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.490.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-40 zone.

     A.    The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Manufacturing uses consistent with high technology, electronics, R and D assembly and flex-space users;

     2.     Manufacturing uses, including food products, pharmaceuticals and similar products that do not create excessive sewage or odor problems;

     3.     Light metal fabrication, machine shops, welding shops, small assembly, printing shops and similar light industrial uses which generate minimal noise, smoke, glare, waste material, etc.;

     4.     Financial institutions;

     5.     Medical and dental offices and/or laboratories;

     6.     Restaurants, cafés, delis, sports bars, health clubs and reducing studios to the extent that such uses do not occupy more than ten percent of the gross floor area of an individual building;

     7.     Day care and child care facilities and meeting rooms in conjunction with another permitted use;

     8.     Public and quasi-public uses appropriate and compatible with the area such as educational institutions, business, technical, vocational and trade schools;

     9.     Stock brokerages, mortgage and real estate companies, credit union offices, but not banks and savings and loan institutions;

     10.   Business and professional offices such as architects, attorneys, accountants, engineers, insurance agencies, and other professional and general business offices;

     11.   Commercial uses which manufacture their primary product on the premises such as drapery shops, cabinet shops, upholstery shops, and similar uses;

     12.   Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator, provided they are not conditionally approved uses or prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.490.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830, the following uses are permitted in the PD-40 zone.

     A.    The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Hospitals;

     2.     Out-patient care facilities;

     3.     Community center facilities;

     4.     Other uses that the zoning administrator determines, because of the type of operation, materials stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure, provided they are not prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.490.004 Prohibited uses.
     The following uses are prohibited within the PD-40 zone.

     A.    The following uses are prohibited:

     1.     Self-storage facilities;

     2.     Bowling alleys;

     3.     Funeral-service facilities and mortuaries;

     4.     Gasoline service stations and/or car washes;

     5.     Auto-related services uses (e.g. transmission shops, brake and tune-up shops, auto body repair, tire shops) that typically display or have merchandise outdoors;

     6.     All uses with outdoor sales and/or displays, including new and used car, boat or other vehicle sales;

     7.     Drive-up or drive-through establishments of any type or use;

     8.     Off-sale liquor;

     9.     Laundromats. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.490.005 Regulations for lot area, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the PD-40 zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area, minimum lot width, and minimum setbacks shall be established by the development plan and related exhibits for PD-40 and/or any subdivision or parcel map approved in conjunction with PD-40.

     B.     Maximum Building Height.

     1.     The maximum height of one-story structures shall not exceed thirty-two feet;

     2.     The maximum height of two-story structures shall not exceed thirty-nine feet;

     3.     Structures greater than two stories or thirty-nine feet may be permitted subject to variance approval as per Chapter 17.860;

     4.     Advertising Signs. All signs shall be subject to Chapter 17.640 and the Sand Creek business center sign program;

     5.     Landscaping and Screening. All facilities shall provide landscaping and screening in accordance with Chapter 17.630 or as shown on the development plan and related exhibits within PD-40;

     6.     Accessory structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660;

     7.     Security Measures. All facilities shall provide security measures in accordance with city standards and subject to design review approval;

     8.     Energy Conservation. All facilities shall, to the greatest extent possible, incorporate energy conservation measures in conformance with city standards and subject to design review approval;

     9.     Manufacturing and Storage Areas. All manufacturing processes shall be within a structure.

     C.     Other Regulations.

     1.     Parking. Off-street parking within PD-40 shall be applied in accordance with Chapter 17.620 dependent on the particular tenant uses for particular buildings or as indicated on the development plan and related exhibits within PD-40.

     2.     Refuse Disposal Enclosure. All facilities shall provide masonry refuse disposal enclosures with exterior surfaces that are compatible with adjacent buildings and that adhere to city standards and specifications.

     3.     Illumination of Parking Facilities and Structures. All facilities shall provide adequate lighting or illumination of parking facilities and structures pursuant to Chapter 17.620.

     4.     Parking Lot Design and Development Standards. All facilities shall comply with the design and development standards of Chapter 17.620.

     5.     Open Storage or Display. Open storage and/or outdoor display of merchandise is prohibited in the PD-40 zoning district. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.490.006 Performance standards.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within subareas A and B shall conform to the performance standards set forth below:

     A.    Noise.

     1.     At the property line, the maximum sound pressure level radiated by listed uses or facilities shall not exceed the following values:

 

 

6:01 a.m.—9:59 p.m.

10:00 p.m.—6:00 a.m.

Industrial and warehouse

75 dBA

65 dBA

Retail, commercial, office, schools

65 dBA

65 dBA

 

     2.     The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer conforming to the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association.

     3.     American Standards Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, Z224.3-1944, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, NY, and American Standard Specification for an Octave-Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, Z224.10-1953, or latest approved revision thereof, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, NY, shall be used.

     B.     Heat, Glare and Humidity.

     1.     Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.

     2.     Any operation or activity producing glare shall be performed within a completely enclosed building and be conducted so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one foot-candle when measured at the lot line. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded and flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled so as not to cause a nuisance across lot lines.

     3.     Any use producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat, shall be carried on in such a manner that steam, humidity or heat is not perceptible at any lot line.

     C.     Vibration. Any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any point along the property line of the subject use, earth-borne vibrations which are discernible without the use of instruments is prohibited.

     D.    Fire, Safety and Explosion. All uses shall provide adequate safety devices against fire, explosion and other hazards, adequate fire-fighting and fire-suppression equipment in compliance with applicable fire prevention and building codes.

     E.     Soundproofing. Offices, retail activities and other acoustically-sensitive activities shall be designed so that interior noise levels due to exterior noise sources do not exceed the peak hour Leq of fifty-five dBA.

     F.     Solid and Liquid Waste.

     1.     No discharge at any point into public sewer, stream or bay or into the ground shall be permitted, except in accord with the standards approved by the state Department of Health, or standards specified in applicable local ordinances for similar uses of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements.

     2.     No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any property in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the property by natural causes or forces.

     3.     Any wastes which might be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored in closed containers.

     G.    Electrical and Radioactive Radiation. No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbances adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.

     H.    Air Pollution. All uses shall comply with regulations of the San Francisco Bay area air pollution control district.

     1.     Smoke. For the purpose of determining the density or equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines in Circular No. 7718 (August 1955) shall be employed. The emission of smoke from any chimney, stack, vent, opening or combustion process shall not exceed Ringlemann No. 1.

     2.     Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the property line of the subject use.

     3.     Toxic and Noxious Matter. No use shall be permitted which creates any emission which endangers human health, can cause damage to animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause soiling at any point beyond the boundaries of the site. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.490.007 Design and site development review.
     The design and site development review procedure contained in Chapter 17.820 shall apply to the development of the Sand Creek business center, with an overall architectural theme.

     Modification to Site Plan. The community development director at his or her discretion may make modifications to approved site plans for PD-40 as long as such modifications are consistent with the architectural theme of the approved design review. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.490.008 Map for PD-40.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.491 PD-41 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FORTY-ONE) ZONE
17.491.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-41 (planned development forty-one) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-41 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-41 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of 5.09 acres located at the southeast corner of Lone Tree Way and the realigned Fairview Avenue with those general commercial uses typically permitted in the C-1 zone, and those other uses found to be appropriate for this site pursuant to the approval of conditional use permit No. 01-24, including a gas station and car wash, in accordance with the Brentwood general plan.

     C.     Intent. It is intended that in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-41 zone of implementing a cohesive, mixed-use development in conformance with the Brentwood general plan, the zone shall be divided into four subareas as geographically designated on the development plan and related exhibits, and as further described below. It is further intended that the creation of the PD-41 zone will ensure the coordinated development of the entire property in order to minimize impacts on adjacent residential areas, while providing for the flexibility to maximize the potential for job creation and serve the needs of surrounding residential and commercial neighborhoods. The boundaries of the PD-41 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.491.006.

     1.     Subarea A consists of approximately 1.14 acres intended for the development of a gas station and convenience store, including a limited seating restaurant and an accessory drive-thru.

     2.     Subarea B consists of approximately 1.75 acres intended for the development of retail, restaurant, and office uses.

     3.     Subarea C consists of approximately 1.13 acres intended for the development of a full-service mechanical car wash and detail shop.

     4.     Subarea D consists of approximately 1.08 acres intended for the development of retail and restaurant uses. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.491.002 Permitted uses.
     A.    Subarea A. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Those uses permitted in the C-1 zone;

     2.     Convenience retail uses such as bakeries, pastry shops, bookstores, candy stores, florists, newsstands, stationery/gift shops, ice cream parlors, mini-marts, supermarkets, drugstores, and similar uses;

     3.     Service uses such as laundromats, dry cleaners, shoe repair, beauty shops, barbershops, and similar uses;

     4.     Financial institutions;

     5.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director.

     B.     Subarea B. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Those uses permitted in the C-1 zone;

     2.     Convenience retail uses such as bakeries, pastry shops, bookstores, candy stores, florists, newsstands, stationery/gift shops, ice cream parlors, supermarkets, drugstores, and similar uses;

     3.     Services such as laundromats, dry cleaners, shoe repair, beauty shops, barbershops, and similar uses;

     4.     Financial institutions;

     5.     Offices;

     6.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director.

     C.     Subarea C. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Those uses permitted in the C-1 zone;

     2.     Convenience retail uses such as bakeries, pastry shops, bookstores, candy stores, florists, newsstands, stationery/gift shops, ice cream parlors, supermarkets, drugstores, and similar uses;

     3.     Services such as laundromats, dry cleaners, shoe repair, beauty shops, barbershops, and similar uses;

     4.     Car washes;

     5.     Financial institutions;

     6.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director.

     D.    Subarea D. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Those uses permitted in the C-1 zone;

     2.     Convenience retail uses such as bakeries, pastry shops, bookstores, candy stores, florists, newsstands, stationery/gift shops, ice cream parlors, supermarkets, drugstores, and similar uses;

     3.     Services such as laundromats, dry cleaners, shoe repair, beauty shops, barbershops, and similar uses;

     4.     Financial institutions;

     5.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.491.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     A.    Subarea A. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Those uses conditionally permitted in the C-1 zone and by CUP 01-24 (approved by the city council on October 22, 2002);

     2.     Auto service stations or gas stations;

     3.     Off-sale liquor establishments;

     4.     Restaurants, limited to a maximum of twenty seats, with or without drive-thru facilities;

     5.     Nurseries, child care centers, or day care centers;

     6.     Meeting halls, fraternal halls, or community centers;

     7.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the planning commission.

     B.     Subarea B. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Those uses conditionally permitted in the C-1 zone and by CUP 01-24 (approved by the city council on October 22, 2002);

     2.     Nurseries, child care centers, or day care centers;

     3.     Meeting halls, fraternal halls, or community centers;

     4.     Restaurants, limited to no more than seven thousand five hundred square feet when combined with those in subareas C and D;

     5.     On or off-sale liquor establishments;

     6.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the planning commission.

     C.     Subarea C. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Those uses conditionally permitted in the C-1 zone and by CUP 01-24 (approved by the city council on October 22, 2002), except that car washes are permitted by right per Section 17.492.002(C);

     2.     Restaurants, limited to no more than seven thousand five hundred square feet when combined with those in subareas B and D;

     3.     Nurseries, child care centers, or day care centers;

     4.     Meeting halls, fraternal halls, or community centers;

     5.     On or off-sale liquor establishments;

     6.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the planning commission.

     D.    Subarea D. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Those uses conditionally permitted in the C-1 zone and by CUP 01-24 (approved by the city council on October 22, 2002);

     2.     Nurseries, child care centers, or day care centers;

     3.     Meeting halls, fraternal halls, or community centers;

     4.     Restaurants, limited to no more than seven thousand five hundred square feet when combined with those in subareas B and C;

     5.     On- or off-sale liquor establishments;

     6.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the planning commission. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.491.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within the PD-41 zone shall comply with the following regulations:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Five acres, except that a master planned shopping center may be subdivided into parcels having a minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet and a minimum lot width of one hundred fifty feet.

     B.     Minimum street frontage: Three hundred feet, except in the event of subdivision pursuant to subsection A of this section, where frontage is not required, provided perpetual access is provided by easements.

     C.     Minimum street frontage yards: Ten feet, which, except for driveway approaches, shall be landscaped pursuant to Section 17.630.

     D.    Minimum non-street frontage yards: Fifty feet. These yards shall be screened if required pursuant to Section 17.630.

     E.     Maximum building height: The maximum height of all structures in the PD-41 zone shall be two stories not to exceed thirty feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.491.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620 of the Brentwood Municipal Code, except that the number of spaces (two hundred twenty-nine) to be provided for the entire PD site shall be consistent with the site plan approved by the city council on October 22, 2002, in accordance with conditional use permit No. 01-24.

     B.     Development Standards. The uses within the PD-41 zone shall comply with Section 17.200.003 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     C.     Performance Standards. The uses within the PD-41 zone shall comply with Section 17.200.004 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     D.    Signs. All signage for uses within the PD-41 zone shall be in accordance with the master sign program, as approved by the city of Brentwood planning commission and/or city council.

     E.     Prior Approvals. All conditional use permits including design reviews previously approved by the city council for the subject site shall run with the land, and those permits shall continue to be valid subsequent to city council adoption of this PD-41 zone. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.491.006 Map for PD-41.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.492 PD-42 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT NO. 42) ZONE
17.492.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-42 (planned development forty-two) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-42 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-42 zone is to permit and regulate the development of the Gregory Ranch planned district, as designated in the city council’s planning and zoning ordinances as a mixed-use zone, permitting maximum flexibility in uses in order to accommodate a variety of diverse as well as complementary multifamily residential, office, commercial retail, hotel, restaurant, business, self-storage, and light industrial uses.

     C.     Intent. It is intended that in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-42 zone of implementing a cohesive, mixed-use development in conformance with the Brentwood general plan, the zone shall be divided into nine subareas as geographically designated in Section 17.492.008 and as further described below. The primary character of the area is intended to be a mix of multifamily residential, light industrial, and offices to accommodate the dynamic flex-tech market, as well as hotel, restaurant, and ancillary commercial, retail, and self-storage uses related to major thoroughfares.

     1.     Subarea A consists of approximately 2.98 gross acres intended for the development of approximately sixty-five thousand square feet of new technology self-storage to serve both the employment uses being developed in the vicinity, as well as the growing residential uses in the region that require self-storage.

     2.     Subarea B consists of approximately one-half gross acre intended for the development of approximately six thousand square feet of future office, convenience retail, and similar compatible uses to serve the needs of the Brentwood community.

     3.     Subarea C consists of approximately three gross acres intended for the development of commercial uses typically associated with thoroughfares such as hotels, restaurants, auto service stations, drive-in/drive-through establishments, and the like.

     4.     Subarea D consists of approximately ten gross acres intended for the development of a multifamily, residential community of a maximum of one hundred twenty units.

     5.     Subarea E consists of approximately 1.1 acres intended for the development of future office, leasing office, commercial service, convenience retail, and similar compatible uses to serve the needs of the adjacent multifamily-community as well as the needs of the surrounding employment area.

     6.     Subarea F consists of approximately 8.75 gross acres intended for the development of an approximately one hundred thousand square foot industrial warehouse, office, flex-space, and business center to serve the untapped needs of the Brentwood community. This business center will provide for the development of industrial, office, and flex-space for potential users and user owners that would provide employment and services to the community.

     7.     Subarea G consists of approximately 3.17 gross acres with uses to be determined by subsequent planned development amendment.

     8.     Subarea H consists of approximately 74.77 gross acres with uses to be determined by subsequent planned development amendment.

     9.     Subarea I consists of approximately 22.2 gross acres with uses to be determined by subsequent planned development amendment. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.492.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-42 zone:

     A.    Subarea A. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Commercial uses for the rental or sale of packing and moving of related items;

     2.     Commercial uses for the operation of a postal box rental facility.

     B.     Subarea B. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Medical and dental offices and/or laboratories;

     2.     Nursery, child care and day care centers;

     3.     Public and quasi-public uses appropriate with the area such as electronical institutions, business, technical, vocational, and trade schools;

     4.     Stock brokerages, mortgage and real estate companies, credit union offices, and financial institutions;

     5.     Business and professional offices such as architects, attorneys, accountants, engineers, insurance agencies, and other professional and general business offices;

     6.     Commercial uses or services such as beauty shop, barbershop, photo studio, convenience retail uses or services such as a bakery, pastry shop, bookstore, candy or ice cream store and shoe repair, apparel and accessory store, and similar small shops or boutiques;

     7.     Addressing and mailing service, blueprinting, photostatting, and/or photocopying services (other than a printer or lithographer), drafting service, messenger service, telegraph office, answering service, private postal box service, travel agency and similar services typically associated with administrative and professional offices;

     8.     General retail sales, excluding uses with outdoor storage or display;

     9.     Other retail uses subject to the approval of the community development director provided they are not conditionally approved uses or prohibited by this chapter.

     C.     Subarea C. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Commercial uses or services such as beauty shop, barbershop, photo studio, convenience retail uses or services such as a bakery, pastry shop, bookstore, candy or ice cream store and shoe repair, apparel and accessory store, and similar small shops or boutiques;

     2.     General retail sales, excluding uses with outdoor storage or display;

     3.     Other retail uses subject to the approval of the community development director provided they are not conditionally approved uses or prohibited by this chapter.

     D.    Subarea D. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Duplex, triplex, apartments, and other small multifamily structures; townhouses and single-family, attached or detached homes; all not exceeding a density of twelve dwellings per gross acre;

     2.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     3.     Nursery, child care and day care centers.

     E.     Subarea E. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Medical and dental offices and/or laboratories up to a maximum of thirty-three percent of the building’s square footage;

     2.     Public and quasi-public uses appropriate with the area;

     3.     Business and professional offices such as architects, attorneys, accountants, engineers, insurance agencies, stock brokerages, mortgage and real estate sales and leasing companies, credit union offices, banks and savings and loan companies, and other professional and general business offices;

     4.     Commercial uses which manufacture their primary product on the premises, such as drapery shops, cabinet shops, upholstery shops, and similar uses;

     5.     Commercial uses or services such as beauty shop, barbershop, photo studio, convenience retail uses or services such as a bakery, pastry shop, bookstore, candy or ice cream store and shoe repair, apparel and accessory store, and similar small shops or boutiques;

     6.     Addressing and mailing service, blueprinting, photostatting, and/or photocopying services (other than a printer or lithographer), drafting service, messenger service, telegraph office, answering service, private postal box service, travel agency and similar services typically associated with administrative and professional offices;

     7.     General retail sales, excluding uses with outdoor storage or display;

     8.     Other retail uses subject to the approval of the community development director provided they are not conditionally approved uses or prohibited by this chapter.

     F.     Subarea F. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Medical and dental offices and/or laboratories. Within the project identified as Design Review 05-15, Gregory Ranch Office Condominiums, this use is restricted to Building A only;

     2.     Nursery, child care and day care centers;

     3.     Public and quasi-public uses appropriate with the area such as electronical institutions, business, technical, vocational, and trade schools;

     4.     Stock brokerages, mortgage and real estate companies, credit union offices, and financial institutions;

     5.     Business and professional offices such as architects, attorneys, accountants, engineers, insurance agencies, and other professional and general business offices;

     6.     Commercial uses which may or may not manufacture their primary product on the premises, such as drapery shops, cabinet shops, upholstery shops, and similar uses;

     7.     Commercial uses or services such as beauty shop, barbershop, photo studio, convenience retail uses or services such as a bakery, pastry shop, bookstore, candy or ice cream store and shoe repair, apparel and accessory store, and similar small shops or boutiques;

     8.     Addressing and mailing service, blueprinting, photostatting, and/or photocopying services (other than a printer or lithographer), drafting service, messenger service, telegraph office, answering service, private postal box service, travel agency and similar services typically associated with administrative and professional offices;

     9.     General retail sales, excluding uses with outdoor storage or display;

     10.   Office uses which are supplementary to any industrial, business, or commercial uses permitted in the zone;

     11.   Other retail uses subject to the approval of the community development director provided they are not conditionally approved uses or prohibited by this chapter.

     G.    Subarea G. Permitted uses for this subarea shall be determined by subsequent planned development amendment.

     H.    Subarea H. Permitted uses for this subarea shall be determined by subsequent planned development amendment.

     I.      Subarea I. Permitted uses for this subarea shall be determined by subsequent planned development amendment. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.492.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830, the following uses are permitted in the PD-42 zone:

     A.    Subarea A. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Self-storage facilities which may or may not include an on-site resident unit;

     2.     Other uses that the community development director determines, because of the type of operation, materials stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure, provided they are not prohibited by this chapter.

     B.     Subarea B. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Sit-down restaurants, cafés, delicatessens and sports bars;

     2.     On-site sale liquor establishments;

     3.     Billiard halls, skating rinks and similar recreational facilities;

     4.     Funeral service facilities and mortuaries;

     5.     Other uses that the community development director determines, because of the type of operation, materials stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure, provided they are not prohibited by this chapter.

     C.     Subarea C. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Health clubs, reducing studios, recreational clubs, and similar recreational uses;

     2.     Sit-down restaurants, cafés, delicatessens, and sports bars;

     3.     On-site sale liquor establishments;

     4.     Hotels;

     5.     Gasoline service stations and/or car washes;

     6.     Drive-up or drive-through establishments of any type or use;

     7.     Other uses that the community development director determines, because of the type of operation, materials stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure, provided they are not prohibited by this chapter.

     D.    Subarea D. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea: uses that the community development director determines, because of the type of operation, materials stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure, provided they are not prohibited by this chapter.

     E.     Subarea E. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Sit-down restaurants, cafés, delicatessens, and sports bars;

     2.     On-site sale liquor establishments;

     3.     Nursery, childcare or day care uses;

     4.     Business, technical, vocational, and trade schools;

     5.     Health clubs, reducing studios, swimming pools, tennis courts, bocce ball courts, gymnasiums, recreational clubs, and similar recreational uses and facilities;

     6.     Other uses that the community development director determines, because of the type of operation, materials stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure, provided they are not prohibited by this chapter.

     F.     Subarea F. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Public and quasi-public uses necessary and appropriate;

     2.     Manufacture of food products, pharmaceuticals, and similar products, excluding the production of fish or meat products or similar products that create excessive sewage or odor problems;

     3.     Churches as temporary uses in existing buildings;

     4.     Health clubs, reducing studios, recreational clubs, and similar recreational uses;

     5.     Sit-down restaurants, cafés, delicatessens, and sports bars;

     6.     On-site sale liquor establishments;

     7.     All uses that, as a necessity of their business, require outdoor sales and/or displays, including new and used car, boat, or other vehicles sales;

     8.     Light metal fabrication, machine shops, and similar uses;

     9.     Light industrial uses which generate minimal noise, odor, smoke, waste material, and similar items which may negatively impact the environment. Such uses include, but are not limited to, small assembly plants, printing establishments, contractors’ storage yard, lumber yard, and similar uses;

     10.   Business services such as laundry, dry cleaning, automotive repair, or service establishments such as electronic, clock or watch repair, small equipment repair, small welding shop, lumberyard, or similar facilities;

     11.   Auto-related services uses (e.g., transmission shops, brake and tuneup shops, auto body repair, tire shops) that typically display or have merchandise outdoors;

     12.   Other uses that the community development director determines, because of the type of operation, materials stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure, provided they are not prohibited by this chapter.

     G.    Subarea G. Conditionally permitted uses for this subarea shall be determined by subsequent planned development amendment.

     H.    Subarea H. Conditionally permitted uses for this subarea shall be determined by subsequent planned development amendment.

     I.      Subarea I. Conditionally permitted uses for this subarea shall be determined by subsequent planned development amendment. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.492.004 Prohibited uses.
     The following uses are prohibited within the PD-42 zone:

     A.    Subarea A. The following uses are prohibited:

     1.     Bowling alleys;

     2.     Funeral-service facilities and mortuaries;

     3.     Gasoline service stations and/or car washes;

     4.     Auto-related services uses (e.g., transmission shops, brake and tuneup shops, auto body repair, tire shops) that typically display or have merchandise outdoors;

     5.     All uses that, as a necessity of their business, require outdoor sales and/or displays including new and used car, boat or other vehicle sales;

     6.     Drive-up or drive-through establishments of any type or use;

     7.     Bank, savings and loans and/or financial institutions;

     8.     Off-sale liquor;

     9.     Motels;

     10.   Laundromats.

     B.     Subarea B. The following uses are prohibited:

     1.     Gasoline service stations and/or car washes;

     2.     Auto-related services uses (e.g., transmission shops, brake and tuneup shops, auto body repair, tire shops) that typically display or have merchandise outdoors;

     3.     All uses that, as a necessity of their business, require outdoor sales and/or displays including new and used car, boat or other vehicle sales;

     4.     Laundromats;

     5.     Self-storage facilities;

     6.     Banks, savings and loans and/or financial institutions;

     7.     Motels;

     8.     Drive-up or drive-through establishments of any type or use.

     C.     Subarea C. The following uses are prohibited:

     1.     Self-storage facilities;

     2.     Bowling alleys;

     3.     Funeral service facilities and mortuaries;

     4.     Auto-related services uses (e.g., transmission shops, brake and tuneup shops, auto body repair, tire shops) that typically display or have merchandise outdoors;

     5.     All uses that, as a necessity of their business, require outdoor sales and/or displays including new and used car, boat, or other vehicle sales;

     6.     Laundromats;

     7.     Motels;

     8.     Off-sale liquor.

     D.    Subarea D. The following uses are prohibited:

     1.     Commercial, retail or service uses.

     E.     Subarea E. The following uses are prohibited:

     1.     Self-storage facilities;

     2.     Bowling alleys;

     3.     Funeral service facilities and mortuaries;

     4.     Gasoline service stations and/or car washes;

     5.     Auto-related services uses (e.g., transmission shops, brake and tuneup shops, auto body repair, tire shops) that typically display or have merchandise outdoors;

     6.     All uses that, as a necessity of their business, require outdoor sales and/or displays including new and used car, boat, or other vehicle sales;

     7.     Drive-up or drive-through establishments of any type or use;

     8.     Off-sale liquor;

     9.     Motels;

     10.   Laundromats.

     F.     Subarea F. The following uses are prohibited:

     1.     Self-storage facilities;

     2.     Bowling alleys;

     3.     Gasoline service stations and/or car washes;

     4.     Drive-up or drive-through establishments of any type or use;

     5.     Off-sale liquor;

     6.     Motels;

     7.     Laundromats.

     G.    Subarea G. Prohibited uses for this subarea shall be determined by subsequent planned development amendment.

     H.    Subarea H. Prohibited uses for this subarea shall be determined by subsequent planned development amendment.

     I.      Subarea I. Prohibited uses for this subarea shall be determined by subsequent planned development amendment. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.492.005 Regulations for lot area, yards, height and related matters.
     A.    The following regulations shall apply to subarea A of the PD-42 zone:

     1.     Minimum lot area: Two acres;

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum street frontage setback: Eighteen feet;

     4.     Minimum non-street frontage setback: Zero feet;

     5.     Maximum building height: Two stories and/or thirty feet.

     B.     The following regulations shall apply to subarea C of the PD-42 zone:

     1.     Minimum lot area: Three quarters acres;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Eighty-nine feet;

     3.     Minimum street frontage setback: Ten feet minimum, with an average setback of twenty feet along Brentwood Boulevard, twenty feet minimum on all other street frontages;

     4.     Minimum non-street frontage setback: Zero feet;

     5.     Maximum building height: Three stories and/or forty-five feet.

     C.     The following regulations shall apply to subarea D of the PD-42 zone:

     1.     Minimum lot area: One thousand five hundred square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Twenty-four feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: Sixty feet;

     4.     Minimum lot frontage: Twenty-four feet;

     5.     Minimum front yard: Six feet; exceptions granted for lots with radius curves;

     6.     Minimum side yard: Zero feet on interior units, and five feet on end units;

     7.     Minimum rear yard: Ten feet;

     8.     Maximum lot coverage: Sixty-six percent.

     D.    The following regulations shall apply to subarea E of the PD-42 zone:

     1.     Minimum lot area: One acre;

     2.     Minimum street frontage setback: Eighteen feet;

     3.     Minimum non-street frontage setback: Ten feet;

     4.     Maximum building height: Two stories and/or thirty feet.

     E.     The following regulations shall apply to subarea F of the PD-42 zone:

     1.     Minimum lot area: Seventeen thousand five hundred square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred twenty feet;

     4.     Minimum lot frontage: Fifty feet;

     5.     Minimum street frontage yard: Fifteen feet;

     6.     Minimum non-street frontage yard: Zero feet;

     7.     Maximum building height: three stories and/or forty feet. Structures greater than forty feet may be permitted subject to conditional use permit approval.

     F.     Regulations for lot area, yards, height and related matters for subareas B, G, H, and I shall be determined by amendment to these planned development guidelines prior to and/or in conjunction with submittal of a development plan.

     G.    Other Regulations.

     1.     Advertising Signs. All signs shall be subject to Chapter 17.640.

     2.     Landscaping and Screening. All facilities shall provide landscaping and screening in accordance with Chapter 17.630.

     3.     Accessory structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     4.     Security Measures. All facilities shall provide security measures in accordance with city standards and are subject to design review approval.

     5.     Energy Conservation. All facilities shall, to the greatest extent possible, incorporate energy conservation measures in conformance with city standards and are subject to design review approval.

     6.     Manufacturing and Storage Areas. All manufacturing processes shall be within a structure.

     7.     Refuse Disposal Enclosure. All facilities shall provide masonry refuse disposal enclosures with exterior surfaces that are compatible with adjacent buildings and that adhere to city standards and specifications.

     8.     Illumination of Parking Facilities and Structures. All facilities shall provide adequate lighting or illumination of parking facilities and structures pursuant to Chapter 17.620.

     9.     Parking Lot Design and Development Standards. All facilities shall comply with the design and development standards of Chapter 17.620. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.492.006 Performance standards.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within all subareas shall conform to the performance standards set forth in this section.

     A.    Noise.

     1.     At the property line, the maximum sound pressure level radiated by listed uses or facilities shall not exceed the following values:

 

 

6:01 a.m.—9:59 p.m.

10:00 p.m.—6:00 a.m.

Industrial and warehouse

75 dBA

65 dBA

Retail, commercial, office, schools

65 dBA

65 dBA

 

     2.     The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer conforming to the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association.

     3.     American Standards Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, Z224.3-1944, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, NY, and American Standard Specification for an Octave-Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, Z224.10-1953, or latest approved revision thereof, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, NY, shall be used.

     B.     Heat, Glare and Humidity.

     1.     Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed within a completely enclosure building in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.

     2.     Any operation or activity producing glare shall be performed within a completely enclosed building and be conducted so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one foot-candle when measured at the lot line. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded and flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled so as not to cause a nuisance across lot lines.

     3.     Any use producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat, shall be carried on in such a manner that steam, humidity or heat is not perceptible at any lot line.

     C.     Vibration. Any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any point along the property line of the subject use, earth-borne vibrations which are discernible without the use of instruments is prohibited.

     D.    Fire, Safety and Explosion. All uses shall provide adequate safety devices against fire, explosion and other hazards, adequate firefighting and fire-suppression equipment in compliance with applicable fire prevention and building codes.

     E.     Soundproofing. Offices, retail activities and other acoustically-sensitive activities shall be designed so that interior noise levels due to exterior noise sources do not exceed the peak hour Leq of fifty-five dBA.

     F.     Solid and Liquid Waste.

     1.     No discharge at any point into public sewer, stream or bay or into the ground shall be permitted, except in accord with the standards approved by the State Department of Health, or standards specified in applicable local ordinances for similar uses of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements.

     2.     No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any property in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the property by natural causes or forces.

     3.     Any wastes which might be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored in closed containers.

     G.    Electrical and Radioactive Radiation. No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbances adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.

     H.    Air Pollution. All uses shall comply with regulations of the San Francisco Bay Area Air Pollution Control District.

     1.     Smoke. For the purpose of determining the density or equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines in Circular No. 7718 (August 1955) shall be employed. The emission of smoke from any chimney, stack, vent, opening or combustion process shall not exceed Ringlemann No. 1.

     2.     Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the property line of the subject use.

     3.     Toxic and Noxious Matter. No use shall be permitted which creates any emission which endangers human health, can cause damage to animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause soiling at any point beyond the boundaries of the site. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.492.007 Design and site development review.
     The design and site development review procedure contained in Chapter 17.820 shall apply to this planned development.

     Modification to Site Plan. The community development director at his or her discretion may make modifications to approved site plans for PD-42 as long as such modifications are consistent with the architectural theme of the approved design review. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.492.008 Map for PD-42.
 



(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 960 § 18, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.493 PD-43 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FORTY-THREE) ZONE
17.493.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-43 (planned development forty-three) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-43 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-43 zone is to permit and regulate the development of the proposed Brentwood Community Park located on the northwest corner of Balfour Road and Griffith Lane.

     C.     Intent. This PD has been prepared to ensure the orderly development of the proposed community park consistent with the intent of the general plan and city of Brentwood park and recreation master plan. The boundary of the PD-43 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.493.008. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.493.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-43 zone:

     A.    Recreational playfields, including, but not limited to, baseball, football, soccer, volleyball and similar field sports, including bleachers;

     B.     Swim and aquatic centers, consisting of swimming pools, spas, cabana and shower rooms, deck areas, bleachers and associated equipment maintenance areas;

     C.     Sports courts, including but limited to tennis, racquetball, handball and other sports requiring courts;

     D.    Picnic areas and passive recreation areas including trails and pathways;

     E.     Active play areas and tot lots, including skateboard facilities;

     F.     Retail and food sales areas to provide conveniences to park uses as well as to assist in financially supporting the park, limited to nine thousand square feet of gross floor area. Such uses shall be limited to such convenience and support uses as bakeries and sandwich shops, delicatessens, coffee shops, ice cream and yogurt shops, newsstands, video rental shops, sporting goods stores and similar uses;

     G.    Restrooms;

     H.    Parking areas;

     I.      Similar uses to the above, subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.493.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are conditionally permitted within the PD-43 zone:

     A.    Retail sales areas with a gross floor area in excess of nine thousand square feet;

     B.     Any use not specifically identified in this section or permitted by right under Section 17.494.002 shall require conditional use permit approval by the planning commission. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.493.004 Prohibited uses.
     The following uses are prohibited within the PD-43 zone:

     A.    The sale of alcoholic beverages and tobacco products;

     B.     Any adult entertainment establishments and/or merchandise. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.493.005 Development standards.
     The following development standards shall govern construction within the PD-43 zone area.

     A.    Minimum lot area: None.

     B.     Minimum lot width and depth: One hundred feet.

     C.     Public street setback (structures): Minimum twenty feet.

     D.    Non-street setback (structures): Minimum thirty feet.

     E.     Landscaping width along public street: Minimum ten feet.

     F.     Maximum building height: Thirty-five feet.

     G.    Other development standards:

     1.     Refuse Disposal Enclosures. Refuse disposal enclosures shall be provided and constructed to city standards and specifications.

     2.     Illumination of Parking Facilities and Recreation Facilities. Parking facilities shall be illuminated if park hours of operation extend past dusk. If illumination is provided, levels of illumination shall comply with Chapter 17.620. Illumination of play-fields shall either be directed downwards, or lighting fixtures shall be equipped with cut-off lenses to eliminate spillover of light onto adjacent properties.

     3.     Parking Lot Design and Development Standards. Parking lots, driveways and other vehicular circulation areas shall comply with design and development standards set forth in Chapter 17.620.

     4.     Open Storage or Display. Open storage and/or display of merchandise is prohibited for retail uses within the park, although outdoor seating may be permitted subject to zoning administrator review.

     5.     Signs. Signs for retail and food service establishments shall comply with Chapter 17.640 of the Brentwood Municipal Code and be approved by the planning commission.

     6.     Screening. All aboveground utility facilities (backflow preventers, HVAC equipment) shall be screened from public view by landscaping or a permanent architectural screen, or both. Rooftop equipment on buildings shall also be screened from public view by a parapet if not built into roof “wells.”

     7.     Accessory Structures. Accessory structures, such as pool mechanical equipment, grounds maintenance equipment and similar structures, shall be permitted, although not located in any setback area. Such structures shall also comply with Chapter 17.460 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     8.     Security Measures. All facilities shall provide security measures in accordance with city standards and shall be subject to design review by the planning commission.

     9.     Energy Conservation. All facilities shall, to the greatest extent feasible, incorporate energy conservation measures in conformance with city standards and subject to design review.

     10.   Noise. Potential noise impacts on the abutting residential area to the west shall be studied and mitigated, if necessary. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.493.006 Performance standards.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within PD-43 shall conform to the performance standards established below:

     A.    Noise.

     1.     At the property line, the maximum sound pressure level shall not exceed sixty dBA at adjoining property lines.

     2.     The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer conforming to the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association.

     3.     American Standards Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, Z224, 3-1944, American Standards Association Inc., New York, NY, and American Standard Specification for an Octave-Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, Z224, 10-1953, or latest approved revision thereof, American Standards Association, NY, NY, shall be used.

     B.     Heat, Glare and Humidity.

     1.     Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazards to adjacent streets or properties.

     2.     Any use or operation producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat, shall be carried on in such a manner that steam, humidity or heat is not perceptible at any lot line.

     C.     Fire, Safety and Explosion. All uses shall provide adequate safety devices against fire, explosion and other hazards adequate for fire fighting and fire suppression equipment in compliance with applicable fire and building codes.

     D.    Storage and Use of Hazardous Materials. All pool chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers and other potentially hazardous materials shall be used in a manner generally recognized as safe and stored on-site in a manner that conforms with local hazardous materials safety standards as enforced by the city of Brentwood and the East Diablo Fire District.

     E.     Solid and Liquid Waste.

     1.     No discharge at any point into a public sewer, stream or bay or into the ground shall be permitted, except in accordance with the standards approved by the State Department of Health, or standards specified in applicable local ordinances for similar uses of any such materials of such similar nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements.

     2.     No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any property in such form or manner that they may be transferred off of the property by natural causes or forces.

     3.     Any wastes that might be attractive to rodents or vectors shall be stored outdoors in sealed containers.

     F.     Electrical and Radioactive Radiation. No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radioactivity at any point on the property, or that would create electrical disturbances adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.

     G.    Air Emissions. All uses shall comply with the regulations of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD) as well as the following:

     1.     For the purpose of determining the density of equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines in Circular No. 7718 (August, 1955) shall be employed. The emission of smoke from any chimney, stack, vent, opening or combustion process shall not exceed Ringlemann No. 1.

     2.     No emission shall be permitted of odorous gasses or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the property line of the subject use.

     3.     No use shall be permitted that creates any emission which endangers human health, can cause damage to animals, vegetation, or other property or which can cause soiling at any point beyond the boundaries of the site. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.493.007 Design and development review.
     The design and site development review procedure contained in Chapter 17.820 of the Brentwood Municipal Code shall apply to new permanent buildings within the park. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.493.008 Map for PD-43.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.494 PD-44 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FORTY-FOUR) ZONE
17.494.001 Authority and purpose.
     The authority and purpose for the adoption of the PD-44 (planned development forty-four) zone are as follows.

     A.    Authority. The PD-44 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-44 zone is to permit and regulate the development of single- and multifamily attached and detached homes and public uses in accordance with the Brentwood General Plan. (Ord. 930 § 2, 2014; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.494.002 Permitted uses.
     Permitted uses in PD-44 are those uses permitted under Chapter 17.100, Residential Zones. (Ord. 930 § 2, 2014; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.494.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Section 17.130.003 which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city. (Ord. 930 § 2, 2014; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.494.004 Development standards for neighborhoods A through E.
     A.    Neighborhood A (El Sol).

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be one thousand five hundred twelve square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width, as measured at the building line, shall be twenty-eight feet.

     3.     Minimum Lot Depth. The minimum lot depth shall be fifty-four feet.

     4.     Minimum Front Yard Setback. The standard building setback shall be a minimum of six feet.

     5.     Minimum Side Yard Setback. The minimum side yard setback shall be three feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     6.     Minimum Rear Yard Setback. The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of two and one-half feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     7.     Projections into Setback Areas. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setback as per Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than three feet from the property line.

     8.     Setbacks from Sidewalks. Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty-two feet.

     B.     Neighborhood A (Cielo).

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be three thousand fifty square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width, as measured at the building line, shall be fifty feet.

     3.     Minimum Lot Depth. The minimum lot depth shall be sixty feet.

 

     4.     Minimum Front Yard Setback. The standard building setback shall be a minimum of twelve feet for homes fronting public streets; for cluster homes at the rear of the cluster the minimum front yard setback shall be four feet.

     5.     Minimum Side Yard Setback. The minimum side yard setback shall be three feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     6.     Minimum Rear Yard Setback. The rear yard setback for lots at the rear of the cluster shall be fifteen feet; for homes fronting public streets the minimum rear yard setback shall be a minimum of four feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     7.     Projections into Setback Areas. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setback as per Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than three feet from the property line.

     8.     Setbacks from Sidewalks. Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed twenty-five feet.

     C.     Neighborhood B (Four Thousand Square Foot Lot).

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be four thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width, as measured at the building line, shall be fifty feet.

     3.     Minimum Lot Depth. The minimum lot depth shall be eighty feet.

     4.     Minimum Front Yard Setback. The standard building setback shall be a minimum of twelve feet.

     5.     Minimum Side Yard Setback. The minimum side yard setback shall be three feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     6.     Minimum Rear Yard Setback. The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of nine feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     7.     Projections into Setback Areas. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setback as per Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than three feet from the property line.

     8.     Setbacks from Sidewalks. Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet.

     D.    Neighborhood B (Five Thousand Square Foot Lot).

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be five thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width, as measured at the building line, shall be fifty feet.

     3.     Minimum Lot Depth. The minimum lot depth shall be ninety feet.

     4.     Minimum Front Yard Setback. The standard building setback shall be a minimum of fifteen feet.

     5.     Minimum Side Yard Setback. The minimum side yard setback shall be four feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     6.     Minimum Rear Yard Setback. The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of fifteen feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     7.     Projections into Setback Areas. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setback as per Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than three feet from the property line.

     8.     Setbacks from Sidewalks. Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet.

     E.     Neighborhood C (Four Thousand Square Foot Lot).

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be four thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width, as measured at the building line, shall be fifty feet.

     3.     Minimum Lot Depth. The minimum lot depth shall be eighty feet.

     4.     Minimum Front Yard Setback. The standard building setback shall be a minimum of twelve feet.

     5.     Minimum Side Yard Setback. The minimum side yard setback shall be three feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     6.     Minimum Rear Yard Setback. The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of nine feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     7.     Projections into Setback Areas. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setback as per Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than three feet from the property line.

     8.     Setbacks from Sidewalks. Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet.

     F.     Neighborhood C (Six Thousand Five Hundred Square Foot Lot).

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be six thousand five hundred square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width, as measured at the building line, shall be sixty-five feet.

     3.     Minimum Lot Depth. The minimum lot depth shall be one hundred feet.

     4.     Minimum Front Yard Setback. The standard building setback shall be a minimum of fifteen feet.

     5.     Minimum Side Yard Setback. The minimum side yard setback shall be seven feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     6.     Minimum Rear Yard Setback. The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of fifteen feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     7.     Projections into Setback Areas. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setback as per Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than five feet from the property line.

     8.     Setbacks from Sidewalks. Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet.

     G.    Neighborhood D (Four Thousand Square Foot Lot).

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be four thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width, as measured at the building line, shall be fifty feet.

     3.     Minimum Lot Depth. The minimum lot depth shall be eighty feet.

     4.     Minimum Front Yard Setback. The standard building setback shall be a minimum of twelve feet.

     5.     Minimum Side Yard Setback. The minimum side yard setback shall be three feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     6.     Minimum Rear Yard Setback. The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of nine feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     7.     Projections into Setback Areas. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setback as per Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than three feet from the property line.

     8.     Setbacks from Sidewalks. Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet.

     H.    Neighborhood D (Five Thousand Square Foot Lot).

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be five thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width, as measured at the building line, shall be fifty feet.

     3.     Minimum Lot Depth. The minimum lot depth shall be ninety feet.

     4.     Minimum Front Yard Setback. The standard building setback shall be a minimum of fifteen feet.

     5.     Minimum Side Yard Setback. The minimum side yard setback shall be four feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     6.     Minimum Rear Yard Setback. The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of fifteen feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     7.     Projections into Setback Areas. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setback as per Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than three feet from the property line.

     8.     Setbacks from Sidewalks. Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet.

     I.      Neighborhood E (Five Thousand Square Foot Lot).

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be five thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width, as measured at the building line, shall be fifty feet.

     3.     Minimum Lot Depth. The minimum lot depth shall be ninety feet.

     4.     Minimum Front Yard Setback. The standard building setback shall be a minimum of fifteen feet.

     5.     Minimum Side Yard Setback. The minimum side yard setback shall be four feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     6.     Minimum Rear Yard Setback. The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of fifteen feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     7.     Projections into Setback Areas. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setback as per Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than three feet from the property line.

     8.     Setbacks from Sidewalks. Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet.

     J.      Neighborhood E (Nine Thousand Square Foot Lots Facing Griffith Lane).

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be nine thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width.

     a.     The minimum lot width, as measured at the building line, shall be ninety feet on Lots 136 and 137 of TSM 9332.

     b.     The minimum lot width, as measured at the building line, shall be seventy feet on Lots 138, 139, and 140 of TSM 9332.

     3.     Minimum Lot Depth.

     a.     The minimum lot depth, as measured at the building line, shall be one hundred feet on Lots 136 and 137 of TSM 9332.

     b.     The minimum lot depth, as measured at the building line, shall be one hundred feet on Lots 138, 139, and 140 of TSM 9332.

     4.     Minimum Front Yard Setback. The standard building setback shall be a minimum of fifteen feet.

     5.     Minimum Side Yard Setback. The minimum side yard setback shall be seven feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     6.     Minimum Rear Yard Setback. The rear yard setback for lots shall be a minimum of fifteen feet as measured from the property line to the building foundation.

     7.     Projections into Setback Areas. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, bay windows, fireplace, porches, and fences/gates (as an architectural extension of the house) may project into any required front, side or rear yard setback as per Brentwood Municipal Code Chapter 17.660, except that in no circumstances shall any portion of the house be less than five feet from the property line.

     8.     Setbacks from Sidewalks. Where public sidewalks are located within the confines of a development lot, minimum setbacks shall be measured from the inside of the sidewalk irrespective of the property line location.

     9.     Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height for all structures shall not exceed thirty feet. (Ord. 930 § 2, 2014; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.494.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.033 and 17.100.004(H).

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 with the exception that no feature may project into the minimum front yard.

     F.     The development of this zoning district shall be substantially in accordance with the development plan. Variations in the development plan including street and lot pattern may be approved through the subdivision map process. (Ord. 930 § 2, 2014; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.494.006 Map showing “Neighborhoods” for PD-44.


(Ord. 930 § 2, 2014; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.495 PD-45 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FORTY-FIVE) ZONE
17.495.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-45 (planned development forty-five) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-45 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-45 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of 54.69 acres located north side of Sycamore Avenue, on either side of the future Garin Parkway extension, with low density residential uses in accordance with the Brentwood general plan, for a maximum of one hundred eighty-one lots and five remainder parcels, including two parks, a trail, a residential group home, and an existing gas well.

     C.     Intent. The intent of creating the PD-45 zone is to ensure the coordinated development of the entire property in order to minimize impacts on adjacent areas, while providing for needed housing. The boundary of the PD-45 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.495.006. (Ord. 961 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.495.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the PD-45 zone:

     A.    Single-family dwelling units not exceeding a density of 3.3 units per gross acre for a maximum of one hundred eighty-one units;

     B.     Parks, playgrounds, and recreational trails;

     C.     Those uses permitted under the R-1 zone, Section 17.130.002 of the zoning ordinance;

     D.    A residential group home on parcel “C” of TSM 8534 for up to eighteen women and children;

     E.     An existing gas well site on parcel “D” of TSM 8534, to be developed at a future date with single-family residential uses when the well is abandoned. (Ord. 961 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.495.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are conditionally permitted in the PD-45 zone:

     A.    Those uses conditionally permitted under the R-1 zone, Section 17.130.003 of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.495.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within the PD-45 zone shall comply with the following regulations:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Seven thousand square feet.

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty-five feet at the mid-point.

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Eighty-five feet.

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Twenty-four feet.

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for front-loading garages, with a five-foot architectural encroachment; fifteen feet for side-loading garages, with a five-foot architectural encroachment.

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet, with an aggregate of fifteen feet; except that corner lots on the street side shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of ten feet.

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet.

     H.    Maximum building height: Two stories and thirty feet.

 

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent for two-story homes and forty-five percent for single-story homes.

     J.      Maximum number of dwelling units: One hundred eighty-one, plus a residential group home for up to eighteen women and children. (Ord. 961 § 2, 2016; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.495.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660, with the exception that no feature may project into the minimum front yard setback.

     F.     A residential group home for women and children who are in need of housing and related services shall be provided on parcel “C” of TSM 8534. The home shall accommodate and be a full-time residence for up to eighteen women and children. The home shall include approximately nine bedrooms, staff offices and overnight accommodations, counseling rooms, and family areas. The home shall be operated primarily as a battered women’s shelter and is operated for the benefit of Brentwood residents and their children. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.495.006 Map for PD-45.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.496 PD-46 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FORTY-SIX) ZONE
17.496.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-46 (planned development forty-six) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-46 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-46 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the area shown on the subarea map in Section 17.496.012 in accordance with the Brentwood general plan for a maximum of four hundred ninety-four lots. The PD-46 area is divided into seven subareas as shown on the subarea map in Section 17.496.012.

     C.     Intent. The zoning district is intended to provide a residential area with five distinct neighborhoods with a diverse mix of single-family homes on various lot sizes, an elementary school site, a detention basin, a fire station site, and three parks with recreational amenities and open space in conformance with the adopted general plan. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.496.002 Permitted uses for each subarea.
     A.    Subarea A—Neighborhood 1.

     1.     Single-family dwelling units;

     2.     Parks, playgrounds and recreation trails;

     3.     Other permitted uses identified in Chapter 17.130 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone).

     B.     Subarea B—Neighborhood 2.

     1.     Single-family dwellings units;

     2.     Parks, playgrounds and recreation trails;

     3.     Other permitted uses identified in Chapter 17.130 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone).

     C.     Subarea C—Neighborhood 3.

     1.     Single-family dwellings units;

     2.     Public facilities including schools and fire stations;

     3.     Parks, playgrounds and recreation trails;

     4.     Other permitted uses identified in Chapter 17.130 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone).

     D.    Subarea D—Neighborhood 4.

     1.     Single-family dwellings units;

     2.     Parks, playgrounds and recreation trails;

     3.     Other permitted uses identified in Chapter 17.130 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone).

     E.     Subarea E—Neighborhood 5.

     1.     Single-family dwellings units;

     2.     Flood control facilities;

     3.     Parks, playgrounds and recreation trails;

     4.     Other permitted uses identified in Chapter 17.130 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone).

     F.     Subarea F—Five Thousand Square Foot Lots.

     1.     Single-family dwellings units;

     2.     Parks, playgrounds and recreation trails;

 

     3.     Other permitted uses identified in Chapter 17.130 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone).

     G.    Subarea G—Zipper Lots.

     1.     Single-family dwellings units;

     2.     Parks, playgrounds and recreation trails;

     3.     Other permitted uses identified in Chapter 17.130 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone). (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.496.003 Conditionally permitted uses for each subarea.
     A.    Subarea A.

     1.     Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005 of this title;

     2.     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Chapter 17.130 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone), which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city.

     B.     Subarea B.

     1.     Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005 of this title;

     2.     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Chapter 17.130 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone), which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city.

     C.     Subarea C.

     1.     Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005 of this title;

     2.     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Chapter 17.130 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone), which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city;

     3.     Nursery, childcare, day care center.

     D.    Subarea D.

     1.     Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005 of this title;

     2.     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Section 17.130.003 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone), which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city.

     E.     Subarea E.

     1.     Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005 of this title;

     2.     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Section 17.130.003 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone), which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city.

     F.     Subarea F.

     1.     Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005 of this title;

     2.     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Section 17.130.003 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone), which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city.

     G.    Subarea G.

     1.     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Section 17.130.003 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone), which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.496.004 General development standards for subarea A.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Six thousand four hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty-four feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Eighty-five feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Forty feet;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages, fifteen feet for side-loading garages and living space, and ten feet for front porches;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of ten feet for both sides. For corner lots, the street side yard shall be a minimum of eight feet and a total of thirteen feet for both sides;

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet for main residence and five feet for detached garage;

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories for main residence and fifteen feet and one story for detached garages;

     I.      Minimum detached living unit rear setback: Five feet;

     J.      Minimum detached living unit side setback: Five feet;

     K.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent including main residence and detached garage area. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.496.005 General development standards for subarea B.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Six thousand four hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty-four feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Eighty feet and fifty-five feet for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets at the shortest side property line;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Forty feet;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages, fifteen feet for side-loading garages and living space, and ten feet for front porches;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of ten feet for both sides. For corner lots, the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet and a total of fifteen feet for both sides;

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.496.006 General development standards for subarea C.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Five thousand seven hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Fifty-seven feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Ninety feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Thirty feet;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages, fifteen feet for living space or side-loading garages, and ten feet for front porches;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of ten feet for both sides. For corner lots, the street side yard shall be a minimum of eight feet and a total of thirteen feet for both sides;

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     H.    Maximum building height: thirty feet and two stories for main residence and fifteen feet and one story for detached garages;

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent for single story unit; forty percent for two-story units. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.496.007 General development standards for subarea D.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Six thousand seven hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty-seven feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Seventy-five feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Seventy feet;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages, fifteen feet for side-loading garages or living space, and ten feet for front porches;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of ten feet for both sides. For corner lots, the street side yard setback shall be a minimum of ten feet and a total of fifteen feet for both sides;

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories for main residence and fifteen feet and one story for detached garages;

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent for single-story unit; forty percent for two-story units. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.496.008 General development standards for subarea E.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Seven thousand eight hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Seventy-five feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Eighty-five feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Sixty feet;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages, fifteen feet for side-loading garages or living space, and ten feet for front porches;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of fifteen feet for both sides. For corner lots, the street side yard setback shall be a minimum of ten feet;

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent for single-story unit; forty percent for two-story units. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.496.009 General development standards for subarea F (five thousand square foot lots).
     A.    Minimum lot area: Five thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Fifty feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet;

     D.    Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages;

     E.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of ten feet for both sides;

     F.     Minimum rear yard setback: Fifteen feet for single-story portions, all two-story additions must maintain a minimum twenty feet;

     G.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     H.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.496.010 General development standards for subarea G (zipper lots).
     A.    Minimum lot area: Three thousand six hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Twenty-three feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Ninety-five feet;

     D.    Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages and ten feet for turned garages;

     E.     Minimum side yard setback: Four feet and a total of nine feet for both sides;

     F.     Minimum rear yard setback: Five feet;

     G.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     H.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.496.011 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H) of this title.

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H) of this title.

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016 of this title.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of this title provided lot coverage does not exceed fifty percent.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provision of Chapter 17.660 of this title with the following exceptions:

     1.     Pop-outs at garage doors may encroach two feet into front yard setback;

     2.     Nonstructural elements including flatwork, column flairs, architectural elements, overhangs, and decorative buildouts may encroach up to two feet into all setbacks;

     3.     Setbacks for side loading garages are to be measured to structural walls. Built-out or recessed window elements may encroach up to two feet into front yards.

     F.     Lot width for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets shall be measured thirty feet from the front property line.

     G.    The development of this zoning district shall be substantially in accordance with the development plan. Variations in the development plan including street and lot pattern may be approved through the subdivision map process.

     H.    Fences shall be set back a minimum of five feet from a side yard property line. The homeowner shall be responsible for planting and maintaining attractive landscaping in the area between the fence and sidewalk. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.496.012 Map for PD-46.
 



(Ord. 960 § 19, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.497 PD-47 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FORTY-SEVEN) ZONE
17.497.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-47 (planned development forty-seven) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-47 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones – General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-47 zone is to permit and regulate the development of that portion of the planned employment center identified as parcels D, E and F of subdivision 8199 and that portion of the planned employment center identified as Parcels A, B, and C of subdivision 8200 and designated as office/business (OB) in the city’s general plan land use element

     C.     Intent. It is intended that in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-47 zone of implementing the development of a planned employment center and associated residential project in conformance with the Brentwood community development plan and redevelopment plan and in accordance with the Walnut commercial master plan, said zone shall be divided into four subareas as geographically designated on the development plan and related exhibits and as further described below. The boundaries of the PD-47 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.497.007. The primary character of the area is intended to be a mix of residential, commercial, office, and industrial uses. Light industrial and service uses may be allowed, provided that they are found compatible with the primary uses. Small scale support commercial uses shall be allowed to serve the surrounding community of major office complexes.

     1.     Subarea A consists of approximately four and two tenths net acres (Parcels A, B, and C), intended for the development of approximately forty-five thousand square feet of commercial, office, and light industrial uses, including supporting retail services compatible with an office/business center.

     2.     Subarea B consists of approximately three net acres, (Parcels E and D), adjacent and south of subarea A, intended for the development of approximately forty thousand square feet of lease space to serve the office, research and development, commercial and service commercial needs of the Brentwood community, including supporting retail services compatible with an office, business, and technology center.

     3.     Subarea C consists of approximately 24.8 acres adjacent and west of subarea’s B and D, intended for low density residential uses in accordance with the Brentwood general plan and this PD.

     4.     Subarea D consists of approximately 5.79 acres adjacent and east of subarea C, intended for the development of approximately sixty-four thousand square feet of office, research and development, commercial, service commercial and light industrial uses, including supporting retail services compatible with an office, business, technology and light industrial center. (Ord. 1019 § 1, 2020; Ord. 958 § 2, 2015; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.497.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-47 zone:

     A.    Subarea A. The following uses shall be permitted within this subarea:

 

     1.     Business and professional offices, such as software developers, architects, attorneys, accountants and office uses which are supplementary to industrial, business or commercial uses;

     2.     General office uses;

     3.     Service uses supportive of light industrial/office uses, such as coffee and sandwich shops, dry cleaners, laundry, health club, recreation club, and similar services. Secondary uses could occupy up to ten percent of the total building square footage with no more than two thousand five hundred square feet per use;

     4.     Research and development space which includes both office, support, and warehouse/research areas;

     5.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator.

     B.     Subarea B. The following shall be permitted within this subarea:

     1.     General office uses;

     2.     Business and professional offices, such as software developers, architects, attorneys, accountants and office uses which are supplementary to industrial, business or commercial uses;

     3.     Research and development space which includes both office, support, and warehouse/research areas (flex-tech);

     4.     Service uses supportive of office/flex-tech uses, such as coffee and sandwich shops, dry cleaners, laundry, health club, recreation club, and similar services. Secondary uses can occupy up to ten percent of the total building square footage with no more than two thousand square feet per use;

     5.     Medical or dental laboratories, medical or dental office or clinic;

     6.     Commercial uses including, but not limited to, uses which may or may not manufacture their primary product on the premises such as a drapery shop, cabinet shop, or upholstery shop;

     7.     Services uses including, but not limited to, appliance, television and radio repair, small equipment repair or service;

     8.     Light metal fabrication, machine shops, small welding shops, small assembly, and printing shop;

     9.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator.

     C.     Subarea C. The following shall be permitted in Subarea C:

     1.     Those uses permitted under the R-1 zone, Section 17.130.002;

     2.     Parks, recreational trails, and water quality basins.

     D.    Subarea D. The following shall be permitted with this subarea. All uses shall be conducted indoors unless otherwise noted.

     1.     General office uses;

     2.     Business and professional offices, such as software developers, architects, attorneys, accountants and office uses which are supplementary to industrial, business or commercial uses;

     3.     Research and development space that includes both office, support, and warehouse/research areas (flex-tech);

     4.     Services uses supportive of office/flex-tech uses, such as coffee and sandwich shops, dry cleaners, laundry, health club, recreation club, and similar services. Secondary uses can occupy up to ten percent of the total building square footage with no more than two thousand square feet per use;

     5.     A maximum of five thousand square feet for restaurant uses. A microbrewery is allowed in conjunction with a primary restaurant use;

     6.     Indoor recreational facilities such as a dance studio, gymnastics facility, karate or fitness facility including ancillary daycare facilities;

     7.     Medical or dental laboratories, medical or dental office or clinic;

     8.     Commercial uses including, but not limited to, uses which may or may not manufacture their primary product on the premises such as a drapery shop, cabinet shop, or upholstery shop;

     9.     Service uses including, but not limited to appliance, television and radio repair; barber or beauty shop; butcher, meat market, including frozen food locker; shoe repair; small equipment repair or service; clock or watch repair;

     10.   Light metal fabrication, machine shops, small welding shops, small assembly, and printing shop;

     11.   Light industrial uses including, but not limited to:

     a.     Commercial laundromat and commercial dry cleaning establishments;

     b.     Printer and copier establishments;

     c.     Welding shop;

     d.     Biotechnology research, development and production operations, including cosmetic, drug, medicinal and pharmaceutical products;

     e.     Appliance repair;

     f.      Cabinet, woodworking, draper, or upholstery shops, furniture manufacturing or assembly uses;

     g.     Glass and window services;

     h.     Photographic equipment and supplies;

     i.      Special trades;

     j.      Small scale manufacturing and assembly plants;

     k.     Light fabricating services;

     l.      Laboratories, commercial testing, research and experimental;

     m.    Manufacturing of scientific, analytical, optical, medical, and dental goods, apparatus, measuring and controlling instruments;

     n.     Professional, scientific and precision equipment;

     o.     Construction-related sales, contractors, suppliers, services and industries, except heavy construction and equipment:

     i.      Building and carpentry,

     ii.     Irrigation,

     iii.    Plumbing,

     iv.    Electrical,

     v.     HVAC,

     vi.    Landscaping and plant nursery supplies,

     vii.   Engineering;

     p.     Warehouse, distribution, shipping and wholesale of materials and equipment of an industrial, automotive, fabrication, manufacturing and construction nature;

     12.   Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 1019 § 1, 2020; Ord. 958 § 2, 2015; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.497.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830, the following uses are permitted in the PD-47 zone

     A.    Subarea A. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this subarea:

     1.     Public and quasi-public uses appropriate to and compatible with the area such as hospitals, medical laboratory, outpatient care facility, business and technical schools, and full service financial institutions;

     2.     Restaurants;

     3.     Secondary uses could occupy up to fifteen percent of the total building square footage with no more than three thousand square feet per use. Drive-thru access to supportive services allowed with a conditional use permit only.

     B.     Subarea B. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this area:

     1.     Public and quasi-public uses appropriate to and compatible with the area such as hospitals, outpatient care facility, business and technical schools, and full service financial institutions;

     2.     Restaurants;

     3.     Drive-thru access to supportive services allowed with a conditional use permit only;

     4.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the zoning administrator.

     C.     Subarea C. Upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830, those uses permitted under the R-1 zone, section 17.130.003.

     D.    Subarea D. The following uses shall be conditionally permitted within this area. All uses shall be conducted indoors unless otherwise noted.

     1.     Public and quasi-public uses appropriate to and compatible with the area such as hospitals, outpatient care facility, business and technical schools, and full service financial institutions;

     2.     Automobile repair or service;

     3.     Auto body repair and service, including painting;

     4.     Drive-thru access to supportive services;

     5.     Other uses that the zoning administrator determines because of the type of operation, material stored or sold or other special circumstance requiring special consideration and conditioning through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 1019 § 1, 2020; Ord. 958 § 2, 2015; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.497.004 Development standards.
     All nonresidential permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth as follows:

     A.    Subarea A.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum street frontage yard: Ten feet;

     4.     Minimum non-street frontage yard: Zero feet;

     5.     Minimum building height: One story not to exceed twenty-four feet, two story not to exceed forty feet. Structures greater than two stories or forty feet may be permitted, subject to variance approval.

     B.     Subarea B.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum street frontage yard: Ten feet;

     4.     Minimum non-street frontage yard: Zero feet;

     5.     Minimum building height: One story not to exceed twenty-four feet, two story not to exceed forty feet. Structures greater than two stories or forty feet may be permitted, subject to variance approval.

     C.     Subarea C.

     1.     Minimum lot size: Eight thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Eighty-five feet as measured from the rear property line;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: Eighty-five feet except at curved streets, culs-de-sac, and knuckles;

     4.     Minimum lot frontage: Eighty-five feet except at curved streets, culs-de-sac, and knuckles;

     5.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet to front loading garages, fifteen feet to side-loading garages and building walls;

     6.     Minimum side yard setback: Seven feet with an aggregate of twenty feet (ten feet on the street side of corner lots);

     7.     Minimum rear yard setback: Fifteen feet;

     8.     Architectural features may project into any required setback pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660;

     9.     Maximum building height: Thirty feet or two stories;

     10.   A minimum of twenty-five percent of the lots shall have single-story units;

     11.   Maximum number of units: One hundred fifty;

     12.   Side-loading garage: Ten percent of the lots shall have side-loading garages;

     13.   Fifty percent of the corner lots shall have single-story units;

     14.   Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent for two-story homes and forty-five percent for single-story homes;

     15.   Maximum fence height: The maximum fence height may exceed the six-foot standard if approved by the community development director to address land use compatibility issues between the existing single- family homes and the existing and proposed non-residential.

     D.    Subarea D.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Ten thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum street frontage yard: Ten feet;

     4.     Minimum non-street frontage yard: Zero feet;

     5.     Minimum building height: One story not to exceed twenty-four feet, two story not to exceed forty feet. Structures greater than two stories or forty feet may be permitted, subject to variance approval.

     E.     Architectural Design.

     1.     Subarea A. All buildings within subarea A shall be constructed with the same architectural theme, design and materials.

     2.     Subarea B. All buildings within subarea B shall be constructed with the same architectural design, theme and material.

     3.     Subarea C. Architectural and landscape design shall be approved through City of Brentwood’s design review process.

     4.     Subarea D. All new buildings within subarea D shall be constructed with the same architectural design, theme and material

     F.     Other Regulations.

     1.     Refuse Disposal Enclosure. All facilities shall provide masonry refuse disposal enclosures to city standards and specifications. Refuse pick-up shall be prohibited between the hours of six p.m. and seven a.m.

     2.     Illumination of Parking Facilities and Structures. All facilities shall provide adequate lighting or illumination of parking facilities and structures pursuant to Chapter 17.620.

     3.     Parking Lot Design and Development Standards. All facilities shall comply with the design and development standards of Chapter 17.620, except as follows:

     Off-Street Parking Spaces Required, PD-47 Zone. Except as specified in Section 17.620.012 there shall be required for permitted uses in all PD-47 zones, business, professional and financial office parking at a rate of one space for each two hundred fifty feet of gross floor area.

     4.     Open Storage or Display. Open storage and/or outdoor display of merchandise is prohibited.

     5.     Landscaping and Screening. Subareas A, B and D. Landscaping and screening shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.630 except as follows:

     a.     The minimum width of landscaping along Walnut Boulevard shall be twenty feet. The minimum width of landscaping along Continente shall be five feet when separating parking and ten feet when separating buildings. All other secondary streets/drives shall be minimum of five feet except where parking is directly off-street, this is only allowed at one hundred feet minimum distance to major intersections and twenty feet minimum from secondary intersections. Widths shall be measured from the face of curb to the edge of a building or parking lot. A public sidewalk is typically included within this required width, with the following exception: when widths are less than ten feet, no sidewalk shall be allowed.

     b.     At the time of development, landscaping shall be installed along any property line abutting a residential zone district. The required landscaping shall consist of the following:

     i.      Minimum width of the landscaped area shall be five feet;

     ii.     Landscape fingers or tree wells perpendicular to the perimeter landscaping shall be provided no more than ten parking spaces apart;

     iii.    Evergreen trees shall be planted in areas in subdivisions (i) and (ii) of this subsection such that a visual screen is created.

     6.     Advertising Signs. All signs shall be subject to Chapter 17.640.

     7.     Yards. All required yards shall be utilized for landscaping only, except for access drives to the property. Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     8.     Accessory structures and buildings shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     9.     Security Measures. All facilities shall provide security measures in accordance with city standards and subject to design review.

     10.   Energy Conservation. All facilities shall, to the greatest extent possible, incorporate energy conservation measures in conformance with city standards and subject to design review.

     11.   Manufacturing and Storage Areas. All manufacturing processes shall be within a structure and all open storage areas shall be screened with a minimum six-foot high view-obscuring fence. No storage shall exceed the height of the fence. Solid walls shall be utilized for screening areas visible from a public street. (Ord. 1019 § 1, 2020; Ord. 958 § 2, 2015; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.497.005 Performance standards for subareas A, B and D.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within subarea A shall conform to the performance standards set forth below

     A.    Noise.

     1.     At the property line, the maximum sound pressure level radiated by listed uses or facilities shall not exceed the following values:

     a.     Industrial and warehouse: 75 dBA;

     b.     Retail, commercial, office, schools, churches: 65 dBA.

     2.     The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer conforming to the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association.

     3.     American Standards Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, Z224.3-1944, American Standards Association, Inc. New York, NY, and American Standard Specification for Octave-Band Filter Set for Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, Z224.10-1953, or latest approved revision thereof, American Standards Association, Inc. New York, NY shall be used.

     B.     Heat, Glare and Humidity.

     1.     Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.

     2.     Any operation or activity producing glare shall be performed within a completely enclosed building and be conducted so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one foot-candle when measured at the lot line. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded and flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled so as not to cause nuisance across lot lines.

     3.     Any use producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat, shall be carried on in such a manner that steam, humidity or heat is not perceptible at any lot line

     C.     Vibration. Any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any point along the property line of the subject use, earth-borne vibrations which are discernable without the use of instruments is prohibited.

     D.    Fire, Safety and Explosion. All uses shall provide adequate safety devices against fire, explosion and other hazards and adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment in compliance with applicable fire prevention and building codes.

     E.     Soundproofing. Offices, retail activities and other acoustically-sensitive activities shall be designed so that interior noise levels due to exterior noise sources do not exceed the peak hour Leq of 55 dBA.

     F.     Solid and Liquid Waste.

     1.     No discharge at any point into public sewer, system or bay into the ground shall be permitted, except in accord with standards approved by the State Department of Health, or standards specified in applicable local ordinances for similar uses of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements.

     2.     No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any property in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the property by natural causes or forces.

     3.     Any wastes which might be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers.

     G.    Electrical and Radioactive Radiation. No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbances adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbances.

     H.    Air Pollution. All uses shall comply with regulations of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District.

     1.     Smoke. For the purpose of determining the density or equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines in Circular No. 7718 (August, 1995) shall be employed. The emission of smoke from any chimney, stack, vent, opening, or combustion process shall not exceed Ringlemann No. 1.

     2.     Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the property line of the subject use.

     3.     Toxic and Noxious Matter. No use shall be permitted which creates any emission which endangers human health, can cause damage to animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause soiling at any point beyond the boundaries of the site. (Ord. 1019 § 1, 2020; Ord. 958 § 2, 2015; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.497.006 Design and site development review.
     The design and site development of all new structures within each subarea shall comply with Chapter 17.820. (Ord. 1019 § 1, 2020; Ord. 958 § 2, 2015; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.497.007 Map for PD-47.
 



 

(Ord. 1019 § 1, 2020; Ord. 958 § 2, 2015; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.499 PD-49 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FORTY-NINE) ZONE
17.499.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-49 zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-49 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose. Consistent with “smart growth” planning principles, the purpose of the PD-49 zone is to permit and regulate mixed-use development of approximately sixty-four gross acres located south of Balfour Road, west of existing Concord Avenue/future Highway 4 Bypass, and to allow for the phased development of a mix of medical campus, office, retail, public and quasi-public and residential uses, variations in density and building intensities, innovative design characteristics, that would not normally be permitted in a single-use zone, and retention of greater flexibility to adjust square footage allocated to each permitted use. The precise square footage for each use would be determined at the time of approval of the development plans as described below. The land covered by this PD-49 zone is designated by the Brentwood general plan as a special planning area (SPA) Q, to be developed consistent with this PD-49 zone.

     C.     Intent. It is intended that, in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-49 zone of implementing a medical campus, mixed-use development in conformance with the Brentwood general plan, development within the PD-49 zone shall be consistent with the permitted and conditionally permitted uses set forth below. It is further intended that in order to provide for the phased development of the property, development of portions of the property may occur upon the approval of a development plan for each such phase. The subareas shall be as shown in the map in Section 17.499.008 of this chapter and made a part of this chapter, and as further described below. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.499.002 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses in subarea A.
     The following uses are permitted “by right” in subarea A:

     A.    Medical facilities, medical offices, hospitals, inpatient and outpatient medical care, birthing facilities, dialysis units, medical and dental laboratory, convalescent hospitals, large residential care facilities, including residential, congregate residential and convalescent care, medical schools and teaching facilities, a single emergency helipad, facilities for the care of the sick or elderly, health club or recreational club, veterinary clinic, public and quasi-public uses, such as government office, library, employment office, and utility offices;

     B.     Professional and business offices;

     C.     General retail sales and services;

     D.    Day care facilities;

     E.     Hotels;

     F.     Other similar uses as determined by the community development director.

     The following uses are permitted within subarea A subject to approval of a conditional use permit:

     A.    Restaurants;

     B.     Drive-in or drive-thru establishments related to a permitted use;

     C.     Auto service station, car wash, tire shop, new or used car sales, vehicular repair;

     D.    Outdoor sales or display;

     E.     Churches, synagogues, or temples;

     F.     Crematoriums;

     G.    Other similar uses as determined by the community development director. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.499.003 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses in subarea B.
     The following uses are permitted “by right” in subarea B:

     A.    Professional and business offices;

     B.     Facilities for the care of the elderly including residential, congregate residential and convalescent care; health club or recreational club; veterinary clinic; public and quasi-public uses such as government office, library, employment office, utility offices, and similar uses, including day care facilities;

     C.     General retail sales and services;

     D.    Medium to high to very high density multifamily residential not exceeding an average density of twenty-five units per acre;

     E.     Other similar uses as determined by the community development director.

     The following uses are permitted within subarea B subject to approval of a conditional use permit:

     A.    Hotels;

     B.     Mixed residential and nonresidential uses within the same structure, except as permitted above;

     C.     Other similar uses as determined by the community development director. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.499.004 Permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses in subarea C.
     The following uses are permitted “by right” in subarea C:

     A.    Medical facilities, medical offices, hospitals, inpatient and outpatient medical care, birthing facilities, dialysis units, medical and dental laboratory, convalescent hospitals, large residential care facilities, including residential, congregate residential and convalescent care, medical schools and teaching facilities, a single emergency helipad, facilities for the care of the sick or elderly, health club or recreational club, veterinary clinic, public and quasi-public uses, such as government office, library, employment office, and utility offices;

     B.     Professional and business offices;

     C.     General retail sales and services;

     D.    Other similar uses as determined by the community development director.

     The following uses are permitted within subarea C subject to approval of a conditional use permit:

     A.    Restaurants;

     B.     A drive-in or drive-thru associated with a drug store pharmacy use only;

     C.     Auto service station, car wash, tire shop, new or used car sales, vehicular repair;

     D.    Outdoor sales or display;

     E.     Churches, synagogues, or temples;

     F.     Crematoriums;

     G.    Other similar uses as determined by the community development director. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.499.005 Permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses in subarea D.
     The following uses are permitted “by right” in subarea D:

     A.    Professional and business offices;

     B.     Facilities for the care of the elderly including residential, congregate residential and convalescent care; health club or recreational club; veterinary clinic; public and quasi-public uses such as government office, library, employment office, utility offices, and similar uses, including day care facilities;

     C.     Retail sales and services that are ancillary to specifically permitted uses, limited to ten percent of the total building area on the parcel;

     D.    Day care facilities.

     The following uses are permitted within subarea D subject to approval of a conditional use permit:

     A.    Hotels;

     B.     Churches, synagogues, and temples;

     C.     Other similar uses as determined by the community development director;

     D.    Structures exceeding the maximum building height permitted in subarea “D”;

     E.     Building encroachments into the minimum non-street setbacks in subarea “D.” (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.499.006 Development standards.
     A.    Minimum lot area. One acre for all four subareas. Smaller parcel sizes may be permitted if they are part of an overall master plan.

     B.     Maximum building height:

 

Subarea A

Seventy-five feet, not to exceed six stories

Subarea B

Forty feet, not to exceed three stories

Subarea C

Forty feet, not to exceed three stories

Subarea D

Thirty feet, not to exceed two stories

 

     C.     Building setbacks:

 

Balfour Road

Fifty feet in subarea A

Fifteen feet in subarea C

Concord Avenue

Fifty feet

Highway 4 Bypass

Fifty feet

John Muir Parkway

Fifty feet

Eagle Rock Avenue

Twenty-five feet

Non-street setbacks

Five feet in subareas A and C

Ten feet in subarea B

Ten feet in subarea D for a one-story building

Twenty feet in subarea D for a two-story building

(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.499.007 Conceptual site plan.
     Development in this zone shall be subject to being in substantial conformance with the development plan and related exhibits unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.499.008 Map for PD-49.
 



(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.500 PD-50 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FIFTY) ZONE
17.500.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-50 (planned development fifty) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-50 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-50 zone is to permit and regulate the development of the Casitas Del Sol project, as designated in the city council’s planning and zoning ordinances as a high-density multifamily residential zone, permitting maximum flexibility in development in order to accommodate a single-family housing product affordable to city of Brentwood residents.

     C.     Intent. The boundary of the PD-50 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.500.006. It is intended that, in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-50 zone, the development of this property will be undertaken in accordance with the Brentwood general plan as follows:

     1.     A maximum of nine homes will be developed on the property.

     2.     Minimum of three thousand square foot lots will be created. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.500.002 Permitted uses.
     Those uses identified in Section 17.150.002 of the Brentwood Municipal Code will be permitted by right within the PD-50 zone. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.500.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a use permit, those uses identified in Section 17.150.003 of the Brentwood Municipal Code may be permitted in the PD-50 zone. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.500.004 Regulations for lot area, yards, height and related matters.
     A.    All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     1.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet;

     2.     Minimum side yard setback: Zero feet with an aggregate of ten feet. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard setback on the street side of ten feet;

     3.     Minimum rear yard setback: Fifteen feet;

     4.     Minimum lot size: Three thousand square feet;

     5.     Minimum lot width: Thirty-six feet;

     6.     Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent;

     7.     Maximum building height limit: Two stories not to exceed thirty feet.

     B.     Other Regulations:

     1.     Landscaping and Screening. All facilities shall provide landscaping and screening in accordance with Chapter 17.630 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     2.     Accessory structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 provided that the maximum lot coverage ratio is not exceeded.

     3.     Energy Conservation. All facilities shall, to the greatest extent possible, incorporate energy conservation measures in conformance with city standards and subject to design review approval. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.500.005 Design and site development review.
     The design and site development review procedure contained in Chapter 17.820 of the Brentwood Municipal Code shall apply to this planned development. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.500.006 Map for PD-50.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.503 PD-53 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FIFTY-THREE) ZONE
17.503.001 Authority and purpose.
     The authority, purpose, and intent for the adoption of the PD-53 (Planned Development Fifty-Three) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-53 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-53 zone is to permit and regulate to orderly development of job-generating uses with complementary medium, high, or very-high density residential uses of up to four hundred seventy-five dwelling units. The boundaries of the PD-53 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.503.015. (Ord. 1002 § 2, 2018; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.503.002 Permitted uses.
     Permitted uses in the PD-53 zone are those permitted under R-1 (single-family residential) zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 1007 § 4, 2018; Ord. 1002 § 2, 2018; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.503.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Conditionally permitted uses identified in the R-1 zoning district in Title 17, which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city. (Ord. 1007 § 4, 2018; Ord. 1002 § 2, 2018; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.503.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the planned development zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Four thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Fifty feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Eighty feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: One-half the required lot width;

     E.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet to the garage, ten feet to any primary building wall;

     F.     Minimum side yard: Five feet. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street of ten feet;

     G.    Minimum rear yard: Fifteen feet;

     H.    Maximum building height: Two stories not to exceed thirty-two feet;

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Fifty percent. (Ord. 1007 § 4, 2018; Ord. 1002 § 2, 2018; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.503.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660. (Ord. 1007 § 4, 2018; Ord. 1002 § 2, 2018; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.503.014 Map for PD-53.


 

(Ord. 1007 § 4, 2018; Ord. 1002 § 2, 2018; Ord. 960 § 20, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.504 PD-54 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FIFTY-FOUR) ZONE
17.504.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose, and intent for the adoption of the PD-54 (planned development number fifty-four) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. This zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-54 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of 9.10 acres located generally east of O’Hara Avenue, west of Adams Lane, south of the future extension of Big Basin Drive, and north of the East Bay Municipal Utility District Mokelumne Aqueduct with low density residential uses in accordance with the Brentwood General Plan.

     C.     Intent. The intent of creating the PD-54 zone is to ensure the coordinated development of the entire property in order to minimize impacts on adjacent properties. The boundaries of the PD-54 zoning district are as shown on the map in Section 17.504.005. (Ord. 949 § 2, 2015)

 

17.504.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the PD-54 zone:

     A.    Those permitted under the R-1 zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 949 § 2, 2015)

 

17.504.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830, the following uses are permitted:

     A.    Those uses conditionally permitted under the R-1 zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 949 § 2, 2015)

 

17.504.004 Development standards.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within the PD-54 zone shall comply with the following regulations:

     A.    Minimum lot size: Eight thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Seventy feet;

     C.     Minimum lot width on curvilinear streets and knuckles shall be measured thirty feet from the front property line;

     D.    Minimum lot depth: One hundred ten feet;

     E.     Minimum lot frontage: Forty-five feet;

     F.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet to any street-facing garage, fifteen feet to the wall of any living space or the wall of a turned garage;

     G.    Minimum side yard: Five feet with an aggregate setback of fifteen feet and all corner lots must maintain a street-side side yard setback of ten feet;

     H.    Minimum rear yard: Twenty feet;

     I.      Maximum building height: Thirty-one feet and two stories;

     J.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent for single-story units and forty percent for two-story units;

     K.    Corner lot fence setback: Five feet from the street-side property line, all other fence regulations shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 17.660 of this title;

     L.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660;

     M.    Side loading garage: Ten percent of the lots shall have side-loading garages;

     N.    A minimum of twenty-five percent of the lots shall have single-story units;

     O.    A minimum of fifty percent of corner lots shall have single-story units. (Ord. 949 § 2, 2015)

 

17.504.005 Map for PD-54.
 

http://gis.brentwoodca.gov/Geocortex/Essentials/REST/TempFiles/Export.jpg?guid=416ca639-ea3e-4e9a-afc9-effd17e5b6b2&contentType=image%2Fjpeg

(Ord. 949 § 2, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.505 PD-55 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FIFTY-FIVE) ZONE
17.505.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-55 zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-55 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-55 zone is to permit and regulate the phased development of a mix of uses consistent with the general plan on the approximately sixty-one gross acres encompassed by the zone. The general plan identifies the PD-55 zone within planned development. PD-55 is bounded by a single-family home subdivision on the north, a single-family home subdivision on the east, mixed-use commercial and medium density residential on the south, and Brentwood Boulevard on the west. Planned development policies are intended to mirror policies and the mixed land uses described in the PD-55 zone for a range of uses including retail commercial businesses, professional office uses, limited light industrial uses, and single-family residential uses. Land use flexibility for this large in-fill parcel is warranted due to its strategic location adjacent to two arterial roadways including Brentwood Boulevard and Sand Creek Road.

     C.     Intent. To achieve the foregoing purpose, the PD-55 zone is divided into six subareas; the subareas as shown on the map in Section 17.505.009. Several subareas include internal land use flexibility per the Zoning Matrix in Section 17.505.008 and shall be developed as generally described below:

     1.     Subarea 1 consists of the southwestern approximately 5.94 acres and is intended for the development of commercial uses that meet the needs of Brentwood and the region.

     2.     Subarea 2 consists of the central western approximately 2.63 acres north of Sand Creek Road, and is intended for the development of commercial uses that meet the needs of Brentwood and the region.

     3.     Subarea 3 consists of approximately 31.13 acres, north of Sand Creek Road, and is intended for the development of single-family detached residential uses that are generally compatible with adjacent residential development. Residential lots adjacent to the northern boundary of Subarea 3 are intended to meet a minimum four thousand square foot lot size, which is typical of the adjacent development to the north. The balance of Subarea 3 consists of small-lot single-family detached residential development.

     4.     Subarea 4 consists of the eastern approximately 3.81 acres located on the north side of Sand Creek Road. Subarea 4 is established to serve primarily as a usable park, with a portion comprised of landscape and water quality basin, and as a buffer to existing residential subdivisions to the north and east. Development within Subarea 4 is intended to provide a north-south pedestrian link.

     5.     Subarea 5 consists of the eastern approximately 2.23 acres located on the south side of Sand Creek Road. Subarea 5 is established to serve primarily as a usable park, with a portion comprised of landscape and water quality basin, and as a buffer to existing residential subdivisions to the south and east. Development within Subarea 5 is intended to provide a north-south pedestrian link.

     6.     Subarea 6 consists of the central approximately 14.79 acres south of Sand Creek Road and is intended for single-family detached residential uses. Residential lots adjacent to the southern boundary of Subarea 6 are intended to meet a minimum four thousand square foot lot size, which is typical of the adjacent development to the south. The balance of Subarea 6 consists of small-lot single-family detached residential development.

     7.     Each of Subareas 1 through 6 may be developed in phases. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 962 § 2, 2016; Ord. 871 § 2, 2009)

 

17.505.002 Permitted uses.
     See Section 17.505.008, which identifies permitted land uses acceptable per individual subareas. Permitted uses must comply with the Sciortino Ranch Design Guidelines. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 962 § 2, 2016; Ord. 871 § 2, 2009)

 

17.505.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     See Section 17.505.008, which identifies conditionally permitted land uses acceptable per individual subareas. Upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830, said uses shall be allowed in the PD-55 zone. Conditionally permitted uses must comply with design standards established in the Sciortino Ranch Design Guidelines. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 962 § 2, 2016; Ord. 871 § 2, 2009)

 

17.505.004 Development standards.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within the subareas shall conform to the following standards as applicable:

     A.    Basic Standards Are Included in the Sciortino Ranch Design Guidelines.

     1.     General commercial, office, and light industrial/R&D development standards are included in the Sciortino Ranch Design Guidelines.

     2.     Single-family residential standards are included in the Sciortino Ranch Design Guidelines. All residential development in the PD-55 zone is exempt from the city of Brentwood Residential Growth Management Program for a period of five years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     B.     Residential density—Densities are defined as follows:

     1.     In Subarea 3, development shall not exceed a density of eight dwelling units per gross acre.

     2.     In Subarea 6, development shall not exceed a density of eight dwelling units per gross acre.

     C.     Landscaping and Screening. Landscaping and screening requirements for each phase of development within PD-55 shall be specified in a master landscaping and screening program for PD-55 approved by the planning commission or in the design and site development review approval for each phase. All landscaping and screening shall adhere to Chapter 17.630 and the city’s adopted Urban Forest Guidelines. All establishments in PD-55 with drive-through windows or counters for the purpose of selling food or merchandise to the general public shall screen those windows and counters from view from the public right-of-way by extensive shrub and tree landscaping, landscaped berms, walls, trellises, or combination thereof. Such screening will be reviewed and approved by the city through the design review or conditional use permit process specified in Chapter 17.820 or 17.830.

     D.    Advertising Signs. The design and site development review approval for each phase of nonresidential development within the PD-55 zone shall require an application for, and approval of, a master sign program. All signs within the PD-55 zone shall conform to the planned sign program as the same may be amended from time to time pursuant to Chapter 17.640, Sign Ordinance.

     E.     Other Development Standards.

     1.     Refuse Disposal Enclosure. All commercial facilities shall provide masonry refuse disposal enclosures to city standards and specifications.

     2.     Illumination of Parking Facilities and Structures. All facilities shall provide adequate lighting or illumination of parking facilities and structures pursuant to Chapter 17.620 with IESNA-classified cut-off or full cut-off fixtures with a maximum height of twenty-five feet to the light source for pedestrian oriented lighting and thirty feet to the light source for parking lot lighting.

     3.     Parking Lot Design and Development Standards. All facilities shall comply with Chapter 17.620.

     4.     Open Storage or Display. Open storage and/or outdoor display of merchandise is permitted only if conducted within an area designated and in accordance with standards specified in a design and site development review approval pursuant to Chapter 17.820, or as expressly provided for by a conditional use permit.

     5.     Accessory structures and buildings shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     6.     Security Measures. All facilities shall provide security measures in accordance with city standards and subject to design review in accordance with Chapter 17.820. No barbed or razor wire shall be utilized in conjunction with any said facilities.

     7.     Energy Conservation. All facilities shall, to the greatest extent possible, incorporate energy conservation measures in conformance with city standards and subject to design review.

     8.     Manufacturing and Storage Areas. All manufacturing processes shall be within a structure and all open storage areas except those for display of farm vehicles and implements shall be screened with a minimum six-foot high masonry wall. No storage shall exceed the height of the wall.

     9.     There shall be no overnight parking of mobile homes, recreational vehicles, buses or campers in the public parking or common areas of PD-55, nor any display of vehicles for sale by owners at any time. There shall also be no permanent or long term storage of merchandise or equipment in the parking areas or sidewalks at any time, with the exception of those areas specifically approved for such uses pursuant to the conditional use permit provisions in Chapter 17.830.

     10.   Development may occur in phases.

     11.   Any other applicable city standards and regulations.

     12.   Development of Subareas 3 and 4 shall require compliance with the provisions of Chapter 17.680 (Oil and Gas Production).

     13.   All development applications within the PD-55 zone shall be reviewed for compliance with the final environmental impact report for the Sciortino Ranch project, including all mitigation measures. All development applications shall also be reviewed for compliance with Vesting Tentative Subdivision Map No. 9356, including all conditions of approval. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 962 § 2, 2016; Ord. 871 § 2, 2009)

 

17.505.005 Performance standards.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within the subareas shall conform to the performance standards set forth below:

     A.    Noise. All noise generated by development within the PD-55 zone shall be consistent with the requirements set forth in the Noise Element of the general plan and in Chapter 9.32 (Noise Regulations) of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Heat, Glare and Humidity.

     1.     Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines;

     2.     Any operation or activity producing glare shall be performed within a completely enclosed building and be conducted so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one foot candle when measured at the lot line. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded and flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled so as not to cause a nuisance across lot lines;

     3.     Any use producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat, shall be carried on in such a manner that the source of steam, humidity or heat is not perceptible from the public property line.

     C.     Vibration. Any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any point along the property line of the subject use, earth-borne vibrations which are discernible without the use of instruments is prohibited.

     D.    Fire, Safety and Explosion. All uses shall provide adequate safety devices against fire, explosion and other hazards and adequate firefighting and fire-suppression equipment in compliance with applicable fire prevention and building codes.

     E.     Soundproofing. Residential and other acoustically-sensitive activities shall be designed so that interior noise levels due to exterior noise sources do not exceed the requirements of the noise element of the general plan or Chapter 9.32, Noise Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     F.     Solid and Liquid Waste.

     1.     No discharge at any point into public sewer, stream or bay or into the ground shall be permitted, except in accord with the standards approved by the State Department of Health, or standards specified in applicable local ordinances for similar uses of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements;

     2.     No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any property in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the property by natural causes or forces;

     3.     Any wastes which might be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers.

     G.    Electrical and Radioactive Radiation. No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, or create an electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.

     H.    Air Pollution. All uses shall comply with regulations of the San Francisco Bay Area Air Pollution Control District.

     1.     Smoke. For the purpose of determining the density or equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines in Circular No. 7718 (August, 1955) shall be employed. The emission of smoke from any chimney, stack, vent, opening or combustion process shall not exceed Ringlemann No. 1;

     2.     Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the property line of the subject use;

     3.     Toxic and Noxious Matter. No use shall be permitted which creates any emission which endangers human health, can cause damage to animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause soiling at any point beyond the boundaries of the site. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 962 § 2, 2016; Ord. 871 § 2, 2009)

 

17.505.006 Design and site development review.
     The design and site development of each phase within the PD-55 zone shall comply with Chapter 17.820 (Design and Site Development Review) of the Brentwood Municipal Code. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 962 § 2, 2016; Ord. 871 § 2, 2009)

 

17.505.007 Conceptual site plan.
     Development in the subareas shall be subject to being in substantial conformance with the Sciortino Ranch Design Guidelines, unless otherwise approved by the city council through an amendment to this chapter. Any modification to the subarea boundaries depicted in Section 17.505.009 shall require an amendment to the subarea map, which shall be reviewed and approved by the community development director. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 962 § 2, 2016; Ord. 871 § 2, 2009)

 

17.505.008 Zoning matrix of land uses by subareas for PD-55.
 

Symbol Legend

P = Permitted Use1

C = Conditional Use Permit Required2

 

 

Commercial

Residential

Park and Water Quality

LAND USES3

Subarea 1

Subarea 2

Subarea 3

Subarea 6

Subarea 4

Subarea 5

Commercial Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

Self-service storage facilities4

C

C

 

 

 

 

Light industrial uses which generate minimal noise, odor, smoke, and waste material5

C

C

 

 

 

 

Sports bar, lounge, nightclub and similar establishments6

C

C

 

 

 

 

Liquor stores7

C

C

 

 

 

 

Motor vehicle sales8

C

C

 

 

 

 

Construction contractor’s and contractor related services with outdoor storage9

C

C

 

 

 

 

Video arcades, indoor movie theatre, bowling alley, skating rink, and similar entertainment establishments

C

C

 

 

 

 

Hotel

C

C

 

 

 

 

Tobacco and cigar lounges that allow smoking on-site

C

C

 

 

 

 

Health clubs (indoor and outdoor recreational facilities)

C

C

 

 

 

 

Merchandise and/or general retail sales less than 75,000 sq. ft. (applies to any single-user or multi-tenant building)

P

P

 

 

 

 

Merchandise and/or general retail sales greater than or equal to 75,000 sq. ft. (applies to any single-user or multi-tenant building)

C

 

 

 

 

 

Supermarkets or grocery (with beer, wine, and distilled spirits sales)

P

P

 

 

 

 

Convenience store with or without beer and wine sales (no distilled spirits). Limited to one store as a permitted use in each of the following subareas: 1 and 2. Any additional convenience store must apply for a conditional use permit.10, 11

P

P

 

 

 

 

Pharmacy establishments with or without drive-through. Limited to one such use in each of the following  subareas: 1 and 2. Any additional drive-through must apply for a conditional use permit

P

P

 

 

 

 

Gas stations, with or without car wash and/or convenience store. Limited to one such use in one of the following subareas: 1 or 2. Any additional gas station must apply for a conditional use permit

P

P

 

 

 

 

Pet and pet supply stores12

P

P

 

 

 

 

Restaurants13 (with or without beer and wine sales)14

P

P

 

 

 

 

Restaurants with full kitchen and bar as secondary use16 (limited to one restaurant as a permitted use in each of the following subareas: 1 and 2. Any additional restaurants with secondary bar use must apply for a conditional use permit)

P

P

 

 

 

 

Convenience restaurants with or without drive-through service.16 Limited to one such use in each of the following subareas: 1 and 2. Any additional drive-through must apply for a conditional use permit

P

P

 

 

 

 

Specialty merchandise, convenience sales and commercial services17

P

P

 

 

 

 

Temporary parking lot display and/or sale areas18

P

P

 

 

 

 

Outdoor display, dining, and/or sale of merchandise19

P

P

 

 

 

 

Commercial uses which may or may not manufacture their primary product on the premises20

P

P

 

 

 

 

Business, institutional, administrative, financial, and professional offices21

P

P

 

 

 

 

Research and development facilities22

P

P

 

 

 

 

Wholesale showrooms and distribution centers

P

P

 

 

 

 

Residential Uses23

 

 

 

 

 

 

Small lot single-family homes

 

 

P

P

 

 

(min. lot size: 3,375 sq. ft.24)

Park Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

Parks25

 

 

P

P

P

P

 

Notes:

1      All proposed developments are to be consistent with the adopted Sciortino Ranch design guidelines, as applicable, for each permitted land use. Land uses that are similar in nature and operation to those uses identified within the land use matrix are acceptable subject to approval by the community development director. The decision of the community development director is subject to appeal in accordance with Brentwood Municipal Code (BMC) Chapter 17.880.

2      “C” notes uses that are required to undergo a conditional use permit process (per BMC Chapter 17.830).

3      Physical design is to adhere to this chapter and the adopted Sciortino Ranch design guidelines, subareas are specifically designed to respond to any existing adjacent development by incorporating like densities, uses, or park buffers.

4      Mini-storage or warehouse with or without a resident manager’s dwelling unit.

5      Including by way of example, but not limited to, warehouses, controlled manufacturing and assembly, printing or lithography production establishments, plastic fabrication, electronic and electrical product and instrument manufacturing, garment manufacturing, furniture making, upholstering, food processing and similar uses.

6      With on-site sale of beer, wine, or distilled spirits, including establishments which offer food as a secondary use, entertainment and/or dancing.

7      Liquor stores including by way of example, but not limited to, establishments that sell primarily beer, wine, or distilled spirits.

8      Including automobile, motorcycle, recreational vehicle and boat sales, agricultural vehicle, equipment and farm implements sales, and similar establishments.

9      Including, but not limited to, cabinetry, countertop, and sheet metal fabrication shops.

10    Convenience store alcoholic beverage sales shall not exceed forty percent of total beverages offered and no individual containers of beer may be sold greater than twenty-four ounces.

11    Sale of newspapers, periodicals, magazines, or other print, analog, or digitally reproduced materials that includes pornographic images is expressly prohibited.

12    Including on-site veterinary clinics, excluding boarding of pets.

13    Including by way of example, but not limited to, full-service sit-down restaurant establishments.

14    Prior to the issuance of a tenant improvement permit, a copy of the floor plan shall be provided for the review and approval of the Brentwood police department specifically identifying where all alcoholic beverages will be stored or displayed and how distribution will be controlled. A sign stating that open alcohol containers shall not be removed from designated areas shall be conspicuously displayed within the restaurant to the satisfaction of the Brentwood police department. Tables shall be bussed immediately following vacancy in order to ensure that all open alcoholic containers are removed from the seating area.

15    The following regulations apply to any restaurant: Prior to the issuance of a tenant improvement permit, a copy of the floor plan shall be provided for the review and approval of the Brentwood police department specifically identifying where all alcoholic beverages will be stored or displayed and how distribution will be controlled. A sign stating that open alcohol containers shall not be removed from the premises shall be conspicuously displayed within the restaurant to the satisfaction of the Brentwood police department. Tables shall be bussed immediately following vacancy in order to ensure that all open alcoholic containers are removed from the seating area. Expressly excludes dancing type uses. Secondary bar uses have limited hours of operation eleven a.m. to midnight. Bar area not to exceed thirty percent of restaurant floor area (excluding office or kitchen area). Restaurant with secondary bar use shall not be permitted within two hundred feet of a residential use or residential zone.

16    Including by way of example, but not limited to, sandwich shops or fast-food establishments.

17    Including by way of example, but not limited to, specialty foods, delicatessen, bakery, pastry, candy, ice cream, butcher, meat market, wine, tobacco, apparel, jewelry, cosmetics, stationery, shoes and shoe repair, kitchenware, motor vehicle parts, agricultural equipment and farm implements, hobby, specialty interest stores, barbershop, beauty shop, hair salon, laundry, dry cleaning, laundromat, electronic, appliance sales and repair, watch and clock repair, tanning studio, small equipment rental and repair, real estate sales and rental, title and escrow services, architectural, engineering, legal and accounting services, insurance agency, employment agency, outpatient medical, dental and optical services, technology access center, telecommuting center, addressing, post box and mailing service, blueprinting, photostating and desktop publishing and printing services, drafting service, messenger service, stenographic service, answering service, private postal box service, travel agency, bank branch, ATM facility, and similar establishments.

18    Requires approval of a temporary use permit per BMC Chapter 17.850.

19    If outdoor display, dining, and/or sales areas are proposed post formal design review and/or development of a subject building then either: (a) BMC Section 17.900.009 shall apply for uses proposed on private property, or (b) BMC Section 17.900.005 shall apply for uses proposed in the public right-of-way (excluding any downtown zone specific regulations).

20    Including, but not limited to, drapery or upholstery shop and similar establishments.

21    Including, but not limited to, large-scale single and/or multi-tenant office uses, such as medical offices, trade schools, colleges, public and quasi-public offices, library, post office and utility office.

22    Including by way of example, but not limited to, research, office, support and associated warehouse areas.

23    Keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to BMC Chapter 17.670; accessory dwelling units are allowed in residential areas pursuant to BMC Section 17.100.005.

24    Single-family lots along the northern and southern project boundaries shall be a minimum of four thousand square feet.

25    Parkland areas are subject to park size minimums described within the adopted Sciortino Ranch design guidelines. Park credits are also described in the design guidelines. Parks are allowed in all subareas per the guidelines with specified park areas located in Subareas 3, 4, 5 and 6. Park subarea borders are flexible to accommodate future development designs that better integrate park land use edges.

 

(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 991 § 4, 2017; Ord. 962 § 2, 2016; Ord. 899 § 8, 2012; Ord. 871 § 2, 2009)

 

17.505.009 Map for PD-55.
 



(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 962 § 2, 2016; Ord. 871 § 2, 2009)

 

17.505.010 Sciortino Ranch design guidelines.
     The Sciortino Ranch design guidelines, as adopted by the city council, are herein incorporated by reference as Exhibit “A” to the ordinance codified in this chapter and are intended to be used in the review of all development projects within the PD-55 zone. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 962 § 2, 2016; Ord. 871 § 2, 2009)

 

Chapter 17.506 PD-56 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FIFTY-SIX) ZONE
17.506.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-56 (planned development fifty-six) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-56 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-56 zone is to establish, permit and regulate the development of industrial uses on approximately 32.5 acres currently designated as “industrial” by the city of Brentwood general plan. “Industrial” zoned areas are intended to reserve appropriately located areas for various and compatible types of industrial uses and related activities and to protect areas appropriate for industrial uses from intrusion by residential and other inharmonious uses.

     C.     Intent. In order to implement the development of “industrial” uses identified in the city of Brentwood general plan for the PD-56 zone, said zone shall be divided into three subareas as geographically designated in Section 17.506.009, and as further described below. The primary character of the area is intended to be a mix of light, medium and heavy industrial uses.

     1.     Subarea A. This area consists of 5.6± acres intended for light industrial uses, indoor recreational uses and a limited amount of retail and restaurant uses intended to serve on-site businesses, users of the adjacent sports park and nearby residents.

     2.     Subarea B. This area consists of 8.6± acres intended for light to medium industrial uses.

     3.     Subarea C. This area consists of 14.6± acres intended for light, medium and heavy industrial uses. (Ord. 881 § 2, 2010)

 

17.506.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the designated subareas:

     A.    Subarea A. All uses shall be conducted indoors unless otherwise noted:

     1.     Light industrial uses including, but not limited to:

     a.     Commercial laundromat and commercial dry cleaning establishments,

     b.     Printer and copier establishments,

     c.     Automobile repair or service,

     d.     Auto body repair and service, including painting,

     e.     Welding shop,

     f.      Biotechnology research, development and production operations, including cosmetic, drug, medicinal and pharmaceutical products,

     g.     Appliance repair,

     h.     Cabinet, woodworking, drapery, or upholstery shops; furniture manufacturing or assembly uses,

     i.      Glass and window services,

     j.      Photographic equipment and supplies,

     k.     Special trades,

     l.      Small scale manufacturing and assembly plants,

     m.    Light fabricating services,

     n.     Laboratories, commercial testing, research and experimental,

     o.     Manufacturing of scientific, analytical, optical, medical, and dental goods, apparatus, measuring and controlling instruments,

     p.     Professional, scientific and precision equipment,

     q.     Construction-related sales, contractors, suppliers, services and industries, except heavy construction and equipment:

     i.      Building and carpentry,

     ii.     Irrigation,

     iii.    Plumbing,

     iv.    Electrical,

     v.     HVAC,

     vi.    Landscaping except for plant nursery supplies which require a conditional use permit,

     vii.   Engineering,

     r.      Warehouse, distribution, shipping and wholesale of materials and equipment of an industrial, automotive, fabrication, manufacturing and construction nature;

     2.     Outdoor storage, holding, display, manufacturing and distribution area(s) and construction yards not exceeding screen/fencing heights or with interior contents that cannot otherwise be seen from ground level to six feet above ground level shall be allowed for subarea A permitted uses;

     3.     A maximum of six thousand square feet for restaurant uses. A microbrewery is allowed in conjunction with a primary restaurant use;

     4.     Similar uses subject to the determination of the community development director.

     B.     Subarea B. All uses shall be conducted indoors unless otherwise noted:

     1.     Uses permitted in subarea A, except restaurants;

     2.     Medium industrial uses including related outdoor storage:

     a.     Public and private utility facilities and equipment or power distribution equipment,

     b.     Utility equipment buildings,

     c.     Commercial printing and publishing,

     d.     Building materials manufacture and assembly, excluding production of asphalt, cement,

     e.     Computer and electronic manufacturing,

     f.      Battery manufacture and assembly,

     g.     Manufacturing and assembly of boats or other equipment,

     h.     Microbreweries (no onsite retail consumer tasting rooms or retail sales),

     i.      Stone, porcelain, clay and glass product manufacturing, fabrication and assembly,

     j.      Non-meat/fish food processing and food product manufacturing, storage and distribution; commercial bakeries,

     k.     Recreational vehicle, boat, medium- and heavy-truck, and tractor-trailer engine and machinery repair,

     l.      Industrial and farm equipment repair and rental,

     m.    Machine shop;

     3.     Similar uses, subject to the determination of the community development director.

     C.     Subarea C. All uses shall be conducted indoors unless otherwise noted:

     1.     Uses permitted in subareas A and B, except restaurants;

     2.     Heavy industrial uses including related outdoor storage:

     a.     Uses which by the nature of their operation can generate noise, dust, fumes, heat, glare, vibrational activities and frequent heavy truck traffic,

     b.     Machine shops, not including drop hammers, automatic screw machines or punch presses with a rated capacity of over twenty tons,

     c.     Metal container manufacture and assembly and metal finishing and plating,

     d.     Motor and generator manufacture and assembly,

     e.     Paper product manufacture and assembly,

     f.      Distilleries and wineries (no on-site retail consumer tasting rooms or retail sales),

     g.     Freight forwarding terminals, transit yards and trucking terminals,

     h.     Plastics manufacture, fiberglass molding and assembly,

     i.      Rubber products manufacture and assembly,

     j.      Linoleum or oil cloth manufacture and assembly,

     k.     Graphite and graphite process manufacture and assembly,

     l.      Agriculture and industrial organic or inorganic chemicals and fertilizer,

     m.    Indoor and outdoor towing and temporary storage of inoperable or abandoned vehicles on twenty-four hour on-call basis,

     n.     Above-ground diesel, gas or petroleum storage tank, compliance with EPA regulations and standards, to service on-site fleet only;

     3.     Similar uses, subject to the determination of the community development director. (Ord. 881 § 2, 2010)

 

17.506.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are conditionally permitted subject to securing a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Subarea A.

     1.     Light industrial uses partially or fully conducted outside a building for permitted uses allowed in enclosed buildings in subarea A;

     2.     Outdoor storage, holding, display, manufacturing, construction and distribution area(s) exceeding screen heights or with interior contents that can otherwise be seen from ground level of public right-of-way;

     3.     Indoor recreational facilities such as, a dance studio, gymnastics facility, karate or fitness facility including ancillary daycare facilities;

     4.     Other uses as provided in Section 17.450.004, except those uses prohibited in Section 17.506.004.

     B.     Subarea B.

     1.     Uses conditionally permitted in subarea A, except indoor recreational uses;

     2.     Medium industrial uses partially or fully conducted outside a building for permitted uses allowed in enclosed buildings;

     3.     Other uses as provided in Section 17.450.004, except those uses prohibited in Section 17.506.004.

     C.     Subarea C.

     1.     Uses conditionally permitted in subareas A and B, except indoor recreational uses;

     2.     Heavy industrial uses partially or fully conducted outside a building for permitted uses allowed in enclosed buildings;

     3.     Heavy industrial uses including related outdoor storage:

     a.     Gravel, rock and cement yards,

     b.     Asphalt and asphalt product manufacture and assembly,

     c.     Concrete batching facility, cement product manufacturing,

     d.     Dismantlers of motor vehicles,

     e.     Meat or fish product processing and packaging, excluding slaughtering and glue manufacture,

     f.      Steel and structural steel product manufacture,

     g.     Metal container manufacture and assembly and metal finishing and plating, sheet metal,

     h.     Lumber milling operation, truss and beam manufacturing,

     i.      Painting, enameling and lacquering shops and manufacturing,

     j.      Chemicals and allied products,

     k.     Detergents and cleaning preparations,

     l.      Textile and fabric manufacturing, bleaching, or processing,

     m.    Metal casting and foundries,

     n.     Motor testing of internal combustion engines,

     o.     Building materials manufacture and assembly pipe, tile and concrete block manufacturing,

     p.     Heavy construction and equipment,

     q.     Recycling plants: storage, sorting, collecting or baling of iron, junk, paper, rags, or scrap metal within a completely enclosed structure,

     r.      Rental storage of recreational vehicles, boats, trailers and any other vehicle storage facility or mini-storage of personal property;

     4.     Other uses as provided in Section 17.450.004, except those uses prohibited in Section 17.506.004. (Ord. 881 § 2, 2010)

 

17.506.004 Prohibited uses.
     The following uses shall be prohibited in subareas A, B and C unless otherwise noted:

     1.     Financial institutions such as:

     a.     Banks,

     b.     Savings and loan institutions,

     c.     Check cashing companies,

     d.     Mortgage companies, and

     e.     Credit unions;

     2.     Business services such as:

     a.     Law firms,

     b.     Accountants,

     c.     Employment agencies,

     d.     Insurance companies,

     e.     Real estate brokerages, and

     f.      Medical and dental offices;

     3.     Vehicle and boat sales;

     4.     Restaurants and establishments serving and selling drinks and/or food are prohibited in subareas B and C;

     5.     Indoor and outdoor animal kennels, animal shelters and veterinary services;

     6.     Outdoor recreational and sports facilities and uses, unless otherwise required by the state of California for an ancillary daycare facility;

     7.     Indoor recreational and sports facilities such as a dance studio, gymnastics facility, batting cages, and karate or fitness facilities are prohibited in subareas B and C;

     8.     Personal services including, but not limited to, the following:

     a.     Beauty salons,

     b.     Barber shops,

     c.     Nail salons,

     d.     Food markets, and

     e.     Health and day spas;

     9.     Assemblage of religious, nonsecular and secular organizations and associations, and educational facilities including center-based child or daycare facilities;

     10.   Petroleum refining and related businesses including gasoline and diesel service stations;

     11.   Explosives and pyroxyline or related materials;

     12.   Slaughtering, glue and stockyard operations. (Ord. 881 § 2, 2010)

 

17.506.005 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to all sub-areas as described below:

     A.    Subarea A.

     1.     Minimum lot area: One-half acre;

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum building or storage front yard setback: Twenty feet;

     4.     Minimum building or storage side yard setback: On the street side of a corner site, the side yard shall be not less than twenty feet. Interior side yards shall be five feet for buildings and one foot for outdoor storage;

     5.     Minimum building and storage rear yard setback: Five feet for buildings and one foot for outdoor storage;

     6.     Maximum building height: Twenty-four feet.

     B.     Subarea B.

     1.     Minimum lot area: One-half acre;

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum building and storage front yard setback: Twenty feet;

     4.     Minimum building and storage side yard setback: Five feet for buildings and one foot for storage;

     5.     Minimum building and storage rear yard setback: Ten feet for buildings and one foot for storage;

     6.     Maximum building height: Two stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet.

     C.     Subarea C.

     1.     Minimum lot area: One acre (gross acreage);

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum building and storage front yard setback: Twenty feet;

     4.     Minimum building and storage side yard setback: Five feet for buildings and one foot for storage;

     5.     Minimum building and storage rear yard: Five feet for buildings and one foot for storage;

     6.     Maximum building height: Two stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet. Equipment, towers and nonbuilding structures shall have a maximum height of seventy-two feet. (Ord. 881 § 2, 2010)

 

17.506.006 Other regulations.
     The following standards shall be applicable to all uses, except expressly provided for otherwise within the regulations of each individual zone:

     A.    Except where modified in Section 17.506.006, all uses within proposed subareas A, B and C shall comply with Chapters 17.200 and 17.300.

     B.     Off-street parking shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.620.

     C.     Landscaping for parking lots and yard setbacks shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.630.

     D.    Screening of parking areas accessible to the public is required. Screening of interior storage and private vehicle and truck parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.630.

     E.     Design and site development review of all new structures within each subarea shall comply with Chapter 17.820. Architectural and site plan review shall confirm conformance with these PD standards. Standards suitable for industrial buildings and uses will be used in determining the acceptability of proposed building types and architecture.

     F.     Refuse Container Enclosure. All industrial facilities shall provide refuse disposal enclosures. The applicant shall submit to the solid waste division for review and approval, detailed copies of their solid waste enclosure plans, along with a completed and signed solid waste plan guide and enclosure standards. This can be located in the city of Brentwood standard plans and specifications. Any changes must be re-approved by the solid waste division. The enclosure location and design must be accessible to the automated trash service the city provides and the exterior materials of the enclosure shall be consistent with the exterior materials of the adjacent and/or surrounding buildings.

     G.    Storage Areas. All open storage areas shall be screened and surrounded with a minimum six-foot to a maximum eight-foot high view-obscuring fence. No storage shall exceed the height of the fence in subarea A without a conditional use permit. Masonry walls shall be utilized for screening uses within subarea A while chain link with view-obscuring slats or fencing materials other than wood, and landscaping may be used for screening uses in subareas B and C.

     H.    All signs are subject to the regulations of Chapter 17.640 and shall be subject to administration review. No off site signage is allowed.

     I.      All industrial facilities shall provide security measures in accordance with city standards and shall be subject to design review.

     J.      All industrial facilities shall, to the greatest extent possible, incorporate energy conservation measures in conformance with city standards and subject to design review.

     K.    All industrial facilities shall, to the greatest extent possible, utilize recycled water for landscape irrigation or other controlled use in conformance with standards set forth by the city and per Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations.

     L.     Standard commercial and industrial building materials, prefabricated metal buildings or concrete tilt-up buildings having concrete tile, metal tile or asphalt shingle roofing material shall be allowed in subareas A, B, and C. Exterior metal sided buildings are not allowed in subarea A. (Ord. 881 § 2, 2010)

 

17.506.007 Performance standards.
     A.    Noise. All uses shall comply with current noise limits in Chapter 9.32 of city of Brentwood Municipal Code and with requirements contained in the Sunset Industrial Complex Environmental Impact Report.

     B.     Heat, Glare and Humidity.

     1.     Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along property lines;

     2.     Any operation or activity in subareas A and B producing glare shall be performed within a completely enclosed building and be conducted so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light shall not result in illumination in excess of one-half foot candle when measured at the property line. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded and flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled so as not to cause a nuisance across property lines. Any use producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat, shall be carried on in such a manner that steam, humidity or heat is not perceptible at any property line. This does not prohibit the use of cooling towers that do not alter humidity at ground level at the property line.

     C.     Vibration. Any industrial operation or activity, which shall cause at any time and at any point along the property line of the subject use, earth-borne vibrations that are discernible without the use of instruments is prohibited.

     D.    Fire, Safety and Explosion. All uses shall provide adequate safety devices against fire, explosion and other hazards and adequate firefighting and fire-suppression equipment in compliance with applicable fire prevention and building codes.

     E.     Soundproofing. Minimum soundproofing shall be required in onsite and off site buildings affected by noise from the industrial park. Permanent and/or temporary soundproofing shall also be required to reduce noise levels of any use to specified limits.

     F.     Solid and Liquid Waste.

     1.     Discharge at any point into public sewer, storm drain system, stream or into the ground shall be done only in accordance with the standards approved by the State Department of Health, and standards specified in applicable local ordinances. This applies to discharge of any materials of such nature or temperature, which can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements;

     2.     No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any property in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the property by natural causes or forces;

     3.     Any wastes which might be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers;

     4.     Any use which generates liquid waste including sewage or storm water with greater quantities, levels of pollutants, temperatures, or biological loadings than for a typical commercial building of similar size shall have such discharges subject to approval by the city engineer.

     G.    Electrical and Radioactive Radiation. No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.

     H.    Air Pollution. All uses shall comply with regulations of the San Francisco Bay Area Air Quality Management District.

     1.     Smoke. For the purpose of determining the density or equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines in Circular No. 7718 (August, 1955) shall be employed. The emission of smoke from any chimney, stack, vent, opening or combustion process shall not exceed Ringlemann No. 1.

     2.     Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the property line of the subject use, unless permitted by a conditional use permit.

     3.     Toxic and Noxious Matter. No use shall be permitted which creates any emission which endangers human health, can cause damage to animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause soiling at any point beyond the boundaries of the site. (Ord. 881 § 2, 2010)

 

17.506.008 Amortization schedule for nonconforming and prohibited uses.
     The purpose of this section is to regulate and limit the continued existence of uses established prior to the enactment of this chapter, or any amendments that do not conform to the provisions of this chapter.

     A.    Following the adoption date of the amendment to this chapter:

     1.     All nonconforming uses shall have a maximum of eighteen months to apply for and receive approval of a conditional use permit in order to continue operating within the Sunset Industrial Complex.

     2.     All prohibited uses shall have a maximum of thirty-six months to relocate out of the Sunset Industrial Complex.

     B.     A nonconforming use shall not be significantly expanded or enlarged, or be changed to any other use unless the new use conforms to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 881 § 2, 2010)

 

17.506.009 Map for PD-56.
 



(Ord. 881 § 2, 2010)

 

Chapter 17.507 RESERVED FOR PD-57 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FIFTY-SEVEN) ZONE
Chapter 17.508 PD-58 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FIFTY-EIGHT) ZONE
17.508.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of PD-58 (planned development fifty-eight) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-58 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450 Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose. The boundary of the PD-58 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.508.505. The purpose of the planned development fifty-eight zone is to permit and regulate the development of multifamily units in accordance with the Brentwood general plan.

     C.     Intent. It is intended that in order to achieve the purpose of the planned development fifty-eight zone, that the development of the parcels will be undertaken in accordance with the Brentwood general plan as follows:

     1.     A maximum of twenty dwelling units per acre will be developed within the subarea;

     2.     Lot sizes of a minimum of six thousand square feet will be created. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.508.002 Permitted uses.
     A.    Duplex, triplex, apartments and other small multifamily structures; townhouses and single-family attached homes;

     B.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     C.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     D.    Temporary uses related to the primary use subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     E.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     F.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     G.    Signs subject to Chapter 17.640. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.508.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     A.    Public facilities including parks, playgrounds, public schools and other public buildings;

     B.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     C.     Community buildings, clubs and activities of quasi-public, social, fraternal or recreational character such as golf, tennis and swimming clubs intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residential project;

     D.    Large residential care facilities;

     E.     Dog fancier’s license in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.670.009. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.508.004 General development standards.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Six thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty feet;

     C.     Minimum front yard: Ten feet for two-story structures, ten feet for one-story structures.

     D.    Minimum side yards: Five feet, the sum of both sides, fifteen feet;

     E.     Minimum rear yard: Ten feet;

     F.     Maximum building height: No main building shall exceed a height of two stories and thirty feet;

     G.    Maximum lot coverage: Fifty percent;

     H.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H);

     I.      Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H);

     J.      The parking and storage of recreational vehicles, boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016;

     K.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660;

     L.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.508.005 Map for PD-58.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.509 PD-59 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT FIFTY-NINE) ZONE
17.509.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-59 (planned development fifty-nine) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-59 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, planned development zones, general regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-59 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the area shown as the development plan and related exhibits in accordance with the Brentwood General Plan for a maximum of two hundred seventy-six lots. The PD-59 area is divided into six subareas as shown on the development plan and related exhibits.

     C.     Intent. The zoning district is intended to provide a neighborhood with a mix of single-family homes on various lots sizes, recreational amenities and open space in conformance with the adopted general plan. The boundaries of the PD-59 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.509.011. (Ord. 915 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.509.002 Permitted uses for each subarea.
     A.    Subarea A:

     1.     Single-family dwelling units;

     2.     Parks, playgrounds and recreation trails;

     3.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     4.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     5.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     6.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670.

     B.     Subarea B (duet lots):

     1.     Single-family attached dwelling units;

     2.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     3.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     4.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     5.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670.

     C.     Subarea C:

     1.     Single-family dwelling units;

     2.     Recreation trails;

     3.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     4.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     5.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     6.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670.

     D.    Subarea D:

     1.     Single-family dwelling units;

     2.     Parks, playgrounds and recreation trails;

     3.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     4.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     5.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     6.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     7.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670.

     E.     Subarea E:

     1.     Single-family dwelling units;

     2.     Parks, playgrounds and recreation trails;

     3.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     4.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     5.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     6.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     7.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670.

     F.     Subarea F:

     1.     Single-family dwelling units;

     2.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     3.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     4.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     5.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     6.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670. (Ord. 915 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.509.003 Conditionally permitted uses for each subarea.
     A.    Subarea A:

     1.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     2.     Nursery, childcare, day care center.

     B.     Subarea B (duet lots):

     1.     Nursery, childcare, day care center.

     C.     Subarea C:

     1.     Nursery, childcare, day care center.

     D.    Subarea D:

     1.     Nursery, childcare, day care center.

     E.     Subarea E:

     1.     Nursery, childcare, day care center.

     F.     Subarea F:

     1.     Nursery, childcare, day care center. (Ord. 915 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.509.004 General development standards for subarea A.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Ten thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Seventy feet except for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets that shall be forty feet at the front property line;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred thirty-five feet;

     D.    Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages, fifteen feet for turned garage and living space, and twelve feet for front porches measured to front of property line;

     E.     Minimum side yard setback: Eight feet and a total of twenty feet for both sides. For corner lots the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet;

     F.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet for main residence and five feet for detached living areas;

     G.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories for main residence and sixteen feet and one story for detached living areas;

     H.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent for main residence and detached living area;

     I.      Maximum number of lots: Eighty. (Ord. 915 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.509.005 General development standards for subarea B (duet lots).
     A.    Minimum lot area: Six thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Fifty-five feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred thirty feet;

     D.    Minimum front yard setback: Fifteen feet;

     E.     Minimum side yard setback: Zero feet and a total of ten feet for both sides. For corner lots the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet;

     F.     Minimum rear yard setback: Zero feet—unit is attached;

     G.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     H.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent for single-story unit; forty percent for two-story units;

     I.      Maximum number of lots: Four. (Ord. 915 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.509.006 General development standards for subarea C.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Four thousand two hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Forty-two feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Forty feet all lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets at front property line;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages, fifteen feet for turned garages and living space, and twelve feet for front porches;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Zero feet—and a total of ten feet for both sides. For corner lots the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet;

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Fifteen feet;

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet;

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent for two-story units;

     J.      Maximum number of units: Eighteen. (Ord. 915 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.509.007 General development standards for subarea D.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Six thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Forty-five feet for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets at front property line;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages, fifteen feet for turned garages and living space, and twelve feet for front porches;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and for corner lots the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet;

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet and five feet for detached garages;

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet;

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent for single-story unit; forty percent for two-story units;

     J.      Maximum number of units: One hundred fifteen. (Ord. 915 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.509.008 General development standards for subarea E.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Seven thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Ninety-five feet except on culs-de-sac where the minimum is eighty-five feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Forty feet for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets at the front property line;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages, fifteen feet for turned garages and living space, and twelve feet for front porches;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and for corner lots the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet;

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet;

     I.      Detached living unit rear setback: Five feet;

     J.      Detached living unit side setback: Five feet;

     K.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent;

     L.     Maximum number of units: Thirty-five. (Ord. 915 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.509.009 General development standards for subarea F.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Eight thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Seventy feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Forty feet for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets at the front property line;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages, fifteen feet for turned garages and living space and twelve feet for front porches;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and for corner lots the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet;

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet;

     I.      Detached living unit rear setback: Five feet;

     J.      Detached living unit side setback: Five feet;

     K.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent;

     L.     Maximum number of units: Twenty-four. (Ord. 915 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.509.010 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provision of Chapter 17.660 with the exception that no feature may project into the maximum front yard setback.

     F.     The development of this zoning district shall be substantially in accordance with the approved development plans. Variations in the development plans including street and lot pattern may be approved through the subdivision map process. (Ord. 915 § 2, 2013; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.509.011 Map for PD-59.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.510 PD-60 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIXTY) ZONE
17.510.001 Authority, purpose, and intent.
     The authority, purpose, and intent for the adoption of the PD-60 (planned development number sixty) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-60 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-60 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of 46.64 acres located generally at the southwest corner of Lone Tree Way and the future O’Hara Avenue extension with very low and low density residential uses in accordance with the Brentwood general plan.

     C.     Intent. The intent of creating the PD-60 zone is to ensure the coordinated development of the entire property in order to minimize impacts on adjacent properties. The boundaries of the PD-60 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.510.005. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.510.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the PD-60 zone:

     A.    Those uses permitted under the R-1 zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.510.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830, the following uses are permitted:

     A.    Those uses conditionally permitted under the R-1 zoning district in Title 17. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.510.004 General development standards.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within the PD-60 zone, subarea A, shall comply with the following regulations:

     A.    Minimum lot size: Ten thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Eighty feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: One-half the required lot width;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet;

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     H.    Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660;

     I.      Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     J.      Side loading garage: Ten percent of the lots shall have side-loading garages;

     K.    A minimum of twenty-five percent of the lots shall have single-story units;

     L.     Fifty percent of the corner lots shall have single-story units;

     M.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent.

     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within the PD-60 zone, subarea B, shall comply with the following regulations:

     A.    Minimum lot size: Nine thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Seventy-five feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred twenty feet, except that lots on culs-de-sac shall have a minimum depth of one hundred five feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Thirty-five feet at the front property line for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles, or curvilinear streets;

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet (fifteen feet for porches);

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet;

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Fifteen feet for single-story elements and twenty feet for two-story elements;

     H.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     I.      Corner lot fence setback: Five feet from the street side property line; all other fence regulations shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 17.660 of this title;

     J.      Side-entry garage: Ten percent of the lots shall have side-entry garages;

     K.    A minimum of thirty-five percent of the lots shall have single-story units at the time of initial construction;

     L.     Fifty percent of the corner lots shall have single-story units at the time of initial construction;

     M.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent for single-story plans and forty percent for two-story plans;

     N.    Maximum number of primary dwelling units: Eighty-seven. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.510.005 Map for PD-60.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.511 PD-61 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIXTY-ONE) ZONE
17.511.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose, and intent for the adoption of the PD-61 (planned development sixty-one) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-61 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-61 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of 5.81 acres located generally between Sycamore Avenue and Spruce Street, east of Brentwood Boulevard, with high density residential uses in accordance with the Brentwood general plan, for a maximum of fifty-three lots. The area is divided into two subareas as shown on the subarea map.

     C.     Intent. The intent of creating the PD-61 zone is to ensure the coordinated development of the entire property in order to minimize impacts on adjacent properties. The boundaries of the PD-61 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.511.007. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.511.002 Permitted uses for each subarea.
     Subarea A:

     A.    Single-family dwelling units not exceeding a density of fifteen and a half dwelling units per gross acre;

     B.     Recreational trails;

     C.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     D.    Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit subject to Chapter 17.850;

     E.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840; and

     F.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670.

     Subarea B:

     A.    Single-family dwelling units not exceeding a density of fifteen and a half dwelling units per gross acre;

     B.     Parks, playgrounds, and recreational trails;

     C.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     D.    Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit subject to Chapter 17.850;

     E.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840; and

     F.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.511.003 Conditionally permitted uses for each subarea.
     Subarea A:

     A.    Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Section 17.130.003 of the zoning ordinance, which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city.

     B.     Nursery, child care, or day care center.

     Subarea B:

     A.    Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Section 17.130.003 of the zoning ordinance, which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city.

     B.     Nursery, child care, or day care center. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.511.004 General development standards for subarea A.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Four thousand eight hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Eighty feet;

     D.    Minimum front yard setback: Ten feet for turned garages;

     E.     Minimum side yard setback: Seven feet, with an aggregate of fifteen feet (corner lots on the street side shall maintain a side yard setback of ten feet);

     F.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     G.    Maximum building height: Thirty-one feet and two stories;

     H.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent for all units;

     I.      Maximum number of units: Nine. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.511.005 General development standards for subarea B.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Two thousand three hundred seventy square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Thirty feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Seventy-nine feet;

     D.    Minimum front yard setback: Thirteen feet for living space and five feet for porches;

     E.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet (corner lots on the street side shall maintain a side yard setback of ten feet to living space and five feet to porches);

     F.     Minimum rear yard setback: Six feet for garages;

     G.    Maximum building height: Thirty-five feet and three stories;

     H.    Maximum lot coverage: Fifty percent for all units;

     I.      Maximum number of units: Forty-four. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.511.006 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers, and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660, with the exception that no feature may project into the minimum front yard setback.

     F.     The development of this zone shall be substantially in accordance with the development plan. Variations in the development plan, including street and lot patterns, may be approved through the subdivision map process. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.511.007 Map for PD-61.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.512 PD-62 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIXTY-TWO) ZONE
17.512.001 Authority and purpose.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-62 (planned development sixty-two) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-62 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-62 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the single-family detached homes and public uses in accordance with the Brentwood general plan. The boundary of the PD-62 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.512.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.512.002 Permitted uses.
     Permitted uses in the PD-62 zone are those permitted under the R-1 (single-family residential) zone, Section 17.130.002 of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.512.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Section 17.130.003 of the zoning ordinance, which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.512.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the planned development zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Five thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Forty-five feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Eighty-five feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Thirty feet;

     E.     Minimum front yard: Twenty feet to the garage, ten feet to any primary building wall;

     F.     Minimum side yard: Five feet. All corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street of ten feet;

     G.    Minimum rear yard: Fifteen feet;

     H.    Maximum building height: Two stories not to exceed thirty feet;

     I.      Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.512.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.512.006 Map for PD-62.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.513 PD-63 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIXTY-THREE) ZONE
17.513.001 Authority and purpose.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-63 (planned development sixty-three) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-63 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-63 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of medium to high density residential uses of up to one hundred seventy-eight dwelling units. The boundary of the PD-63 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.513.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.513.002 Permitted uses.
     Permitted uses in the PD-63 zone are those permitted under R-2 (moderate density multifamily residential) zone, Section 17.140.002 of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.513.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Section 17.140.003 of the zoning ordinance, which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.513.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the planned development sixty-three zone:

     A.    Minimum lot area: Six thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Fifty feet;

     C.     Minimum street frontage setback: Ten feet;

     D.    Minimum rear yard: Twenty feet;

     E.     Minimum side yard: Five feet with an aggregate of fifteen feet;

     F.     Allowable dwelling units per building. The maximum number of dwelling units within an individual building shall not exceed eight;

     G.    Maximum lot coverage. The main residential buildings and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than forty percent of the lot area;

     H.    Maximum building height: Two-story units not to exceed thirty feet; one-story units not to exceed twenty feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.513.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development review shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004.

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.513.006 Map for PD-63.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.514 PD-64 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIXTY-FOUR) ZONE
17.514.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-64 (planned development sixty-four) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-64 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of this code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-64 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the area shown on the development plan and related exhibits in accordance with the Brentwood general plan for up to one thousand one hundred active adult single-family residential units; up to one hundred fifty executive single-family residential units; a recreation center; a winery with amphitheater and associated uses; a village center with civic, commercial, office, hotel lodging (B&B) senior and other multifamily residential units; a water tank and pump stations; two water quality/detention basins; and associated parks, open space and landscape parcels. In addition, this PD includes three additional areas (the PG&E site, the John Marsh House State Park site, and a future community college site) that will be defined as applicable at a later date when projects are developed. The PD-64 area then is divided into six subareas as shown on the development plan and related exhibits. The boundaries of the PD-64 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.514.010.

     C.     Intent. The zoning district is intended to describe the project “The Vineyards at Marsh Creek” which will provide private distinguished neighborhoods among an agriculturally-themed landscape of vineyards and olive groves. The overall architectural style will be Tuscan, French Spanish—Mediterranean, with its historical roots in the villas and villages of the inland Coastal Spain, the Balearic Islands and the French and Italian Mediterranean regions of Provence and Tuscany. This palette will expand to include other wine regions such as Bordeaux and Rhone areas of France as well as the more California Craftsman palette of our own Napa Valley in the Custom Estate home area. The residential components include single-story active adult single-family homes with a central recreation center. The active adult neighborhoods will be of a density similar to the existing Summerset Development north of the site, including golf cart accessibility even though they do not back onto a golf course. In addition, there will be up to two private executive single-family neighborhoods located in close proximity to the winery and open space. The executive homes architectural style will have a more craftsman interpretation of the Mediterranean style than that of the active adult area. The winery is intended to become a distinguishing focal point for the city as a whole, and the village center is intended to serve the needs of the surrounding community, and not compete with downtown commercial activities. All uses will be in conformance with the adopted general plan with amendments. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.514.002 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea A.
     Low density residential area with active adult neighborhoods, executive neighborhoods, a recreation center, a water tank and pump stations, storm drainage basins, parks and associated open space.

     A.    Permitted Uses.

     1.     Single-family single-story detached for age-restricted occupancy;

     2.     Duet units for age-restricted occupancy;

     3.     Single-family detached homes for non-age-restricted occupancy;

     4.     Single-family uses not exceeding a density of five dwelling units per gross acre;

     5.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     6.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     7.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     8.     Model home sales facilities;

     9.     Recreation center and related facilities including clubhouse, tennis courts, swimming pools, maintenance structures and related recreation facilities;

     10.   Homeowners’ association recreation buildings, tennis courts, swimming pools, gatehouses, other common-use facilities and open area;

     11.   Water tank, pump stations and associated structures;

     12.   Detention basin, water quality basin and associated structures;

     13.   Agricultural planting areas with vineyards and olive groves, maintenance and related structures;

     14.   Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     15.   Parks, playgrounds and recreational trail;

     16.   Other uses determined by the community development department to be similar to and compatible with the preceding permitted uses.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses.

     1.     Uses ancillary to a recreation center, which will serve persons other than residents of the active adult community, such as a restaurant or bar;

     2.     Other uses determined by the community development department to be similar to the ancillary use.

     C.     General Development Standards.

     1.     Maximum Number of Units and Minimum Lot Area.

     a.     Maximum Active Adult Units. A maximum of one thousand one hundred single story active adult Single-Family dwelling units and duets shall be permitted within the lands of subarea A.

     b.     Maximum Executive Units. A maximum of one hundred fifty single-family dwelling units shall be permitted within the lands of subarea A.

     c.     Recreation Center. One community center which may have a distinguishing tower that exceeds thirty-five feet in height, is allowed on a centrally located approximately nine-acre site.

     d.     Lot area. Minimum lot area shall be four thousand square feet for active adult single-family lots, two thousand five hundred square feet for active adult duet lots, and nine thousand square feet for executive single-family lots. A variety of lot sizes, larger than the minimums, shall be included to provide a variety of housing products and yard conditions.

     e.     Setbacks, Height and Parking. Each yard setback below shall be measured from its respective property line, regardless of guest parking bays, except that measurement shall be from the back of sidewalk wherever a street’s sidewalk lies inside a lot. All yard setbacks shall be measured to the nearest specified wall of the dwelling. Allowable projections into yard setbacks shall be as set forth in Section 17.660.005, Encroachments Into Required Yards.

 

The Vineyards at Marsh Creek Setback Criteria and Lot Coverage

 

Active Adult Residential

Duet Lot

48′ x 97′ Lot

58′ x 97′ Lot

72′-75′ x 97′ Lot

Minimum Frontage on a Curve/Cul-de-sac or Knuckle

18′

35′

35′

35′

A. Minimum Front Yard

 

 

 

 

1. To a garage door of a front-entry garage

18′

18′

18′

18′

2. To a wall of a side entry garage

12′

12′

12′

12′

3. To a wall of a habitable room

12′

12′

12′

12′

B. Minimum Side Yard Adjoining a Street

10′

10′

10′

10′

C. Minimum Side Yard at an Interior Lot Line

 

 

 

 

1. To a wall of a garage

0/5′

5′

5′

5′

2. To a wall of a habitable room

0/5′

5′

5′

5′

3. To landscape structures not exceeding 6′ in height

3′

3′

3′

3′

4. Aggregate, both side yards at garage

5′

10′

10′

10′

5. Aggregate, both side yards at non-garage

5′

10′

10′

10′

6. Aggregate, both side yards at landscape walls

3′

6′

6′

6′

D. Minimum Rear Yard

 

8′ minimum with a 15′ average

8′ minimum with a 15′ average

8′ minimum with a 15′ average

E. Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces

 

 

 

 

1. In a garage

2

2

2

2

2. In a driveway

2

2

2

2

F. Maximum Building Height

35′

35′

35′

35′

 

G. Lot Coverage (Note: all plans are single story)

Sq. Ft.

% Coverage

%Coverage

% Coverage

Plan 1

1737

37.31

 

 

Plan 2

2135

45.85

 

 

Plan 3

2221

47.70

 

 

Plan 4

2357

 

41.89

 

Plan 5

2515

 

44.70

 

Plan 6

2664

 

47.40

 

Plan 7

2966

 

 

40.77

Plan 8

3003

 

 

41.29

Plan 9

3189

 

 

43.79

Executive Single-Family Residential

9,000 SF Lot

13,000 SF Lot

Minimum 9,000 SF

Minimum 13,000 SF

Average 11,500SF

Average 17,000SF

(Min 70′ x 110′)

(Min 75′ x 110′)

Minimum Frontage on a Curve/Cul-de-sac or Knuckle

35′

35′

A. Minimum Front Yard

 

 

1. To a garage door of a front-entry garage

20′

20′

2. To a wall of a side entry garage

15′

15′

3. To a wall of a habitable room

15′

15′

B. Minimum Side Yard Adjoining a Street

10′

15′

C. Minimum Side Yard at an Interior Lot Line

 

 

1. Minimum/aggregate setbacks

5/15

10/20

D. Minimum Rear Yard

15′ first floor

Lots backing onto 20′ second floor

 

20′ second floor

Fairview: 20′ first floor; 25′ second floor; other lots 25′

E. Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces

 

 

1. In a garage

3

3

2. In a driveway

2

2

3. Total off-street

5

5

F. Maximum Building Height

35′

35′

G. Lot Coverage

% Coverage

% Coverage

1. Single story

45

45

2. Two-story

40

40

 

 

     D.    Construction Standards for Active Adult and Executive Housing.

     1.     Variety in Building Mass. Variety in building mass shall be accomplished by:

     a.     Inclusion in the floor plans available for purchase, varying front façade design, such as side-entry garages and varying the entryway location and design;

     b.     Avoidance of use of a single façade design more than twice in any group of contiguous homes;

     c.     Inclusion of floor plan purchase-options, such as additional golf cart garage space, which alters the visual mass of a floor plan;

     d.     Executive single-family homes that back up onto Fairview shall have one story profiles. This is defined by having a minimum of a five-foot horizontal setback between the first and second floors, having a single story component for at least eighty percent of the length of the rear elevation. See the development plan and related exhibits for lot locations and example profiles.

     e.     At the time site design and development review of multiple floor plans, incorporating design variations such as those described above, shall be submitted.

     E.     Additional Residential Design Items.

     1.     Design Review. Design review shall be required as follows:

     a.     Residential Buildings. Design and site development review shall be required pursuant to Chapter 17.820. The architectural style has a palette of cut and rustic stone with hues of rose, buff and ochre, ornamental carved or cast stone, terra cotta colored clay or concrete roof tile, awning shutters, detailed ironwork and plants in terra cotta pots. Residential units have been organized for “street presence” with several models possessing gathering and semi-private terraces on the street side of the property. Identifying features may consist of:

     i.      Roofs are typically “S” and barrel concrete or clay tiles at a low pitch;

     ii.     Doors and windows are generally recessed into thick walls;

     iii.    Accents may include tile surround, metal railings, shutters and awnings;

     iv.    Use of columns, window and door surrounds.

     b.     Landscaping, Fencing and Walls. Landscaping, fencing and walls in areas adjoining a public or private street shall conform to the plans approved by the planning commission. Individual lot landscaping includes a lawn area and a palette of groundcovers and smaller trees in the front and side yards with a mix of shrubs, flowering groundcovers and grasses to provide moderate privacy screening and seasonal interest. Where lot size permits, gardens will be anchored by larger shade trees. Trellises or patio trees that shade courtyards off of living spaces are encouraged. Trellises and walls may be covered with climbing landscaping. Walls are generally stucco, smooth and in earth tone colors. Gatehouses will reflect the residential architecture and incorporate community monumentation.

     c.     Public and Common Open Space. As part of the aesthetic productive landscape, grapes and olives will be cultivated wherever possible. In larger open-space production areas, grapes will be grown in rows spaced to allow mechanical harvesting. However, in some areas where aesthetics are equally important such as the rows flanking Fairview Avenue, the rows may have to be spaced more tightly and thus harvested by hand. Olive orchards can be located on slopes that are steeper than three to one. Harvest will be by hand or mechanical means, depending on orchard access.

     Since the agricultural components are part of a true working landscape, access within the vineyards and orchards will be restricted to those who are growing the grapes and olives. Limited pedestrian and service vehicular access only will be allowed where possible in designated areas.

     d.     Recreation Facilities and Conditional Use Permit Uses. Design and site development review approval by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 17.820 shall be required for the following:

     i.      Recreation center buildings and accompanying outdoor facilities such as pools;

     (a)    Design elements may include stone accents and a distinguishing tower. Large view oriented spaces will be designed as lightly scaled trellis or outdoor loggia elements (though glass enclosed) attached to the more traditional mass of this architectural character.

     ii.     Buildings for which approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission is required.

     F.     Roadway Items.

     1.     Fairview Avenue. Public one hundred forty-foot right-of-way, including two to four travel lanes, turn lanes at intersections, bike lanes, with no parking allowed. Landscaping to allow vineyards and olive groves in addition to traditional street trees and groundcover. Public eight-foot multi use path located on each side of Fairview Avenue.

     2.     Local Spine Streets. Private thirty-six-foot curb-to-curb, including two travel lanes and on-street parking allowed. One side only five-feet of traditional landscaping between a separated four-foot sidewalk and the curb. Ten-foot PUE, that overlaps the right-of-way by six-inches located each side of the roadway.

     3.     Local Streets. Private thirty-six-foot curb-to-curb, including two travel lanes and on-street parking allowed. One side only four and one-half-foot curb adjacent sidewalk. Ten-foot PUE, that overlaps the right-of-way by six-inches located each side of the roadway. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.514.003 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea B.
     Mixed use business park winery, amphitheater and associated uses.

     A.    Permitted Uses.

     1.     Winery including tasting rooms, storage, production and general commercial retail and service businesses which are ancillary to the primary winery uses;

     2.     Amphitheater that hosts events with dancing and/or live entertainment and amplified sound;

     3.     Parks, playgrounds and recreational trail;

     4.     Accessory facilities including kitchens, lodging for VIP guests and performers, offices and parking lots or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     5.     Up to four single-family homes on quarter-acre lots;

     6.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses.

     1.     Tasting room and stores which sell beer and/or wine (packaged goods off-sale);

     2.     Neighborhood bar and/or restaurant which serves or sells alcoholic beverages;

     3.     Outdoor sales or display;

     4.     Temporary and Interim Uses. The following uses may be permitted as a temporary interim use. The CUP will establish the timeframe for these activities:

     a.     Nursery;

     b.     Produce market;

     c.     Auction gallery;

     d.     Flea market;

     e.     Craft and art fairs;

     C.     General Development Standards.

     1.     Setbacks, Height and Parking. Each yard setback below shall be measured from its respective property line, except that measurement shall be from the back of sidewalk wherever a street’s sidewalk lies inside a lot. All yard setbacks shall be measured to the nearest specified wall of the dwelling. Allowable projections into yard setbacks shall be as set forth in Section 17.660.005, Encroachments Into Required Yards.

     a.     Front yard setback: Ten feet from curb line or parking bay, five feet from property line;

     b.     Side yard setback: Zero lot line, minimum;

     c.     Rear yard setback: Five feet from property line;

     d.     Maximum height: Forty-five feet or three stories;

     e.     Parking: Per code, with shared parking allowed.

     2.     Design Standards. The site is characterized as a sloping site overlooking the historic John Marsh Home and the new Fairview Avenue, intended for a winery. The winery complex may be a collection of major buildings plus several secondary buildings and set in the midst of vineyards and olive trees. The architecture can vary from California Mission Style to the Vineyards at Marsh Creek Mediterranean style, featuring tiled roofs and arched arcades. A turf amphitheater will provide a venue for concerts.

     Winery buildings for production, storage and shipping may total over eighty thousand square feet. A public events building provides for conferences, weddings, tasting events and retail sales. Picnicking areas may be included in the landscaping and winery tours may be offered.

     The vineyards and landscaping may extend into the public rights-of-way and common spaces between new residential areas. Pedestrian and golf cart paths may link the residential areas to the winery. Parking for concerts (more than three hundred spaces) and employees/visitors (more than eighty spaces) should be onsite or planned in a shared parking arrangement with nearby uses (i.e., village center, community college, etc.).

     The winery site may provide a site for cultural, social and entertainment events for the community. The vineyards and winery operation represent not only a cultural amenity in the community, but also an appropriate, credible link to the agricultural heritage of the city of Brentwood. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.514.004 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea C.
     Attached duet active adult residential neighborhoods, parks and associated open space.

     A.    Permitted Uses.

     1.     Duet units for age-restricted occupancy;

     2.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     3.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     4.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     5.     Model home sales facilities;

     6.     Recreation center and related facilities including clubhouse, tennis courts, swimming pools, maintenance structures and related recreation facilities;

     7.     Homeowners’ association recreation buildings, tennis courts, sports fields, swimming pools, gatehouses, other common-use facilities and open area;

     8.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     9.     Parks, playgrounds and recreational trail;

     10.   Other uses determined by the community development department to be similar to and compatible with the preceding permitted uses.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses.

     1.     Uses ancillary to a recreation center, which will serve persons other than residents of the active adult community, such as a restaurant or bar;

     2.     Other uses determined by the community development department to be similar to the ancillary use.

     C.     General Development Standards.

     1.     Maximum Number of Units and Minimum Lot Area.

     a.     Maximum Active Adult Units. A maximum of seventy-two active adult duets shall be permitted within the lands of subarea C.

     b.     Minimum lot area shall be three thousand two hundred square feet for active adult duet lots.

     c.     Setbacks, Height and Parking. Each yard setback below shall be measured from its respective property line, regardless of guest parking bays, except that measurement shall be from the back of sidewalk wherever a street’s sidewalk lies inside a lot. All yard setbacks shall be measured to the nearest specified wall of the dwelling. Allowable projections into yard setbacks shall be as set forth in Section 17.660.005, Encroachments into Required Yards.

 

Barcelona Setback Criteria and Lot Coverage

 

Active Adult Residential

Duel Lot

Minimum Frontage on a Curve/Cul-de-Sac or Knuckle

18′

A. Minimum Front Yard

1. To a garage door of a front-entry garage

20′

2. To a wall of a habitable room

10′

B. Minimum Side Yard Adjoining a Street

10′

C. Minimum Side Yard at an Interior Lot Line

1. To a wall of a garage

0/5′

2. To a wall of a habitable room

0/5′

3. To landscape structures not exceeding 6′ in height

3′

4. Aggregate, both side yards at garage

5′

5. Aggregate, both side yards at non-garage

5′

6. Aggregate, both side yards at landscape walls

3′

D. Minimum Rear Yard

5′

E. Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces

1. In a garage

2

2. In a driveway

2

F. Maximum Building Height

35′

G. Line of Sight Requirements

None

H. Lot Coverage (First Floor Only)

% Max

Plan 1

65

Plan 2

65

Plan 3

65

Plan 4

65

 

     D.    Construction Standards for Duet Active Adult Housing.

     1.     Variety in building mass shall be accomplished by:

     a.     Combination of floor plans both single- and two-story that provide a variation of building heights;

     b.     Varying façade design;

     c.     Asymmetrical treatment of the building elevations including the use of varying entry shapes (arches and flat soffits) gable ends and shed roofs, varying the roof shapes over the garages (gable ends and shed roofs).

     E.     Additional Residential Design Items.

     1.     Design Review. Design review shall be required as follows:

     a.     Residential Buildings. The Architectural style is to be true to the wine country inspired feel of the residences in Subarea A. Vineyard Cottage style provides a design indicative of a winery while reimagined for today’s homeowner.

     i.      Defined with a mix of exterior applications, including rustic stone veneer, brick, and wood, the materials help define the historical roots of the style;

     ii.     Steep gable roofs along with varying intersecting pitches and occasional use of dormers further express the cottage nature of the style;

     iii.    Arched brick headers, decorative shutters, and siding at gable ends come together to give this style elegance and charm;

     iv.    Principal openings such as entry doors or front facing windows are recessed or enhanced with shutters, stone veneers, or pot shelves.

     b.     Landscaping, Fencing and Walls. Individual lot landscaping may include some or all: turf (natural and/or artificial), a palette of groundcovers and smaller trees, with a mix of shrubs, flowering groundcovers and grasses to provide moderate privacy screening and seasonal interest. Where lot size permits, gardens will be anchored by larger shade trees. Patio covers, trellises and/or patio trees that shade courtyards off of living spaces are encouraged. Trellises and walls may be covered with climbing landscaping. Natural wood privacy fences and wrought iron view fences on open space will be consistent with the fences used in the residential area of Subarea A. Walls are generally stucco, smooth and in earth tone colors, again consistent with that which is used in residential area of Subarea A.

     c.     Conditional Use Permit Uses. Design and site development review approval by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 17.820 shall be required for the following:

i.   Local Streets. Private thirty-six-foot curb-to-curb or street back of curb to back of curb for beveled curb sections, including two travel lanes. On-street parking other than on the morning of garbage collection is allowed only for visitors. One side only four and one-half-foot curb adjacent sidewalk. Eight-foot PUE that overlaps the right- of-way by six-inches located each side of the roadway. (Ord. 988 § 2, 2017; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.514.005 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea D.
     PG&E site.

     A.    Permitted Uses. PG&E Brentwood facility and related uses.

     B.     Conditionally permitted uses: None.

     C.     General Development Standards.

     1.     To be defined at a later date as applicable, when plan is proposed. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.514.006 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea E.
     John Marsh House State Park site.

     A.    Permitted Uses. John Marsh House State Park and related uses.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses. To be defined at a later date as applicable, when plan is proposed.

     C.     Development Standards. To be defined at a later date as applicable, when plan is proposed. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.514.007 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea F.
     Attached duet active adult residential neighborhoods, parks and associated open space.

     A.    Permitted Uses.

     1.     Duet units for age-restricted occupancy;

     2.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     3.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     4.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     5.     Model home sales facilities;

     6.     Recreation center and related facilities including clubhouse, tennis courts, swimming pools, maintenance structures and related recreation facilities;

     7.     Homeowners’ association recreation buildings, tennis courts, sports fields, swimming pools, gatehouses, other common-use facilities and open area;

     8.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     9.     Parks, playgrounds and recreational trail;

     10.   Other uses determined by the community development department to be similar to and compatible with the preceding permitted uses.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses.

     1.     Uses ancillary to a recreation center, which will serve persons other than residents of the active adult community, such as a restaurant or bar;

     2.     Other uses determined by the community development department to be similar to the ancillary use.

     C.     General Development Standards.

     1.     Maximum Number of Units and Minimum Lot Area.

     a.     Maximum Active Adult Units. A maximum of one hundred forty active adult duets shall be permitted within the lands of subarea F.

     b.     Minimum lot area shall be three thousand two hundred square feet for active adult duet lots.

     c.     Setbacks, Height and Parking. Each yard setback below shall be measured from its respective property line, regardless of guest parking bays, except that measurement shall be from the back of sidewalk wherever a street’s sidewalk lies inside a lot. All yard setbacks shall be measured to the nearest specified wall of the dwelling. Allowable projections into yard setbacks shall be as set forth in Section 17.660.005, Encroachments into Required Yards.

 

Barcelona Setback Criteria and Lot Coverage

Active Adult Residential

Duel Lot

Minimum Frontage on a Curve/Cul-de-sac or Knuckle

18′

Minimum Front Yard

 

To a garage door of a front-entry garage

20′

To a wall of a habitable room

10′

Minimum Side Yard Adjoining a Street

10′

Minimum Side Yard at an Interior Lot Line

 

To a wall of a garage

0/5′

To a wall of a habitable room

0/5′

To landscape structures not exceeding 6′ in height

3′

Aggregate, both side yards at garage

5′

Aggregate, both side yards at non-garage

5′

Aggregate, both side yards at landscape walls

3′

Minimum Rear Yard

5′

Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces

 

In a garage

2

In a driveway

2

Maximum Building Height

35′

Line of Sight Requirements

None

Lot Coverage (First Floor Only)

% Max

Plan 1

65

Plan 2

65

Plan 3

65

Plan 4

65

 

     D.    Construction Standards for Duet Active Adult Housing.

     1.     Variety in building mass shall be accomplished by:

     a.     Combination of floor plans both single- and two-story that provide a variation of building heights;

     b.     Varying façade design;

     c.     Asymmetrical treatment of the building elevations including the use of varying entry shapes (arches and flat soffits) gable ends and shed roofs, varying the roof shapes over the garages (gable ends and shed roofs).

     E.     Additional Residential Design Items.

     1.     Design Review. Design review shall be required as follows:

     a.     Residential Buildings. The architectural style is to be true to the wine country inspired feel of the residences in subarea A. Vineyard Cottage style provides a design indicative of a winery while reimagined for today’s homeowner.

     i.      Defined with a mix of exterior applications, including rustic stone veneer, brick, and wood, for Vineyard Cottage; deep set windows, pot shelves, stucco for Spanish, French, and Italianate; variations on these themes for a Napa expression of these styles; the materials help to define the historical roots of the style.

     ii.     Steep gable roofs along with varying intersecting pitches and occasional use of dormers further express the Vineyard Cottage nature of the style; while low-pitched roofs exemplify the Spanish and Italianate styles; hip roofs with suggestions of mansard roof style for a French version; and the Napa expression could be one or a combination of any of these including parapet styles.

     iii.    Arched brick headers, decorative shutters, and siding at gable ends come together to give this style elegance and charm.

     iv.    Principal openings such as entry doors or front facing windows are recessed or enhanced with shutters, stone veneers, or pot shelves.

     b.     Landscaping, Fencing and Walls. Individual lot landscaping may include some or all: turf (natural and/or artificial), a palette of groundcovers and smaller trees, with a mix of shrubs, flowering groundcovers and grasses to provide moderate privacy screening and seasonal interest. Where lot size permits, gardens will be anchored by larger shade trees. Patio covers, trellises and/or patio trees that shade courtyards off of living spaces are encouraged. Trellises and walls may be covered with climbing landscaping. Natural wood privacy fences and wrought iron view fences on open space will be consistent with the fences used in the residential area of subarea A. Walls are generally to be made of stucco, smooth and in earth tone colors, again consistent with that which is used in residential area of subarea A.

     c.     Design and site development review approval by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 17.820 shall be required for the following:

     i.      Local Streets. Private thirty-six-foot curb-to-curb or street back of curb to back of curb for beveled curb sections, including two travel lanes. On-street parking other than on the morning of garbage collection is allowed only for visitors. One side only four and one-half-foot curb adjacent sidewalk. Eight-foot PUE that overlaps the right-of-way by six inches located each side of the roadway. (Ord. 1005 § 1, 2018)

 

17.514.008 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Section 17.100.003 and subsection H of Section 17.100.004.

     B.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     C.     Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17 660.

     D.    Signs subject to Chapter 17.640.

     E.     The development of this zoning district shall be substantially in accordance with the development plan. Variations in the development plan including street and lot pattern may be approved though the community development department.

     F.     Allowable projections into yard setbacks shall be set forth in Section 17.6360.005, Encroachments into Required Yards. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.514.009 Exceptions.
     A.    Exception to Zoning Regulations. The community development department may permit exceptions to the regulations of this chapter and the remainder Title 17 upon finding that granting of the exception will constitute an insignificant deviation from the land uses, activities and construction otherwise resulting from strict application of the regulations of this chapter. This exception specifically includes:

     1.     One pylon/monument sign adjacent to Highway 4 on a smaller parcel and at a maximum height no greater than the maximum building height specified in the subarea;

     2.     Tower elements in subareas A, B and C at a maximum height no greater than the maximum building height specified in the subarea;

     3.     Density in subarea C at forty du/acre and a four story maximum height.

     B.     Exception to Engineering Standards. The city engineer may permit exceptions to adopted city engineering standards in the city’s Title 17, Subdivision and Land Department Ordinance, the engineering design standards, the standard drawings upon finding that granting the exception will constitute an insignificant deviation from the land uses, activities and construction otherwise resulting from strict application of the regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.514.010 Map for PD-64.
 



(Ord. 960 § 21, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.515 PD-65 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIXTY-FIVE) ZONE
17.515.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-65 (planned development sixty-five) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-65  is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-65  zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the area shown on the development plan and related exhibits in accordance with the Brentwood general plan for a maximum of five hundred eleven lots. The PD-65  area is divided into six subareas as shown on the development plan and related exhibits.

     C.     Intent. The zoning district is intended to provide a neighborhood with a diverse mix of single-family homes on various lot sizes, recreational amenities and open space in conformance with the adopted general plan. The boundaries of the PD-65 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.515.011. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.515.002 Permitted uses for each subarea.
     A.    Subarea A.

     1.     Single-family dwelling units;

     2.     Parks, playgrounds and recreation trails;

     3.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     4.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     5.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     6.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670.

     B.     Subarea B.

     1.     Single-family dwelling units;

     2.     Parks, playgrounds and recreation trails;

     3.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     4.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     5.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     6.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670.

     C.     Subarea C.

     1.     Single-family dwelling units;

     2.     Parks, playgrounds and recreation trails;

     3.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     4.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     5.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     6.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670.

     D.    Subarea D.

     1.     Single-family dwelling units;

     2.     Parks, playgrounds and recreation trails;

     3.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     4.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     5.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     6.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     7.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670.

     E.     Subarea E (Duet Lots).

     1.     Single-family attached dwelling units;

     2.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     3.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     4.     Home occupation subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     5.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670.

     F.     Subarea F (Swim Club).

     1.     Swimming and related facilities serving the surrounding Rose Garden neighborhood only, including pools and pool equipment, shade structures, restrooms, shower areas, changing areas, aquatic apparatus, meeting rooms, facility staff offices, and vending machines. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.515.003 Conditionally permitted uses for each subarea.
     A.    Subarea A.

     1.     Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005;

     2.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     3.     Nursery, child care, day care center.

     B.     Subarea B.

     1.     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Section 17.130.003 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone), which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city;

     2.     Nursery, child care, day care center.

     C.     Subarea C.

     1.     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Section 17.130.003 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone), which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city;

     2.     Nursery, child care, day care center.

     D.    Subarea D.

     1.     Conditionally permitted uses are those uses identified in Section 17.130.003 of the zoning ordinance (the R-1, single-family residential zone), which are subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the city;

     2.     Nursery, child care, day care center.

     E.     Subarea E (Duet Lots).

     1.     Nursery, child care, day care center.

     F.     Subarea F (Swim Club).

     1.     Privately or publicly sponsored recreational events or ongoing activities involving twenty or more guests from outside the neighborhood including, but not limited to, swim meets, swim lessons, swim practices, lap swimming and social gatherings;

     2.     Snack bar, café, or staffed food-service enterprise. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.515.004 General development standards for subarea A.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Seven thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty-five feet except for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets that shall be at least forty feet measured at the front property line;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Eighty-five feet;

     D.    Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street-facing garages, fifteen feet for turned garage and living space, and twelve feet for front porches measured to front of property line;

     E.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of fifteen feet for both sides. For corner lots, the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet;

     F.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet for main residence and five feet for detached living areas;

     G.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories for main residence and sixteen feet and one story for detached living areas;

     H.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent for single-story units; forty percent for two-story units including main residence and detached living area;

     I.      Maximum number of lots: One hundred twenty-six. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.515.005 General development standards for subarea B.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Five thousand nine hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Sixty-five feet except for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets that shall be forty feet at the front property line;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Seventy feet;

     D.    Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street-facing garages, fifteen feet for turned garages and living space, and twelve feet for front porches measured to the front property line;

     E.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of fifteen feet for both sides. For corner lots, the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet. Porte-cochere and trellis elements may encroach into the minimum side yard setback;

     F.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet and five feet for recessed garages;

     G.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     H.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent for single-story units; forty percent for two-story units;

     I.      Maximum number of lots: Ninety-three. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.515.006 General development standards for subarea C.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Four thousand nine hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Fifty feet except for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets that shall be a minimum of thirty feet at the front property line;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Ninety feet;

     D.    Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street-facing garages, fifteen feet for turned garage and living space, and twelve feet for front porches measured to the front property line;

     E.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of ten feet for both sides. For corner lots, the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet. Porte-cochere and trellis elements may encroach into the minimum side yard setback;

     F.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet and five feet for recessed garages;

     G.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     H.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent for single-story units; forty percent for two-story units;

     I.      Maximum number of units: One hundred forty-eight. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.515.007 General development standards for subarea D.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Three thousand five hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Forty-five feet except for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets that shall be a minimum of thirty feet at the front property line;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Seventy feet;

     D.    Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street-facing garages, fifteen feet for living space, and twelve feet for front porches measured to the front property line;

     E.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of ten feet for both sides. For corner lots, the street side yard setback shall be a minimum of ten feet. Porte-cochere and trellis elements may encroach into the minimum setback;

     F.     Minimum rear yard setback: Twelve feet and five feet for recessed garages;

     G.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     H.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent for single-story units; forty percent for two-story units;

     I.      Maximum number of units: One hundred fourteen. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.515.008 General development standards for subarea E (duet lots).
     A.    Minimum lot area: Three thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Thirty-five feet except for lots adjacent to parks that shall be a minimum of eighteen feet at the front property line;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Fifty-five feet;

     D.    Minimum front yard setback: Fifteen feet;

     E.     Minimum side yard setback: Zero feet and a total of seven and one-half feet for both sides of interior lots and five feet and a total of fifteen feet for both sides on corner lots. For corner lots, the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet;

     F.     Minimum rear yard setback: Zero feet if unit is attached;

     G.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet and two stories;

     H.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five percent for single-story units; forty percent for two-story units;

     I.      Maximum number of units: Thirty. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.515.009 General development standards for subarea F (swim club).
     A.    Maximum building height: Thirty feet;

     B.     All new development within subarea F of PD-65  shall be subject to design and site development review pursuant to Chapter 17.820 and all other applicable criteria established by the city through policy or resolution. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.515.010 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provision of Chapter 17.660 with the exception that no feature may project into the maximum front yard setback.

     F.     The development of this zoning district shall be substantially in accordance with the approved development plan. Variations in the development plan including street and lot pattern may be approved through the subdivision map process. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.515.011 Map for PD-65.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.516 PD-66 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIXTY-SIX) ZONE
17.516.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-66 (planned development sixty-six) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-66 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-66 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of 123.04 acres located generally on the south side of the Grant Street extension, east of the union pacific railroad tracks, on either side of the O’Hara Avenue extension, with very low and low density residential uses in accordance with the Brentwood general plan.

     C.     Intent. The intent of creating the PD-66 zone is to ensure the coordinated development of the entire property in order to minimize impacts on adjacent properties. The boundary of the PD-66 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.516.005. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.516.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the PD-66 zone:

     A.    Those uses permitted under the R-1 zone, Section 17.130.002;

     B.     Parks and recreational trails. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.516.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830, the following uses are permitted:

     A.    Those uses permitted under the R-1 zone, Section 17.130.003. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.516.004 General development standards.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses developed within the PD-66 zone shall comply with the following regulations:

     A.    Minimum lot size: Eight thousand square feet, with the exception of Lots 107—112, 136—143, and 172—176, which shall have a minimum size of twenty thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: Seventy feet at the front of the house (fifty-five feet for curved streets, culs-de-sac, and knuckles);

     C.     Minimum lot depth: Eighty feet;

     D.    Minimum lot frontage: Seventy feet (thirty-three feet for curved streets, culs-de-sac, and knuckles);

     E.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet to front loading garages, fifteen feet to side-loading garages and building walls;

     F.     Minimum side yard setback: Seven feet with an aggregate of twenty feet (ten feet on the street side of corner lots);

     G.    Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty feet;

     H.    Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660;

     I.      Maximum building height: Thirty feet or two stories;

     J.      A minimum of twenty-five percent of the lots shall have single-story units;

     K.    Maximum number of units: Three hundred eleven;

     L.     Side-loading garage: Ten percent of the lots shall have side-loading garages;

     M.    Fifty percent of the corner lots shall have single-story units;

     N.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent for two-story homes and forty-five percent for single-story homes;

     O.    Maximum fence height: The maximum fence height may exceed the six-foot standard if approved by the community development director to address land use compatibility issues between the existing single-family homes and the proposed lots in VTSM 8788, as well as any lots adjacent to the neighborhood park site (Lots 177-183). (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.516.005 Map for PD-66.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.517 PD-67 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIXTY-SEVEN) ZONE
17.517.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose, and intent for the adoption of the PD-67 (planned development number sixty-seven) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. The PD-67 zone is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations, of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-67 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the area in accordance with the Brentwood general plan for medium density residential, very high density residential, and general commercial uses. The PD-67 zone is divided into six subareas as shown on the subarea map in Section 17.517.009.

     C.     Intent. The PD-67 zone is intended to provide a distinguished neighborhood of single-family homes arranged in an efficient “pod” configuration, a one hundred twenty unit senior apartment complex, commercial areas for general commercial uses including restaurants, medical offices, and retail uses, and recreational amenities and open space in conformance with the adopted general plan. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.517.002 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea A (general commercial area).
     A.    Permitted Uses for Subarea A.

     1.     Retail sales or rentals of new merchandise or service:

     a.     Convenience retail uses such as a bakery, pastry shop, coffee shop, candy store, newsstand, ice cream parlor, etc.,

     b.     Clothing stores and sporting goods stores,

     c.     Pharmacies and drug stores,

     d.     Grocery stores and delicatessens,

     e.     Hardware stores,

     f.      Stores that sell alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption as an ancillary use,

     g.     Bookstores and video stores,

     h.     Florist,

     i.      Stationary stores and gift shops,

     j.      Printing and copying stores,

     k.     Office supply stores;

     2.     Sales of personal or financial services such as:

     a.     Barber shops, beauty salons and spas,

     b.     Banks and savings and loans, ATMs and other financial institutions,

     c.     Clothes cleaning, laundry pickup stations, launderettes, pressing shops and shoe repair facilities;

     3.     Nurseries and pre-schools;

     4.     Studios and instructional facilities, such as dance studios, music studios, or similar establishments;

     5.     Public and quasi-public uses, such as government offices, libraries, post offices, employment offices, utility offices, and similar uses;

     6.     Professional and business offices including medical offices;

     7.     Veterinary clinics;

     8.     Hotels;

     9.     Health and fitness centers;

     10.   Parks, playgrounds, and recreational trails;

     11.   Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     12.   Finished product assembly such as computer assembly, bookbinding and garment manufacture;

     13.   Commercial or retail uses that may or may not manufacture their primary product on the premises such as drapery shops, upholstery shops, carpet sales, spa sales, satellite dish sales and furniture sales provided that there is no outdoor storage;

     14.   Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses for Subarea A.

     1.     Retail stores that sell alcoholic beverages for on or off-premises consumption as a primary use;

     2.     Restaurants, including those which sell or serve alcoholic beverages, and provide outdoor use of designated seating areas;

     3.     Drive-thru facilities;

     4.     Temporary and interim uses: the following uses may be temporarily permitted, upon approval of a CUP, with the individual CUP establishing the timeframe:

     a.     Nursery,

     b.     Produce market,

     c.     Auction gallery,

     d.     Flea market,

     e.     Craft and art fairs;

     5.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     6.     Other similar uses as determined by the community development director.

     C.     General Development Standards for Subarea A.

     1.     Minimum lot area: One acre, except that a master planned development may be subdivided into parcels having a minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet;

     4.     Maximum building height: Two stories, not to exceed thirty feet;

     5.     Building setbacks:

     a.     Balfour Road: Thirty feet from back of curb (includes ROW and landscape easement),

     b.     Balfour Way: Twenty-five feet to ROW (landscape easement),

     c.     John Muir Parkway: Ten feet to ROW,

     d.     Interior property lines: Ten feet on each property and clear of utility easements;

     6.     General development design and site development review requirements. Development within subarea A shall be subject to design and site development review pursuant to Chapter 17.820, other applicable criteria established by the city through policy or resolution, and the architectural design guidelines prepared for the Cox Property. Generally,

        “In order to create a strong, memorable and appropriate architectural theme, a preferred architectural vocabulary has been established to guide commercial developers and neighborhood builders and their architects for the Cox Property.

        This theme is derived from traditional Tuscan building forms and materials (and contemporized through the addition of metal canopies, strong geometric detailing, offset wall plans, and varied building coloration). Strong correlation between exterior façades and sidewalk surfaces and planting is integral to the success of the design theme.

        Individual tenants’ buildings are encouraged to use originality and creativity in interpreting the preferred vocabulary and criteria in these guidelines. The intent is not to create mirror image buildings. However, buildings shall be compatible in massing, form, color, and materials to achieve a sense of architectural continuity.

        In all cases, these guidelines stress the importance of visually identifying and unifying the community, as well as providing reinforcement for positive historic characteristics.”

(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.517.003 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea B (general commercial area).
     A.    Permitted Uses for Subarea B.

     1.     Retail sales or rentals of new merchandise or service:

     a.     Convenience retail uses such as a bakery, pastry shop, coffee shop, candy store, newsstand, ice cream parlor, etc.,

     b.     Clothing stores and sporting goods stores,

     c.     Pharmacies and drug stores,

     d.     Grocery stores and delicatessens,

     e.     Hardware stores,

     f.      Stores that sell alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption as an ancillary use,

     g.     Bookstores and video stores,

     h.     Florist,

     i.      Stationary stores and gift shops,

     j.      Printing and copying stores,

     k.     Office supply stores;

     2.     Sales of personal or financial services such as:

     a.     Barber shops, beauty salons and spas,

     b.     Banks and savings and loans, ATMs and other financial institutions,

     c.     Clothes cleaning, laundry pickup stations, launderettes, pressing shops and shoe repair facilities;

     3.     Nurseries and pre-schools;

     4.     Studios and instructional facilities, such as dance studios, music studios, or similar establishments;

     5.     Public and quasi-public uses, such as government offices, libraries, post offices, employment offices, utility offices and similar uses;

     6.     Professional and business offices, including medical offices;

     7.     Veterinary clinics;

     8.     Hotels;

     9.     Health and fitness centers;

     10.   Parks, playgrounds and recreational trails;

     11.   Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     12.   Finished product assembly such as computer assembly, bookbinding and garment manufacture;

     13.   Commercial or retail uses that may or may not manufacture their primary product on the premises such as drapery shops, upholstery shops, carpet sales, spa sales, satellite dish sales and furniture sales provided that there is no outdoor storage;

     14.   Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses for Subarea B.

     1.     Restaurants, including those which sell or serve alcoholic beverages, and provide outdoor use of designated seating areas;

     2.     Retail stores that sell alcoholic beverages for on or off-premises consumption as a primary use;

     3.     Drive-thru facilities;

     4.     Car washes, tire shops, new or used car sales, and vehicular repair;

     5.     Outdoor sales or display;

     6.     Temporary and interim uses: the following uses may be temporarily permitted, upon approval of a CUP, with the individual CUP establishing the timeframe:

     a.     Nursery,

     b.     Produce market,

     c.     Auction gallery,

     d.     Flea market,

     e.     Craft and art fairs;

     7.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     8.     Other similar uses as determined by the community development director.

     C.     General Development Standards for Subarea B.

     1.     Minimum lot area: One acre, except that a master planned development may be subdivided into parcels having a minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet;

     4.     Maximum building height: Two stories, not to exceed thirty feet;

     5.     Building setbacks:

     a.     Balfour Road: Thirty feet from back of curb (includes ROW and landscape easement),

     b.     Balfour Way: Twenty-five feet to ROW (landscape easement),

     c.     Interior property lines: Ten feet on each property and clear of utility easements;

     6.     General development design and site development review requirements. Development within subarea B shall be subject to design and site development review pursuant to Chapter 17.820, other applicable criteria established by the city through policy or resolution, and the architectural design guidelines prepared for the Cox Property. Generally,

        “In order to create a strong, memorable and appropriate architectural theme, a preferred architectural vocabulary has been established to guide commercial developers and neighborhood builders and their architects for the Cox Property.

        This theme is derived from traditional Tuscan building forms and materials (and contemporized through the addition of metal canopies, strong geometric detailing, offset wall plans, and varied building coloration). Strong correlation between exterior façades and sidewalk surfaces and planting is integral to the success of the design theme.

        Individual tenants’ buildings are encouraged to use originality and creativity in interpreting the preferred vocabulary and criteria in these guidelines. The intent is not to create mirror image buildings. However, buildings shall be compatible in massing, form, color, and materials to achieve a sense of architectural continuity.

        In all cases, these guidelines stress the importance of visually identifying and unifying the community, as well as providing reinforcement for positive historic characteristics.”

(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.517.004 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea C (general commercial area).
     A.    Permitted Uses for Subarea C.

     1.     Retail sales or rentals of new merchandise or service:

     a.     Convenience retail uses such as a bakery, pastry shop, coffee shop, candy store, newsstand, ice cream parlor, etc.,

     b.     Clothing stores and sporting goods stores,

     c.     Pharmacies and drug stores,

     d.     Grocery stores and delicatessens,

     e.     Hardware stores,

     f.      Stores that sell alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption as an ancillary use,

     g.     Bookstores and video stores,

     h.     Florist,

     i.      Stationary stores and gift shops,

     j.      Printing and copying stores,

     k.     Office supply stores;

     2.     Sales of personal or financial services such as:

     a.     Barber shops, beauty salons and spas,

     b.     Banks and savings and loans, ATMs and other financial institutions,

     c.     Clothes cleaning, laundry pickup stations, launderettes, pressing shops and shoe repair facilities;

     3.     Nurseries and pre-schools;

     4.     Studios and instructional facilities, such as dance studios, music studios, or similar establishments;

     5.     Public and quasi-public uses, such as government offices, libraries, post offices, employment offices, utility offices and similar uses;

     6.     Professional and business offices, including medical offices;

     7.     Veterinary clinics;

     8.     Hotels;

     9.     Health and fitness centers;

     10.   Parks, playgrounds and recreational trails;

     11.   Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     12.   Finished product assembly such as computer assembly, bookbinding and garment manufacture;

     13.   Commercial or retail uses that may or may not manufacture their primary product on the premises such as drapery shops, upholstery shops, carpet sales, spa sales, satellite dish sales and furniture sales provided that there is no outdoor storage;

     14.   Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses for Subarea C.

     1.     Gas stations;

     2.     Retail stores that sell alcoholic beverages for on or off-premises consumption as a primary use;

     3.     Restaurants, including those which sell or serve alcoholic beverages, and provide outdoor use of designated seating areas;

     4.     Drive-thru facilities;

     5.     Car washes, tire shops, new or used car sales and vehicular repair;

     6.     Outdoor sales or display;

     7.     Temporary and interim uses: the following uses may be temporarily permitted, upon approval of a CUP, with the individual CUP establishing the timeframe:

     a.     Nursery,

     b.     Produce market,

     c.     Auction gallery,

     d.     Flea market,

     e.     Craft and art fairs;

     8.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     9.     Other similar uses as determined by the community development director;

     C.     General Development Standards for Subarea C.

     1.     Minimum lot area: One acre, except that a master planned development may be subdivided into parcels having a minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet;

     4.     Maximum building height: Two stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet;

     5.     Building setbacks:

     a.     Balfour Road: Thirty feet from back of curb (includes ROW and landscape easement),

     b.     State Route 4 Bypass: Ten feet to ROW and clear of utility easements,

     c.     Interior property lines: Ten feet on each property and clear of utility easements;

     6.     General development design and site development review requirements. Development within subarea C shall be subject to design and site development review pursuant to Chapter 17.820, other applicable criteria established by the city through policy or resolution, and the architectural design guidelines prepared for the Cox Property. Generally,

        “In order to create a strong, memorable and appropriate architectural theme, a preferred architectural vocabulary has been established to guide commercial developers and neighborhood builders and their architects for the Cox Property.

        This theme is derived from traditional Tuscan building forms and materials (and contemporized through the addition of metal canopies, strong geometric detailing, offset wall plans, and varied building coloration). Strong correlation between exterior façades and sidewalk surfaces and planting is integral to the success of the design theme.

        Individual tenants’ buildings are encouraged to use originality and creativity in interpreting the preferred vocabulary and criteria in these guidelines. The intent is not to create mirror image buildings. However, buildings shall be compatible in massing, form, color, and materials to achieve a sense of architectural continuity.

        In all cases, these guidelines stress the importance of visually identifying and unifying the community, as well as providing reinforcement for positive historic characteristics.”

(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.517.005 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea D (general commercial area).
     A.    Permitted Uses for Subarea D.

     1.     Medical facilities, including medical offices, hospitals, inpatient and outpatient medical care, birthing facilities, dialysis units, medical and dental laboratories, medical schools and teaching facilities;

     2.     Other similar uses as determined by the community development director;

     3.     Retail sales or rentals of new merchandise or service:

     a.     Convenience retail uses such as a bakery, pastry shop, coffee shop, candy store, newsstand, ice cream parlor, etc.,

     b.     Clothing stores and sporting goods stores,

     c.     Pharmacies and drug stores,

     d.     Grocery stores and delicatessens,

     e.     Hardware stores,

     f.      Stores that sell alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption as an ancillary use,

     g.     Bookstores and video stores,

     h.     Florist,

     i.      Stationary stores and gift shops,

     j.      Printing and copying stores,

     k.     Office supply stores;

     4.     Sales of personal or financial services such as:

     a.     Barber shops, beauty salons and spas,

     b.     Banks and savings and loans, ATMs and other financial institutions,

     c.     Clothes cleaning, laundry pickup stations, launderettes, pressing shops and shoe repair facilities;

     5.     Nurseries and pre-schools;

     6.     Studios and instructional facilities, such as dance studios, music studios or similar establishments;

     7.     Public and quasi-public uses, such as government offices, libraries, post offices, employment offices, utility offices and similar uses;

     8.     Professional and business offices, including medical offices;

     9.     Veterinary clinics;

     10.   Hotels;

     11.   Health and fitness centers;

     12.   Parks, playgrounds and recreational trails;

     13.   Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     14.   Finished product assembly such as computer assembly, bookbinding and garment manufacture;

     15.   Commercial or retail uses that may or may not manufacture their primary product on the premises such as drapery shops, upholstery shops, carpet sales, spa sales, satellite dish sales and furniture sales provided that there is no outdoor storage;

     16.   Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses for Subarea D.

     1.     Retail stores that sell alcoholic beverages for on- or off-premises consumption as a primary use;

     2.     Restaurants, including those which sell or serve alcoholic beverages, and provide outdoor use of designated seating areas;

     3.     Drive-thru facilities;

     4.     Outdoor sales or display;

     5.     Temporary and interim uses: the following uses may be temporarily permitted, upon approval of a CUP, with the individual CUP establishing the timeframe:

     a.     Nursery,

     b.     Produce market,

     c.     Auction gallery,

     d.     Flea market,

     e.     Craft and art fairs;

     6.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     7.     Other similar uses as determined by the community development director;

     C.     General Development Standards for Subarea D.

     1.     Minimum lot area: One acre, except that a master planned development may be subdivided into parcels having a minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet;

     4.     Maximum building height: Three stories, not to exceed forty feet. Selected building elements such as towers may project to a maximum building height of forty-five feet;

     5.     Building setbacks:

     a.     Balfour Way: Twenty-five feet to ROW (landscape easement),

     b.     State Route 4 Bypass: Ten feet to ROW and clear of utility easements,

     c.     Interior property lines: Ten feet on each property and clear of utility easements;

     6.     General development design and site development review requirements. Development within subarea D shall be subject to design and site development review pursuant to Chapter 17.820, other applicable criteria established by the city through policy or resolution, and the architectural design guidelines prepared for the Cox Property. Generally,

        “In order to create a strong, memorable and appropriate architectural theme, a preferred architectural vocabulary has been established to guide commercial developers and neighborhood builders and their architects for the Cox Property.

        This theme is derived from traditional Tuscan building forms and materials (and contemporized through the addition of metal canopies, strong geometric detailing, offset wall plans, and varied building coloration). Strong correlation between exterior façades and sidewalk surfaces and planting is integral to the success of the design theme.

        Individual tenants’ buildings are encouraged to use originality and creativity in interpreting the preferred vocabulary and criteria in these guidelines. The intent is not to create mirror image buildings. However, buildings shall be compatible in massing, form, color, and materials to achieve a sense of architectural continuity. In all cases, these guidelines stress the importance of visually identifying and unifying the community, as well as providing reinforcement for positive historic characteristics.”

(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.517.006 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea E (very high density residential area).
     A.    Permitted Uses in Subarea E.

     1.     Multifamily age-restricted (fifty-five years and older) dwelling units in a complex form;

     2.     Convalescent hospitals, large residential care facilities (including residential, congregate residential and convalescent care) and facilities for the care of the sick or elderly;

     3.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     4.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     5.     Home occupations, subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     6.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     7.     Model homes sales facilities, subject to a temporary use permit;

     8.     Swimming and related facilities serving apartment residents, including pools and pool equipment, shade structures, restrooms, shower areas, changing areas, aquatic apparatus, meeting rooms, facility staff offices, snack bars, cafés or staffed food-service enterprise and vending machines;

     9.     Those uses which are permitted within the R-3 zone;

     10.   Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses in Subarea E.

     1.     Those uses which are conditionally permitted in the R-3 zone;

     2.     Privately or publicly sponsored recreational events or ongoing activities involving fifty or more guests from outside the development including, but not limited to, swim meets, swim lessons, swim practices, lap swimming and social gatherings;

     3.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     4.     Other similar uses as determined by the community development director.

     C.     General Development Standards in Subarea E.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Ten thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: One hundred feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet;

     4.     Maximum building height: Three stories, not to exceed forty-five feet. Selected building elements such as towers may project to a maximum height of fifty feet;

     5.     Building setbacks:

     a.     Balfour Way: Twenty-five feet to ROW (landscape easement),

     b.     State Route 4 Bypass: Ten feet to ROW and clear of utility easements,

     c.     Interior property lines: Ten feet on each property and clear of utility easements;

     6.     Maximum number of units: One hundred twenty;

     7.     Off-street parking for multifamily age-restricted (fifty-five years and older) dwelling units in a complex form shall be provided at the rate of one space for each unit. All other uses shall provide off-street parking in accordance with Chapter 17.620 of the Brentwood Municipal Code;

     8.     General development design and site development review requirements. Development within subarea E shall be subject to design and site development review pursuant to Chapter 17.820, other applicable criteria established by the city through policy or resolution, and the architectural design guidelines prepared for the Cox Property. Generally,

        “In order to create a strong, memorable and appropriate architectural theme, a preferred architectural vocabulary has been established to guide commercial developers and neighborhood builders and their architects for the Cox Property.

        The recommended residential architectural style is Tuscan, French, Spanish—Mediterranean. This vocabulary has its historical roots in the villas and villages of the inland French and Italian Mediterranean regions of Provence and Tuscany and has a palette of cut and rustic stone with hues of rose, buff and ochre, ornamental carved or cast stone, terra cotta colored roof tile, awning shutters, detailed iron work, and plants potted in terra cotta pots. Identifying features may consist of:

        a.        Walls are generally stucco, smooth and in earth tone colors,

        b.        Roofs are typically “S” and barrel tiles at low pitches,

        c.        Doors and windows are generally recessed into thick walls,

        d.        Accents include tile surround, metal railings, shutters and awnings,

        e.        Use of stone looking columns and window and door surrounds,

        f.        The use of trellis;

        In all cases, these guidelines stress the importance of visually identifying and unifying the community, as well as providing reinforcement for positive historic characteristics.”

(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.517.007 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea F (medium density residential area).
     A.    Permitted Uses in Subarea F.

     1.     Single-family detached dwelling units;

     2.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     3.     Temporary uses related to the primary use and subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     4.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     5.     The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     6.     Parks, playgrounds and recreational trails;

     7.     Rooming and boarding subject to Chapter 17.650.003;

     8.     Model homes sales facilities, subject to approval of a temporary use permit;

     9.     Secondary housing units in accordance with Chapter 17.100.005 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses in Subarea F.

     1.     Those uses which are conditionally permitted in the R-2 zone.

     C.     General Development Standards in Subarea F.

     1.     Minimum lot area: Three thousand square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: Forty feet;

     3.     Minimum lot depth: Forty feet;

     4.     Minimum lot frontage: Forty feet, or twenty feet for lots on culs-de-sac, knuckles or curvilinear streets at front property line and rear property lines for reverse pie shaped lots;

     5.     Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet for street facing garages; eight feet for plans 1 and 2; five feet for plans 3 and 4;

     6.     Minimum side yard setback: Five feet and a total of ten feet for both sides. For corner lots the street side yard shall be a minimum of five feet;

     7.     Minimum rear yard setback: Five feet (plans 1 and 2) and fourteen feet (plans 3 and 4—excluding breakfast nook popouts up to a maximum of three feet);

     8.     Maximum building height: Three stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet;

     9.     Maximum lot coverage: Fifty percent;

     10.   Maximum number of units: Ninety;

     11.   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620 of this title;

     12.   No single-story plans are required;

     13.   General Development Design and Site Development Review Requirements. Development within subarea F shall be subject to design and site development review pursuant to Chapter 17.820, other applicable criteria established by the city through policy or resolution, and the architectural design guidelines prepared for the Cox Property. Generally,

        “In order to create a strong, memorable and appropriate architectural theme, a preferred architectural vocabulary has been established to guide commercial developers and neighborhood builders and their architects for the Cox Property.

        The recommended residential architectural style is Tuscan, French, Spanish—Mediterranean. This vocabulary has its historical roots in the villas and villages of the inland French and Italian Mediterranean regions of Provence and Tuscany and has a palette of cut and rustic stone with hues of rose, buff and ochre, ornamental carved or cast stone, terra cotta colored roof tile, awning shutters, detailed iron work, and plants potted in terra cotta pots. Identifying features may consist of:

        a.        Walls are generally stucco, smooth and in earth tone colors,

        b.        Roofs are typically ‘S’ and barrel tiles at low pitch’s,

        c.        Doors and windows are generally recessed into thick walls,

        d.        Accents include tile surround, metal railings, shutters and awnings,

        e.        Use of stone looking columns and window and door surrounds,

        f.        The use of trellis;

        In all cases, these guidelines stress the importance of visually identifying and unifying the community, as well as providing reinforcement for positive historic characteristics.”

(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.517.008 Other regulations.
     A.    Off-street parking, unless otherwise specifically addressed in this chapter, shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H).

     B.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     C.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provision of Chapter 17.660.

     D.    All signage shall be subject to the master sign program approved for the Cox Property.

     E.     The development of the PD-67 zone shall be substantially in accordance with the various approved plans for each subarea. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.517.009 Map for PD-67.
 



(Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 960 § 22, 2015)

 

17.517.010 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses and general development standards for subarea G.
     A.    Permitted Uses for Subarea G.

     1.     Aboveground and subsurface structures related to privately operated (including any partnership or publicly traded corporation or other non-municipal ownership) and maintained pipeline facilities and all ancillary services and all ancillary uses related to the same;

     2.     Landscaping;

     3.     Perimeter security fencing and other accessory structures in accordance with Chapter 17.660; and

     4.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director, which said approval shall not be unreasonably conditioned or withheld.

     B.     Conditionally Permitted Uses for Subarea G. Uses, other than those identified in Section 17.517.008(A), that the community development director determines because of the type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances that require special consideration and conditioning through the conditional use permit procedure.

     C.     General Development Standards for Subarea G.

     1.     Minimum lot area: twenty-five thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum lot width: seventy-five feet.

     3.     Minimum lot depth: three hundred feet.

     4.     Maximum building height: two stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet.

     5.     Setbacks.

     a.     State Route 4: ten feet.

     b.     Balfour Road: twenty-five feet.

     c.     Interior property lines: ten feet.

     6.     Off-street parking and vehicular access shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620.

     7.     On-site signage shall be allowed in accordance with Chapter 17.640.

     8.     Perimeter security fencing shall be a maximum height of eight feet and shall be screened to obscure views from public right-of-way and adjacent properties. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020; Ord. 960 § 23, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.518 PD-68 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIXTY-EIGHT) ZONE
17.518.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-68 (planned development sixty-eight) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-68 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones, General Regulations, of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-68 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the Miles/Fennell properties (also known as Bella Fiore) in accordance with the Brentwood General Plan for a maximum of ninety-eight single-family residential lots, a 4.01 acre remainder parcel, and related improvements.

     C.     Intent. The PD-68 zone is intended to provide a neighborhood with a mix of single-family homes on various lots sizes, recreational amenities, and open space in conformance with the adopted general plan. The boundaries of the PD-68 zoning district and its subareas are as shown on the map in Section 17.518.007. (Ord. 934 § 2, 2014)

 

17.518.002 Permitted uses for each subarea.
     A.    Subarea A.

     1.     Single-family dwelling units;

     2.     Parks, playgrounds, and recreation trails;

     3.     Other permitted uses identified in Chapter 17.140 of the Brentwood Municipal Code (R-2 zone).

     B.     Subarea B. Those uses identified in Chapter 17.140 of the Brentwood Municipal Code as being permitted (R-2 zone). (Ord. 934 § 2, 2014)

 

17.518.003 Conditionally permitted uses for each subarea.
     A.    Subarea A.

     1.     Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005 of the Brentwood Municipal Code;

     2.     Those uses identified in Chapter 17.140 of the Brentwood Municipal Code as being conditionally permitted (R-2 zone).

     B.     Subarea B. Those uses identified in Chapter 17.140 of the Brentwood Municipal Code as being conditionally permitted (R-2 zone): nursery, childcare, day care center. (Ord. 934 § 2, 2014)

 

17.518.004 General development standards for subarea A.
     A.    Minimum lot area: three thousand seven hundred thirty square feet.

     B.     Minimum lot width: thirty seven and one-half feet.

     C.     Minimum front yard setback: five feet for living spaces, and five feet for front porches.

     D.    Minimum side yard setback: five feet.

     E.     Minimum rear yard setback: five feet.

     F.     Maximum building height: thirty feet and two stories.

     G.    Maximum lot coverage: fifty percent for main residence and detached living area. (Ord. 934 § 2, 2014)

 

17.518.005 General development standards for subarea B.
     All general development standards are as set forth in Chapter 17.140 of the Brentwood Municipal Code. (Ord. 934 § 2, 2014)

 

17.518.006 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H) of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H) of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     D.    Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provision of Chapter 17.660 of the Brentwood Municipal Code with the exceptions:

     1.     Pop-outs at garage doors may encroach two feet into the required yard setback.

     2.     Setbacks are measured to building structure. Flatwork, column flairs, architectural elements, overhangs, and non-structural build-outs may encroach two feet into all required setbacks.

     3.     Setbacks for side loading garages are measured to structural walls. Built-out or recessed window elements may encroach up to two feet into required front yard setbacks.

     F.     The development of this zoning district shall be substantially in accordance with the development plan. Variations in the development plan including street and lot pattern may be approved through the subdivision map process.

     G.    Corner lot fences shall be set back a minimum of five feet from back of sidewalk or at property lines, whichever is greater. The homeowner shall be responsible for planting and maintaining attractive landscaping in the area between the fence and sidewalk. (Ord. 934 § 2, 2014)

 

17.518.007 Map for PD-68.
 

http://gis.brentwoodca.gov/Geocortex/Essentials/REST/TempFiles/Export.jpg?guid=b42d597e-8bd4-4a47-903b-db98055a14e3&contentType=image%2Fjpeg

 

(Ord. 934 § 2, 2014)

 

Chapter 17.519 PD-69 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIXTY-NINE) ZONE
17.519.001 Authority purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-69 (planned development sixty-nine) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-69 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-69 zone is to permit and regulate the development of the City Block project, generally located west of Griffith Lane, and south of Balfour Road, in accordance with the Brentwood general plan for general commercial uses.

     C.     Intent. The PD-69 zone is intended to provide for general commercial uses including retail uses, office uses, service uses and restaurant uses in conformance with the adopted general plan. The boundary of the PD-69 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.519.007. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.519.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the PD-69 zone:

     A.    General retail uses and convenience retail uses such as a bakery, pastry shop, bookstore, candy store, florist, newsstand, stationery/gift shop, ice cream parlor, supermarket, drugstore and similar uses;

     B.     Service uses such as laundromat, laundry or dry cleaning pickup station, shoe repair, beauty and barber shop;

     C.     Professional and business offices;

     D.    Restaurant or café less than two thousand five hundred square feet per establishment restricted to sit-down or take-out facility only;

     E.     Automatic teller machine; convenience banking center, full service bank, and other financial institutions;

     F.     Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.519.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted only on the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17. 830:

     A.    Restaurant or café over two thousand five hundred square feet restricted to sit-down facility only;

     B.     On-sale or off-sale liquor establishments;

     C.     Medical and dental offices;

     D.    Nursery, child care, day care center, meeting hall or fraternal hall, community center, health club facilities or recreational/ exercise class facilities;

     E.     Other uses that the community development director determines, because of type of operation, material stored or sold, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulation through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.519.004 Prohibited uses.
     The following uses are strictly prohibited within the PD-69 zone:

     A.    Gas station, service station, and auto services or repair; car wash facilities;

     B.     Motor vehicle sales or rentals, recreational vehicle sales or rentals;

     C.     Drive-in and drive-through uses;

     D.    Light industrial and manufacturing uses;

     E.     Funeral services, mortuaries and crematoriums;

     F.     Animal boarding facilities;

     G.    Self-service storage facilities;

     H.    Outdoor storage; outdoor display unless approved through the temporary use permit process. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.519.005 Regulations for lot area, yards, height and related matters.
     A.    Minimum lot area: Four acres except that a master planned shopping center may be subdivided into parcels having a minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: One hundred fifty feet except in the event of subdivision pursuant to subsection A of this section;

     C.     Minimum street frontage: Three hundred feet except in the event of subdivision pursuant to subsection A of this section where frontage is not required provided perpetual access is provided by easements;

     D.    Minimum street frontage yards: Ten feet, which shall be screened if required pursuant to Chapter 17.630;

     E.     Minimum non-street frontage yards for property lines adjoining residentially-zoned property: Fifty feet, which shall be screened if required pursuant to Chapter 17.630;

     F.     Minimum non-street frontage yards for property lines adjoining non-residentially-zoned property: Ten feet, which shall be screened if required pursuant to Chapter 17.630;

     G.    Maximum building height: The maximum height of all structures shall be two stories not to exceed thirty feet. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.519.006 Other regulations.
     A.    Refuse Disposal Enclosure. All facilities shall provide masonry refuse disposal enclosures with exterior surfaces that are compatible with adjacent buildings and that adhere to city standards and specifications. Refuse pick-up shall be prohibited between the hours of six p.m. and seven a.m.

     B.     Parking Lot Design and Development Standards. All facilities shall comply with the design and development standards of Chapter 17.620.

     C.     Energy Conservation. All facilities shall, to the greatest extent possible, incorporate energy conservation measures in conformance with city standards and subject to design review approval.

     D.    Advertising Signs. All signs shall adhere to the approved master sign program for this project.

     E.     Landscaping and Screening. All facilities shall provide landscaping and screening in accordance with Chapter 17.630 of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     F.     Security Measures. All facilities shall provide security measures in accordance with city standards and subject to design review approval.

     G.    Illumination of Parking Facilities and Structures. All facilities shall provide adequate lighting or illumination of parking facilities and structures pursuant to Chapter 17.620 of the Brentwood Municipal Code. All lighting fixtures shall be a minimum cut-off classification. All pole-mounted and building-mounted lighting fixtures shall be mounted at a maximum twenty-foot height above the finished grade. Additionally, any building-mounted fixtures on the rear of the buildings abutting residential areas shall have any light fixtures mounted as low on the building wall as determined feasible by the community development director.

     H.    Design and Site Development Review. The design and site development review procedure contained in Chapter 17.820 of the Brentwood Municipal Code shall apply to new structures within PD-69. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.519.007 Map for PD-69.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.520 RESERVED FOR PD-70 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SEVENTY) ZONE
Chapter 17.521 PD-71 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SEVENTY-ONE) ZONE
17.521.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-71 (planned development seventy-one) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-71 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-71 zone is to permit and regulate development of the approximately 19.73 acres within the zone as designated by the city general plan.

     C.     Intent. It is intended that in order to achieve the purpose of the PD-71 zone of implementing the development of single-family housing uses based on the policies and prescribed density allowed under the general plan, the zoning district shall be, as shown on the development plan and related exhibits and as further described below. The primary use intended for this area shall consist of detached single-family residential, duets, park and open space uses. The boundary of the PD-71 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.521.006. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.521.002 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-71 zone:

     A.    Single-family dwelling units and duets not exceeding a density of five dwelling units per acre;

     B.     Accessory facilities or buildings related to the primary use subject to Chapter 17.660;

     C.     Temporary uses related to the primary use subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Section 17.850;

     D.    Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     E.     Public parks and related facilities;

     F.     Improved open space and trails;

     G.    Pedestrian bridges and riparian habitat enhancement and restoration activities subject to obtaining all applicable local, state, and federal permits;

     H.    The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670;

     I.      Small family residential care facilities;

     J.      Similar uses subject to the approval of the community development director. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.521.003 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses require special consideration and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Secondary housing units subject to Section 17.100.005;

     B.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     C.     Community buildings, recreational clubs such as tennis and swimming clubs intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residences within one-half mile of the recreational club when they are located at least fifty feet from the top of the bank of Marsh Creek;

     D.    Large residential care facilities;

     E.     Other uses as determined by the community development director that because of the type of operation, materials stored, or other special circumstances require special consideration and regulations through the conditional use permit procedure. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.521.004 Regulations for lot area, density, yards, height and related matters—Development plan required.
     A.    Minimum lot area: The minimum lot area for single-family detached units shall be five thousand square feet for sixty-seven percent of the lots on the 19.73-acre project site and four thousand five hundred square feet for thirty-three percent of the lots on the project site, excluding all single-family duet units that are approved pursuant to Chapter 17.725 of the Brentwood Municipal Code, which shall be permitted on lots with a minimum area of three thousand square feet;

     B.     Minimum front yard setback: The front yard setback shall be fifteen feet as measured from the property line to any building façade or side entry garage and twenty feet for any garage facing the street measured from the property line to the center of the garage door. Front porches may encroach up to six feet;

     C.     Minimum side yard setbacks: The minimum side yard setbacks for single-family detached units shall be a minimum of five feet with a minimum combined total of fifteen feet for both side yards. Duet units shall have a minimum zero-foot side yard setback for the common wall property line, with a minimum ten feet for the other side property line. Corner lots shall maintain a minimum side yard on the street side of ten feet;

     D.    Minimum rear yard setback: The minimum rear yard setback shall be twenty feet. Detached garages may encroach up to ten feet;

     E.     Minimum useable rear yard: The minimum useable rear yard per unit shall be five hundred square feet;

     F.     Maximum building height: The maximum building height for all structures shall be two stories and thirty feet;

     G.    Maximum lot coverage: Forty percent;

     H.    Architectural Design.

     1.     All front entry doors shall be visible from the street and shall provide a minimum of two steps into the house,

     2.     All housing units shall have useable (at least six feet by six feet) covered porches at front entrance,

     3.     The inclusion of wrap-around porches is encouraged,

     4.     The use of detached garages, tandem garages, or non-street facing garages is encouraged,

     5.     A variety of architectural designs shall be used throughout the development area. The exact design shall be determined at the time of design review;

     I.      An open space buffer area along the eastern edge of the site adjacent to Marsh Creek shall be provided with a minimum width of fifty feet measured from the top of the west bank of Marsh Creek. No lots shall be located within this buffer area. Additionally, a single-loaded frontage road, with homes along the west side of the road, shall parallel this buffer area along a majority of the site’s creek frontage to encourage public access to this open space amenity;

     J.      A meandering trail shall be provided within the open space buffer along Marsh Creek;

     K.    Public access to open space and recreation amenities shall be encouraged;

     L.     Enhancement of riparian habitat adjacent to Marsh Creek shall be required;

     M.    The development of this property shall utilize a cluster-style development;

     N.    Unless specified above, design of any parks and related facilities shall be determined during design review in conjunction with a specific development proposal. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.521.005 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Sections 17.100.003 and 17.100.004(H).

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620 and Section 17.100.004(H) for single-family dwelling units.

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers and similar vehicles and equipment shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.620.016.

     D.    All street and other lighting shall be designed to utilize only cut-off or full cut-off classified fixtures.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required yard pursuant to the provision of Chapter 17.660.

     F.     The tentative map and design review for the future development of this property shall adhere to the city’s adopted residential design guidelines.

     G.    Landscaping. The landscaping standards for this development area shall comply with the regulations contained in Chapter 17.630, titled Landscaping and Screening, except as provided below:

     1.     Street Trees. Street trees are required to be planted on all streets within the PD-71 zone. Tree spacing shall be approximately thirty feet on center. This also includes the Lone Tree Way frontage adjacent to any sound walls.

     2.     Landscaping Along Marsh Creek. Trees, shrubs, and groundcovers within the open space buffer along Marsh Creek shall be planted in an irregular pattern to enhance the natural character of the riparian area and maintain views of the creek over time. Native plant material which is indigenous to the Brentwood area shall be utilized in all planting areas along Marsh Creek.

     H.    Parks and Open Space. All park and open space areas or alterations thereto shall require design review by the parks and recreation commission prior to any development approval. A minimum of one park totaling at least one acre shall be provided within the southern portion of PD-71. The park shall be configured in such a manner as to allow for future expansion when the area south of PD-71 urbanizes in the future. Areas to remain as open space, including the open space buffer along Marsh Creek may be required to be offered for dedication as part of a public open space or park system. Where such offer of dedication is not accepted, the development shall provide legal arrangements, acceptable to the city council, sufficient to assure the maintenance and preservation of such open space for whatever purpose is intended. Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify the ownership of the open space; method of maintenance, responsibility for maintenance; taxes and insurance; compulsory membership and assessment provisions; guarantees that any association formed to own and maintain common open space will not be dissolved without the consent of the city council; and any specification deemed necessary to the city.

     I.      Any future development proposal for the project site shall be consistent with the city’s master plans for infrastructure improvements including the water master plan, sewer master plan, reclaimed water master plan, storm drainage and flood control master plans, and the roadway circulation plan requirements for streets, bicycle and pedestrian facilities, and transit facilities. (Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

17.521.006 Map for PD-71.
 



(Ord. 857 § 2, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.522 PD-72 (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SEVENTY-TWO) ZONE
17.522.001 Authority, purpose and intent.
     The authority, purpose and intent for the adoption of the PD-72 (planned development seventy-two) zone are as follows:

     A.    Authority. PD-72 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 17.450, Planned Development Zones—General Regulations.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the PD-72 zone is to permit and regulate the orderly development of the area shown on the development plan and related exhibits, and to provide for reasonable opportunities for residents to enjoy privileges similar to those enjoyed by residents in other Brentwood neighborhoods in accordance with the General Plan.

     C.     Intent. To achieve the foregoing purpose, the PD-72 zone shall include development standards to provide for a private neighborhood of attached single-family townhouses. The standards shall also make provision for accessory buildings and structures specific to the small residential parcels present within the zone. The boundary of the PD-72 zoning district is as shown on the map in Section 17.522.007. (Ord. 905 § 2, 2012)

 

17.522.002 Definitions.
     A.    “Accessory structure” means a detached structure that is subordinate and incidental to the main building on the site, such as a shed, patio cover, arbor, trellis, or gazebo.

     1.     “Arbor” means a horizontal shade structure supported by two or more posts in a single vertical plane, or similar structures. The roof may be composed of either a solid or lattice material and the structure is not enclosed on any side.

     2.     “Gazebo” means a structure that is composed of multiple vertical posts forming a square, hexagonal, or octagonal footprint; supporting a solid roof and that is partially enclosed by railings or pony walls with a height of less than forty-two inches, or similar structures. Such structures generally have raised floors.

     3.     “Patio cover” means a horizontal shade structure that is supported by three or more posts in more than two vertical planes, or similar structures. The roof may be composed of either a solid or lattice material and the structure is enclosed on less than fifty percent of its sides.

     4.     “Shed” means a subordinate building enclosed on more than fifty percent of its sides that is used primarily for storage purposes, or similar structures.

     5.     “Trellis” means a landscape structure that is composed of two or more posts in a single vertical plane supporting a vertical lattice designed to support landscape material, or similar structures. A trellis may act as a dividing instrumentality or an extension thereof.

     B.     “Common area” means property within the neighborhood that is owned by the homeowners association and supports landscape materials, driving and parking areas, carports, common walkways, the clubhouse, as well as the common pool and pool area.

     C.     “Internal property line” means a property line that separates private or individually-owned property from other private or individually-owned properties within the neighborhood and from property that composes the common area.

     D.    “Perimeter property line” means a property line that separates either private individually-owned property or common area property from neighboring residential, commercial, or public facility parcels located outside of the Villa Terrace project area, as well as from the right-of-way.

     E.     “Private yard” means ground-level open space that is enclosed within a wall or fence, and is directly accessible only from the unit that it serves. (Ord. 905 § 2, 2012)

 

17.522.003 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted within the PD-72 zone:

     A.    Apartments, condominiums, townhouses, and attached single-family homes;

     B.     Rooming and boarding subject to Section 17.650.003;

     C.     Accessory structures related to the primary use subject to Section 17.522.006(D);

     D.    Temporary uses related to the primary use, subject to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.850;

     E.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     F.     Small family residential care facilities;

     G.    The keeping of domestic animals or pets subject to Chapter 17.670; and

     H.    Signs subject to Chapter 17.640. (Ord. 905 § 2, 2012)

 

17.522.004 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses are conditionally permitted within the PD-72 zone:

     A.    Public facilities including parks, playgrounds, public schools and other public buildings;

     B.     Churches and religious institutions and parochial or private schools;

     C.     Community buildings, clubs and activities of quasi-public, social, fraternal or recreational character such as golf, tennis and swimming clubs intended to primarily serve the immediate neighborhood or residential project; and

     D.    Large residential care facilities. (Ord. 905 § 2, 2012)

 

17.522.005 General development standards.
     All permitted and conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the development standards set forth below:

     A.    Minimum lot area: one thousand two hundred square feet;

     B.     Minimum lot width: thirty-five feet;

     C.     Minimum lot depth: thirty-five feet;

     D.    Minimum private yard depth from internal property line: eight feet;

     E.     Minimum private yard depth from perimeter property line: eight feet;

     F.     Residential buildings may be located directly on internal property lines where those lines do not abut private open space;

     G.    Maximum building height: twenty feet and one story;

     H.    Maximum lot coverage: the residence may cover up to seventy-six percent of the lot area;

     I.      Maximum number of units: seventy-eight. (Ord. 905 § 2, 2012)

 

17.522.006 Other regulations.
     A.    Design and site development shall be required for all housing units pursuant to Section 17.100.003.

     B.     Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.620.

     C.     The parking and storage of boats, trailers, and similar vehicles and equipment shall be prohibited.

     D.    Accessory structures shall be permitted as follows:

     1.     Accessory structures may be placed anywhere within a private yard, except that sheds must be placed a minimum of twelve inches from any fence or wall erected on a perimeter property line and twelve inches from a building wall forming the side of a residential townhouse.

     2.     Accessory structures may have a maximum height of ten feet, except that they are limited to a height of eight feet within three feet of the property line (both internal and perimeter property lines) opposite the entry to the residential unit.

     3.     The total coverage of all accessory structures on a single residential property may not exceed more than thirty percent of the total square footage of a private yard.

     4.     Sheds are limited to a maximum floor area of one hundred twenty square feet.

     5.     Sheds must be placed a minimum of twelve inches from any exterior building wall and any fence or wall erected on a perimeter property line.

     6.     All accessory structures must be free-standing and may not overhang any building, wall, fence, or any of their appurtenances.

     E.     Architectural features may project into any required private yard pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.660.

     F.     Private useable open space shall be maintained as follows:

     1.     Private usable open space shall be directly accessible from the unit served and be available only to that unit.

     2.     Private usable open space shall have a minimum area of two hundred ninety-five square feet and a minimum dimension of eight feet.

     3.     Each private useable open space may be enclosed with a stucco-covered masonry wall or wooden fence with a height of up to six feet. (Ord. 905 § 2, 2012)

Article IX. Supplementary Regulations


Chapter 17.600 SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS—GENERAL
17.600.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this article shall be known as the “supplementary regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The provisions of Chapters 17.610 through 17.690 are applicable to certain principle and accessory uses which are common to more than one zone or uses which require more specific and/or additional regulations. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.600.002 Applicability of provisions.
     Wherever in the zoning ordinance it provides that a use “is permitted” or there is a “regulation” or “requirement” with a reference to any of the aforementioned chapters, it shall mean that the regulations contained in such chapter shall apply. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.600.003 Chapters enumerated.
     Supplementary regulations include the following:

     A.    Chapter 17.610: Nonconforming Uses;

     B.     Chapter 17.620: Off-Street Parking;

     C.     Chapter 17.630: Landscaping and Screening;

     D.    Chapter 17.640: Signs;

     E.     Chapter 17.650: Accessory, Temporary and Service Uses;

     F.     Chapter 17.660: Encroachments into Required Yards;

     G.    Chapter 17.670: Animals;

     H.    Chapter 17.680: Oil and Gas Production;

     I.      Chapter 17.690: Adult Entertainment.

(Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.610 NONCONFORMING USES
17.610.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of Chapter 17.610 shall be known as the “nonconforming use regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the nonconforming use regulations is to provide for the general welfare and convenience of the public through the elimination of those nonconforming activities and facilities considered to be detrimental to the orderly growth and development of the city. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.610.002 Applicability of provisions.
     The nonconforming use provisions shall be applicable to the use of any land, building or structure; any building or structure itself; or a lot within the city which is not in conformance with the regulations of the zoning ordinance of the city of Brentwood. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.610.003 Definitions.
     For the purposes for this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

     A.    “Alteration” means an enlargement, addition, relocation, repair, remodeling, increase in the number of dwellings or rooming units, development of or change in open areas, any increase in occupancy or tenants, change in use, or any other change in an activity or facility. Alteration shall not include painting and ordinary maintenance, demolition or removal, change in ownership, tenancy or management or an approved activity substitution.

     B.     “Lot of record” means a lot or other parcel of land shown on the tax rolls of the county of Contra Costa on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.

     C.     “Nonconforming activity” means the use of land, a building or a structure which use was permitted within the zone in which it was located at the time it was established but which has become no longer permitted due to subsequent annexation, rezoning of the land or amendment of the zoning regulations. For purpose of this section the term “activity” includes signs.

     D.    “Nonconforming facility” means a building or structure or other land development that was lawfully constructed in conformance the applicable zoning regulations with respect to setbacks, height, off-street parking and similar provisions but which is no longer in conformance with existing regulations due to annexation, rezoning of the land or amendment of the zoning regulations.

     E.     “Nonconforming lot” means a “lot of record” lawfully subdivided in conformance with the applicable zoning regulations but which is no longer in conformance with existing regulations with respect to area or dimension due to annexation, rezoning of the land or amendment of the zoning regulations.

     F.     “Nonconforming use” means a nonconforming activity, facility or lot. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.610.004 Nonconforming uses—General.
     Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no nonconforming use shall be expanded, extended, enlarged, substituted, replaced or otherwise altered without conforming to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.610.005 Nonconforming activity—Continuance of.
     The following activities may continue not withstanding their status as nonconforming activities however, in the event the activity is discontinued for a period of six months or more, the activity is changed to a conforming use, or the activity is changed to a substitute nonconforming use, status as a nonconforming activity shall be considered terminated and the use may not be reestablished:

     A.    Any residential use in any zone;

     B.     Agricultural uses limited to the production of crops or plants, vines and trees and bulbs and seeds. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.610.006 Nonconforming activity—Termination of.
     Nonconforming activities shall be terminated by the date stated or within five years following annexation or adoption of any future ordinance making a conforming use nonconforming in the following cases:

     A.    In any R or A zone or the OS zone where no buildings are employed in conjunction with a nonconforming activity or where any buildings or structures are incidental to a nonconforming activity and have an appraised value (for tax purposes) of less than two thousand dollars (or one percent of the current appraised value of the land, whichever is greater) the nonconforming activity shall be terminated by January 1, 1992.

     B.     Nonconforming signs shall be subject to termination pursuant to Section 17.640.012.

     C.     In any district where a nonconforming activity is being conducted in conjunction with or as an accessory to the use of the property as a residential use, such nonconforming activity shall be terminated by January 1, 1990 unless a home occupation permit is obtained.

     D.    In any zone of the city all nonconforming activities not subject to Section 17.610.005 or subsections 17.610.006A through C shall be terminated by January 1, 1990 unless a conditional use permit is obtained. Conditional use permit approval shall not terminate the nonconforming status of the activity except where the use is a conditional use within the zone in which it is located but shall establish the ultimate termination date of the activity based on the intensity of the activity, the value of the business or activity, the capability of the activity being converted to a conforming activity and the impact of the activity on surrounding property. In addition, conditions of approval may be imposed to assure compatibility of the activity with the neighborhood during the period pending its termination.

     E.     Any activity which is nonconforming by reason of noncompliance with the performance standards set forth in Section 17.200.004 shall be terminated by January 1, 1991 unless measures are adopted to conform therewith. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.610.007 Nonconforming activity—Notification of.
     Prior to July 1, 1988 the owner and any tenants, lessee, renter or other occupants of any lot on which is being conducted a nonconforming activity which is subject to termination under the provisions of Section 17.610.009 shall be given constructive notice of the provisions of this chapter, the specific provisions of the ordinance which makes the activity nonconforming, and notice of the date that the activity is to be terminated. Failure of the city to give the prescribed notice by the date specified shall constitute automatic grant of an extension of the termination date ultimately determined for a period equal to the period of time notice was delinquent. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.610.008 Nonconforming activity—Substitution of.
     Subject to conditional use permit approval, a nonconforming activity may be terminated and a substitute nonconforming activity established where it is found that the substitute activity is more in conformance with the other uses permitted within the zone. Such substitution must occur within three months of conditional use permit approval. The substitute use shall be considered a nonconforming activity, conditional use permit approval notwithstanding. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.610.009 Nonconforming activity—Involuntary termination of.
     In the event a nonconforming activity is terminated as a result of its destruction by accident or by flood, earthquake or other act of nature such nonconforming activity shall not be reestablished. For the purposes of this section termination shall mean the cessation of the activity for more than thirty days. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.610.010 Nonconforming facility—Continuance of.
     Any building or structure may continue to be maintained notwithstanding its status as a nonconforming facility except, however, in the event such building or structure is voluntarily razed, status as a nonconforming facility shall be considered terminated and reconstruction shall be in conformance with the applicable zoning regulations. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.610.011 Nonconforming facility—Alteration of.
     A nonconforming facility shall not be altered except in conformance with the regulations of the zoning ordinance. Applications for a variance to allow such alteration is not precluded and if variance approval is granted, nonconforming facility status shall be terminated. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.610.012 Nonconforming facility—Off-street parking.
     In the event a facility is nonconforming by virtue of a deficiency in off-street parking, substitution with another use shall not be permitted if the off-street parking requirements of the new use exceed those of the previous use. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.610.013 Nonconforming facility—Involuntary termination.
     In the event any nonconforming facility is destroyed or damaged as a result of accident or by fire, flood, earthquake or other act of nature to an extent exceeding fifty percent of its current assessed value it shall not be repaired or reconstructed except in conformance with the applicable zoning district regulations. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.610.014 Nonconforming lot—Continuance of.
     Any “lot of record” may continue to be maintained and developed under the provisions of this title notwithstanding its status as a nonconforming lot with respect to required area, width or frontage. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.610.015 Reestablishment of nonconforming residential use.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 17.610.009 and 17.610.013 above, a nonconforming residential use may be reestablished through the granting of a building permit when the following conditions are satisfied.

     1.     A building permit has been issued by the city no later than one year from the date when the nonconforming residential use ceased; and

     2.     The nonconforming use is determined to be single-family residential; and

     3.     The single-family dwelling was the place of principal residence of the property owner at the time the use was involuntarily terminated;

     4.     The nonconforming use and/or nonconforming facility was involuntarily terminated as a result of its damage or destruction by accident, fire, flood, earthquake or other act of nature. (Ord. 468 § 13, 1990)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 17.620 OFF-STREET PARKING
17.620.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title.   The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “off-street parking and loading regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the off-street parking and loading regulations is to provide for the general welfare and convenience of the public utilizing the various uses located within the city by providing the following:

     1.     Adequate and functionally designed parking and loading areas and spaces to serve the owners, tenants, customers and/or other users of facilities within the city;

     2.     The safe movement of traffic on public streets by deemphasizing dependence on on-street parking and, through the proper design of off-street parking lots, to reduce conflict with traffic on city streets;

     3.     Assurance that off-street parking and loading areas and their use shall not have adverse impact on adjacent or nearby residential uses or areas. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.002 Applicability of provisions.
     Off-street parking and loading shall be required for all new uses or change in use as follows:

     A.    Off-street parking and loading in compliance with the regulations of this chapter shall be required with the construction of any new building or structure, the addition to an existing building or structure, or with the relocation of a building or structure onto a different lot.

     B.     Off-street parking and loading in compliance with the regulations of this chapter shall be required at such time as the use of any land, building, structure or portion thereof is changed from a nonconforming use to a conforming use within a zone where the conforming use has off-street parking and loading requirements in excess of the previous use.

     C.     Additional off-street parking and loading in conformity with the regulations of this chapter shall be required at such time as the use of any land, building, a structure or portion thereof changes from one conforming use to another conforming use within a zone where the new use has off-street parking and loading requirements in excess of the previous use. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.003 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

     A.    “Access driveway” means that portion of a parking lot providing access other than aisles.

     B.     “Aisle” means that portion of a parking lot which is contiguous to a parking space and provides direct access thereto.

     C.     “Camper” means a structure designed to be mounted upon a motor vehicle for human habitation or other purposes.

     D.    “Commercial parking” means a private parking lot or garage where parking is the principal use of the property for free or fee.

     E.     “Historical building” means a building erected prior to 1930 and/or any other building which has been found by the city to have historical or architectural significance.

     F.     “Motor vehicle” means a vehicle which is self-propelled.

     G.    “Municipal parking” means a parking area or lot, including portions of public streets, owned by the city of Brentwood, Brentwood redevelopment agency, parking district or other municipal body or agency.

     H.    “Off-street loading space” means a parking space or portion of a parking lot marked and designed for temporary parking for purposes of on-loading and off-loading.

     I.      “Off-street parking” means the standing, for a period of time on private property, of any vehicle for purposes of temporary parking, long or short-term storage or on-loading and off-loading.

     J.      “Parking lot” means an area of land, a yard or other open space on a lot used for or designed for use by standing motor vehicles. Parking lots shall include parking spaces, aisles, access driveways, and other areas providing ingress and egress to parking spaces.

     K.    “Parking space” means land or space, covered or uncovered, including space in a private garage, laid out for, surfaced and used or designed to be used for temporary storage, loading or unloading by a standing motor vehicle and permanently maintained as such. “Parking space” does not include access driveways, aisles and other areas used for ingress and egress to parking spaces.

     L.     “Private parking” means a parking lot or space located on private property, which, generally, is not available for public use, except with the specific permission of the property owner.

     M.    “Public parking” means a parking lot or space located on private property, which generally is advertised, designated or otherwise available for public use with the implied permission of the property owner for customers, clients, visitors or employees.

     N.    “Trailer” means a vehicle designed for carrying persons or property on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.

     O.    “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway. For purposes of this chapter, “vehicle” includes bicycle, wagon, cart or similar devices which are normally propelled by humans.

     P.     “Vehicle storage” means the observed parking of any vehicle, trailer or similar equipment at the same approximate location at two successive times more than seventy-two hours apart within any two-week period. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.004 Procedure.
     The off-street parking requirements for uses within the city shall be determined in accordance with the following procedures:

     A.    Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be established for a building, site or use at such time as a use permit, building permit, business license, or other approval is granted for a new building, new use of land or change in use of a building or land.

     B.     Subsequent changes in land use shall be permitted provided the overall requirement for spaces on the lot continues to be maintained.

     C.     Existing off-street parking and loading may not be reduced at such time as the use of any land, building or structure or portion thereof changes from one conforming use to another conforming use within a zone where the new use has off-street parking and loading requirements less than the previous use, except through the issuance of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.005 Calculation rules.
     The number of required off-street parking and loading spaces required shall be calculated in accordance with the following rules:

     A.    If after calculating the number of required off-street parking spaces, a figure is obtained containing a fraction of one-half or more, one additional space shall be required. If such fraction is less than one-half, it may be disregarded.

     B.     When the requirement is based on number of seats, each twenty inches of pews, benches, bleachers or similar seating shall be counted as one seat.

     C.     When the parking requirement is based on floor area, “floor area” includes the total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines, employee cafeterias and upper floors, expressed in square feet measured from centerlines of joist separations and exteriors.

     D.    Whenever a single lot contains different uses which all have the same parking or loading requirement, the overall requirement shall be based on the total floor area or other applicable unit of measurement prescribed herein.

     E.     When a single lot contains uses with different requirements, the overall requirements shall be the sum of the requirements for each use calculated separately.

     F.     Where there is an addition to a building or structure, or increase in the amount of open land use, the addition of new floor area within an existing building, an increase in the number of dwelling units on the site, or otherwise an increase in the amount of parking required, additional off-street parking need only be required to the extent of that required for the addition or increased occupancy.

     G.    A conditional use permit shall be required in case of any unlisted use or a use for which the off-street parking and loading requirements cannot be clearly determined. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.006 Off-street parking spaces required—General.
     When applicable, pursuant to Section 17.620.002, the number of off-street parking spaces to be provided for uses within each zone shall be in accordance with the Sections 17.620.007 through 17.620.014. The parking spaces required in these sections shall be considered as a minimum number and a greater number of spaces may be required, if justified, as a condition of approval of a conditional use permit or design and site development review permit. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 17.620.007 Off-street parking spaces required—Residential zones.
     Except as specified in Section 17.620.012 there shall be required for permitted uses in a residential zone the number of off-street parking spaces specified in this section:

     A.    Single-Family Dwelling.

     1.     Primary Dwelling Unit. Two spaces, both of which shall be enclosed within a garage.

     2.     Accessory Dwelling Unit. One space for an accessory dwelling unit. The space may be an uncovered, tandem space on an existing driveway, and in permitted side and rear yard setback areas.

     When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit, the replacement spaces may be located in any configuration on the lot, including as covered, uncovered, or tandem spaces (but see Section 8.00.030(I), which limits front yard parking to the designated paved driveway area);

     B.     Two- and Three-Family Dwellings. Two assigned spaces for each dwelling unit, all of which shall be covered;

     C.     Four- and More Family Dwellings. Parking shall be provided for each dwelling unit in an apartment complex at a ratio of one assigned space which shall be covered plus one common space which may be uncovered;

     D.    Condominium or Similar Single-Family Residence Projects. Two assigned spaces which shall be enclosed within a garage, and two common spaces for each dwelling unit which may be uncovered;

     E.     Mobile Home Park. Two assigned spaces on each mobile home lot, one of which shall be covered, plus one of which may be covered, plus one common space for each two mobile home lots which may be uncovered;

     F.     Common parking spaces in mobile home park, apartment, condominium and similar projects shall be distributed throughout the project with some concentration near recreation, laundry and other community facilities. (Ord. 991 § 2, 2017; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.008 Off-street parking spaces required—Office and commercial zones.
     Except as specified in Section 17.620.012 there shall be required for permitted uses in all C zones public parking at the rate of one space for each two hundred square feet of gross floor area or open space area devoted to a use. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.009 Off-street parking spaces required—Industrial zones.
     Except as specified in Section 17.620.012 there shall be required for permitted uses in an I or a PEC zone, public parking at the rate of one space for each five hundred square feet of gross floor area or open space area devoted to a use. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.010 Off-street parking spaces required—Agricultural and open space zones.
     Except as specified in Section 17.620.012 there shall be required for permitted uses in an A or an OS zone private parking at the rate of two spaces for each dwelling unit or other use. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.011 Off-street parking spaces required—Public and semipublic facility zones.
     Except as specified in Section 17.620.012 there shall be required for permitted uses in a PF or SPF zone public parking at the rate of one space for each two hundred square feet of gross floor area or open space area devoted to a use. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.012 Off-street parking spaces required—Specific uses.
     When applicable, pursuant to Section 17.620.002, the number of public off-street parking spaces to be provided for specific uses, zone notwithstanding, shall be in accordance with the following:

     A.    Temporary roadside stand for sale of agricultural products: five spaces which may be unimproved;

     B.     Agricultural processing uses: five spaces plus one space for each one thousand square feet of gross floor area, or one space for each one and one-half employees on a maximum shift, whichever is greater;

     C.     Contractor, material and equipment storage yards, transportation and trucking yards, building material yards and similar open land uses where any building is accessory to the use: five spaces, exclusive of company vehicle storage, plus one space for each two thousand square feet of gross site area;

     D.    Manufacturing: five spaces plus one space for each eight hundred square feet of gross floor area, or one space for each one and one-half employees on a maximum shift, whichever is greater;

     E.     Warehousing: five spaces plus one space for each one thousand square feet of gross floor area;

     F.     Building materials, hardware, nursery and garden supply: one space for each three hundred square feet of gross floor area plus one space for each one thousand square feet of open space area devoted to retail use, plus one space for each two thousand square feet of open area devoted to wholesale use or area restricted to employees only;

 

     G.    General retail sales: one space for each two hundred square feet of gross floor area;

     H.    Business, professional and financial offices: one space for each two hundred fifty square feet of gross floor area;

     I.      Automobile service station: three spaces plus five spaces for each auto service bay;

     J.      Eating and Drinking Places.

     1.     Restaurants, bars, and nightclubs: one space for each one hundred square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each fifty square feet of gross floor area used for dancing or other assembly uses,

     2.     Carry-out restaurant: one space for each two hundred square feet of gross floor area,

     3.     When located in shopping centers, the number of required parking spaces may be reduced at the time of issuance of a conditional use permit based on the following factors:

     a.     Mix of land uses within the shopping center and their projected parking demand,

     b.     Hours of operation of the various land uses,

     c.     Floor area of shopping center,

     d.     If the shopping center is existing, the number of parking spaces actually occupied at peak hours,

     The applicant shall submit the above information with the conditional use permit application;

     K.    Hotels, motels and tourist courts, rooming and boarding houses: one space for each sleeping unit plus the required spaces for ancillary eating and drinking places, places of assembly or retail trade;

     L.     Automotive repair and service: five spaces plus five spaces for each repair or service bay or four hundred square feet of gross floor and open space area, whichever is less;

     M.    Motion Picture Theater. See subsection U of this section;

     N.    Bowling alleys: five spaces per alley plus an amount required for any ancillary eating and drinking place or other use;

     O.    Automotive, boat and mobile home and recreational vehicle dealer: one space for each three hundred square feet of gross floor area plus parking in an amount specified for automotive repair and service;

     P.     Offices of physicians, dentists and other health practitioners: one space for each two hundred square feet of gross floor area or five spaces per physician or dentist, whichever is greater;

     Q.    Nursing and personal care facilities: five spaces plus one space for each three beds over ten. For nursing or convalescent homes one additional space for each one and one-half employees on a maximum shift shall be provided;

     R.     Hospitals: one space for each patient bed plus the required spaces for ancillary office, clinic, outpatient and similar uses;

     S.     Educational facilities:

     1.     Child care nurseries and preschool facilities:

three spaces for the first fifteen children authorized plus one space for each ten additional children,

     2.     Schools, grades K-8: two and one-half spaces for each classroom,

     3.     Schools, grades 9-16: one space for each two students plus one space for each one and one-half employees at designed capacity,

     4.     Trade, vocational, professional and business school: one space for each two students plus one space for each one and one-half employees at designed capacity,

     5.     In-Lieu Parking Provisions.

     a.     The spaces required for any place of assembly may be reduced in the amount of any space otherwise required for a school,

     b.     The spaces required for any place of assembly may be located within school playground or similar surfaced open space area;

     T.     Places of assembly such as religious sanctuary, funeral chapels, auditoriums, theaters, sports arenas, social hall, exhibition hall, dancehall, fraternal hall, meeting room: one space for each five fixed seats in principal assembly rooms or where seats are not fixed, one space for each fifty square feet of floor area;

     U.    Public stable: one space for every four horses authorized for boarding. Public stables shall provide the capability of off-street loading and storage of multi-horse vans and trailers as may be required as a condition of conditional use permit approval;

     V.    Billiard and pool room: five spaces plus two spaces for each table;

     W.    Golf course and/or driving range: five spaces for each hole plus one space for each driving range tee plus parking required for any bar, restaurant, retail, office or other ancillary use. (Ord. 813 § 1, 2005; Ord. 736, 2003; Ord. 486 §§ 2, 3, 1991; Ord. 467 §§ 2—6, 1990; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.013 Bicycle parking required.
     Bicycle parking shall be provided within any parking lot developed within a C district or for any public or semipublic facility in accordance with the following regulations:

     A.    In each parking lot there shall be provided at least four bicycle spaces with a total of spaces to be provided equivalent to five percent of the total vehicle parking spaces in the lot.

     B.     Bicycle parking spaces may be integrated into the parking lot or may be separate.

     C.     Bicycle parking spaces shall have a minimum width of two feet and a length of six feet.

     D.    Bicycle parking spaces shall be located adjacent to bicycle paths and pedestrian walkways and shall be located on the site in a manner that will provide parking within fifty feet of the public entrance to each building or use. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.014 Handicapped parking required.
     Parking for the physically handicapped shall be provided as follows:

     A.    For a building, structure or use which is in part used by the general public or for a publicly funded residential project there shall be provided parking for the physically handicapped in accordance with the following regulations:

     1.     Handicapped parking spaces shall be located as near as practical to a primary entrance to the building, structure or use or to any access provided for the handicapped.

     2.     Handicapped parking shall be provided in each parking lot in the amount of one additional space for the first twenty-five spaces in the lot plus one additional space for each fifty additional spaces in the lot.

     3.     Handicapped parking spaces shall be signed as set forth in the California Vehicle Code.

     4.     Handicapped parking spaces shall have a designated loading zone having a minimum width of five feet. Where two handicap spaces adjoin, such loading zone may be jointly provided. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.015 Off-street loading spaces required.
     In conjunction with the development of any off-street parking facility there shall be provided off-street loading space in accordance with the following:

     A.    Off-street Loading Spaces Required—General. Off-street loading spaces shall be required in accordance with the following schedule:

 

Square Foot Gross Floor Area

Spaces Required

Less than 10,000

0

10,000 to 19,999

1

20,000 to 29,999

2

30,000 to 49,999

3

50,000 to 75,000

4

Each additional 25,000

1

 

     B.     Off-street loading spaces required—specific: none at this time.

     C.     Off-Street Loading Space Regulations. Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and developed in accordance with the following regulations:

     1.     Off-street loading areas shall be improved to the same standards as off-street parking lots except in the case of industrial, heavy commercial or similar uses where it is found by the city that the off-street loading areas are not accessible to the public.

     2.     Off-street loading spaces or areas may be separate or integrated as part of the off-street parking lot.

     3.     In the case of uses or buildings having less than twenty thousand square feet gross floor area, required off-street parking spaces may be designated as off-street loading spaces provided they have a width of at least ten feet and a length of at least twenty-five feet.

     4.     In the case of uses or buildings having twenty thousand square feet gross floor area or more, each loading space shall be not less than forty-five feet in length and twelve feet in width.

     5.     Off-street loading spaces shall be located in a manner so as to not obstruct traffic within a parking lot nor require backing onto a public street.

     6.     Off-street loading spaces shall have an overhead clearance of not less than fifteen feet.

     D.    Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the following:

 

     1.     To a commercial or industrial use where off-street loading is one of the principal activities associated with the use;

     2.     To any residential or agricultural use. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.016 Vehicle storage.
     The parking or storage of a motor vehicle, trailer, camper, boat, aircraft or similar equipment must be in conformance with the following:

     A.    Abandoned Vehicle. The parking or storage of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle in any zone is subject to Chapter 10.20, Abandoned vehicles.

     B.     Public Right-of-Way. The parking or storage of a vehicle, trailer or similar equipment within a public right-of-way in violation of applicable traffic codes, or for more than seventy-two consecutive hours, is prohibited (see Chapter 10.13 and the California Vehicle Code).

     C.     Residential District. The parking or storage of a vehicle or similar equipment is permitted in any residential district subject to these regulations. The vehicle or equipment must:

     1.     Not be used for living or sleeping;

     2.     Not be a vehicle that requires a Commercial Class A, Commercial Class B, or Commercial Class C California driver’s license to operate;

     3.     Not be stored in an unsafe manner, as determined by the city; and

     4.     Comply with the following:

     a.     If parked or stored within a front yard or an unfenced side yard, the vehicle must be a passenger vehicle, motorcycle, motor scooter, or truck (excluding a truck tractor or a vehicle exceeding a maximum six thousand pounds base pound weight), and:

     i.      Not be a trailer, boat, motorhome, or RV,

     ii.     Be entirely located on the designated paved driveway area that provides direct access to the garage from the street; or on a driveway extension (the area of the front yard between the driveway and its nearest side yard property line, that is improved in a manner substantially similar to the driveway). In this section, “paved driveway area” includes any impervious surface, including concrete, brick, pavers or asphalt,

     iii.    Not exceed twenty feet in length and twelve feet in height,

     iv.    Not be within the visibility triangle as defined at Section 17.640.004, Sign ordinance;

     b.     If stored within a side or rear yard, the vehicle (including a trailer, recreational vehicle (RV), motorhome, boat, boat mounted on a trailer, or similar equipment) must:

     i.      Not exceed twelve feet in height,

     ii.     Be stored behind a solid six-foot fence, or other wrought iron or chain link fence with screening material on it,

     iii.    Not be used for living or sleeping,

     iv.    If the property has an access driveway for vehicle storage in the side or rear yard, the curb cut to the access driveway requires an encroachment permit and the property owner must maintain the required percentage of landscaped area under Section 8.36.030(B), Residential landscaping requirements—Structures completed after the year 1987. A vehicle may not be parked or stored on the access driveway. An access driveway is a secondary driveway not adjacent to the main driveway, on the opposite side of the front yard (or on the adjacent street of a corner lot). An access driveway may be improved with an impervious surface or with open pavers with green planting material growing through and around the pavers. (Ord. 999 § 7, 2018; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.017 Exception, senior citizen housing.
     Subject to conditional use permit approval, off-street parking requirements may be reduced. The amount of parking required shall be based on:

     1.     Type of senior housing project (congregate care, senior apartments, subsidized housing, residential care, etc.);

     2.     Availability of public transportation;

     3.     Provision of private van or bus service;

     4.     Mix of unit types with respect to number of bedrooms per unit.

     No conditional use permit shall be granted unless the property owner has entered into, or is required to enter into, a written agreement with the city of Brentwood restricting use of the facility to senior citizens for a period of not less than thirty years. (Ord. 467 § 8, 1990; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.018 Exception, parking impact area.
     That area so designated on the zoning map of the city of Brentwood is found and declared to be an area impacted by the off-street parking regulations of the city and is characterized by higher per-square-foot land values, inequities between land owners in the provision of off-street parking, the availability of on-street parking, the existence of parking lots which are inefficient or function poorly because of design, and the existence of fragments of land which are basically unusable due to the restrictions of this title. Within the area so designated the following off-street parking regulation shall apply.

     A.    Notwithstanding any proposed use, the parking requirement for buildings existing as of October 22, 1987 shall be at least one space for each nine hundred square feet of ground floor area and one space for each one thousand eight hundred square feet of basement or upper floor area.

     B.     An existing building may be substantially remodeled for purposes of historical preservation or restoration without the provision of off-street parking; provided:

     1.     There is no increase in floor area except that an increase in ground floor area may be allowed to occupy any vacant area on the site, provided the area is not or cannot be utilized for off-street parking purposes.

     2.     Any existing off-street parking is maintained.

     3.     Any potential off-street parking spaces are developed for off-street parking.

     C.     If any existing building is increased in occupancy within the building through division thereby creating additional spaces for purposes of lease, franchise, rental or other occupancy above that existing on October 22, 1987, for each new commercial space created having an area of one thousand two hundred square feet or more, there shall be provided one parking space for each nine hundred square feet of floor area in the space or spaces created, and for each new commercial space created having an area of less than one thousand two hundred square feet, there shall be provided one parking space for each three hundred square feet of floor area in the space or spaces created. Such parking spaces shall be in addition to any existing parking spaces; however, the total parking spaces need not exceed the minimum required by subsection A of this section. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.019 Exception—In-lieu parking provisions.
     The off-street parking and loading requirements of a use may be met through the following in-lieu provisions:

     A.    When the site of the use is located within an off-street parking assessment district to the extent of the amount of the benefit ratio determined by the district;

     B.     When the site of the use can be annexed to an off-street parking assessment district and upon payment to the district of the costs of the required off-street parking spaces;

     C.     By payment of the costs of the required off-street parking spaces into a trust fund to be administered by the city for the provisions of future off-street parking facilities;

     D.    Where costs of required off-street parking are to be paid to the city or assessment district such costs will be based on the fair market value of the land on which the new use is to be located, the amount of land necessary to provide the required off-street parking, and the current costs of paving and other necessary improvements as determined by the city. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.020 Location of required off-street parking and loading.
     All required off-street parking and loading facilities shall be located on the same site on which is located the use they serve except as follows:

     A.    In the case of any new use, building or structure where it is found that due to parcel size, location or other circumstances the required off-street parking cannot or should not be provided on the site, the required off-street parking may be located on another site located within three hundred feet of the use which site may be in the same or different ownership or in the cooperative ownership.

     B.     Where any required off-street parking is located off-site the parking requirements will be considered to be met only through the execution of an agreement to be recorded in the offices of the county recorder as a covenant running with the land for the benefit of the city providing that the owner or owners and their heirs, assigns or successors in interest will continue to maintain such parking facilities for the exclusive benefit of the use as long as the building or use they are intended to serve is maintained.

     C.     When the off-street parking and loading requirements for the use are satisfied by use of the in-lieu provision of Section 17.620.019. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.021 Parking lot design.
     Parking lots which are developed or redeveloped after October 22, 1987 shall be designed in accordance with the following regulations:

     A.    Minimum parking space width: nine feet except as specified in subsection D of this section.

     B.     Minimum parking space length: twenty feet except as specified in subsection D of this section and for parallel parking which shall be twenty-four feet.

     C.     Aisle Width. The required width of aisles shall vary with the width and angle of the parking space as specified in the following table:

 

 

Aisle Width

Angle in Degrees

8 to 9-1/2 foot space

Greater than 9-1/2 foot space

90 (Perpendicular)

25

25

76—89

22

21

61—75

18

19

46—60

15

14

1—45

13

12

0 (Parallel)

13

12

 

     D.    Compact Car Parking. Up to thirty percent of the required number of off-street parking spaces may be designated for the parking of compact cars only. Such spaces may be reduced in required width by one foot and in length by four feet. Compact spaces shall not be located directly opposite another compact space along an aisle providing access to such spaces.

     E.     Driveway Width. Where a parking lot does not abut a public street, there shall be provided a service drive or easement of access which shall be unoccupied and unobstructed, which shall be improved to parking lot standards and which shall have a width of not less than twenty-five feet except as follows:

     1.     In the event more than one driveway or easement of access is provided, the width for one-way access may be reduced to twelve feet.

     2.     Driveways or easements of access having a length of less than fifty feet may have a width reduced to eighteen feet.

     3.     Driveways or easements of access providing access to parking lots of less than ten spaces may have a width reduced to sixteen feet.

     F.     Access. Parking lots shall be designed to provide clear ingress and egress to all spaces with a minimum of maneuvering. Parking in tandem shall be prohibited except two cars may be parked in tandem on mobile home lots and on individual single-family, duplex and triplex lots. The backing out from a parking lot onto a public street shall be prohibited except in R zones for lots of less than six spaces.

     G.    Curb Cuts. Curb cuts for driveway purposes shall be approved by the city and shall be regulated in number and location in a manner that will; in order of importance:

     1.     Minimize conflict with movement of traffic;

     2.     Minimize loss of on-street parking;

     3.     Provide ease of ingress to the parking lot;

     4.     Provide ease of egress from the parking lot.

     H.    Maintenance of Visibility. Parking lots shall be designed in a manner that will assure that site distances are maintained, particularly at points of egress to a public right-of-way.

     I.      Within any zone, except for necessary access driveways, no portion of a parking lot or space shall be located in any required front yard or required side yard adjacent to a street.

     J.      Valet or Other Controlled Parking. Subject to obtaining a conditional use permit the design provisions of this section may be revised for purposes of accommodating a larger number of vehicles within a parking lot. Such revisions shall include the allowance of tandem parking and reduced dimension and shall only be allowed where valet service is provided for public parking, where parking is completely controlled by the use with no public parking and where the reduced standards will not impact other portions of a parking lot, if any. Any conditional use permit approved pursuant to these provisions shall be temporary and shall not be construed to allow a reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces or the design standards otherwise required. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.620.022 Parking lot development and maintenance.
     Parking lots which are developed or redeveloped after October 22, 1987 shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following regulations:

     A.    Surfacing. Parking lots shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or Portland cement binder pavement, building stone or equivalent material approved by the city on a suitable base so as to provide a durable and dust-free surface.

     B.     Screening. Parking lots for more than six vehicles shall be screened in accordance with Sections 17.630.005 and 17.630.009.

     C.     Striping. All parking and loading spaces and, when required, aisles, pedestrian walkways and crossings, visitors’ parking, fire lanes, no-parking areas and driveways, shall be striped and otherwise designated to provide for the safe loading, unloading and parking and storage of vehicles and shall be so installed as to be in accordance with the standards of the city for such improvements.

     D.    Barriers. Curbs, tire stops or similar barriers shall be provided where a parking space abuts any structure, boundary of an adjacent property, landscaped area or tree. Barriers shall be placed in a manner that will prevent the overhang of a vehicle over a required landscaped area.

     E.     Parking lot lighting shall be installed to the approval of the city. All lighting shall be directed or shielded so as to not produce nuisance or annoyance on abutting properties. Lighting shall be of the type or in a location such that it does not constitute a hazard to vehicular traffic, either on private property or on abutting streets. The spacing and height of the standards and luminaries shall be such that a maximum of seven foot-candles and a minimum of one foot-candle of illumination are obtained on all vehicle access ways and parking areas. The height of lighting fixtures shall not exceed thirty feet. To prevent damage from automobiles, standards shall be mounted on reinforced concrete pedestals or otherwise protected. Under-canopy lighting elements shall be recessed or concealed in such a manner as not to be directly visible from a public street. All lighting fixtures shall be vandal-resistant.

     F.     Traffic Controls. Traffic controls at ingress and egress points and standard traffic directional signs with no advertising thereon shall be provided as may be deemed by the city to be necessary in the interest of public safety.

     G.    Parking Lot Landscaping. In conjunction with their development all parking lots shall be improved and permanently maintained by the property owner with the installation of shade trees and landscaped areas and planters in accordance with Chapter 17.630. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.630 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
17.630.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “Landscaping and Screening Regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the landscape and screening regulations is to provide for the general welfare and convenience of the public by:

     1.     Increasing the compatibility between different intensities of land uses, by providing visual barriers, visually interrupting the barren expanse of paved parking lots, screening undesirable views which have a blighting impact on surrounding properties, and providing a visual separation and physical buffer between varying intensities of abutting land uses;

     2.     Implementing the comprehensive plan;

     3.     Encouraging the retention of significant existing vegetation to the extent feasible;

     4.     Reducing erosion and water runoff;

     5.     Conserving energy;

     6.     Preserving and promoting urban wildlife habitats;

     7.     Minimizing impacts of noise, light and glare. (Ord. 893 § 2, 2011)

 

17.630.002 Applicability of provisions—General.
     A.    Landscaping shall be required within all yards, off-street parking lots and open land uses that are visible to and/or accessible to the public.

     B.     Shade trees shall be required within required landscaping, off-street parking lots and open land uses.

     C.     Screening shall be required as a buffer between activities having a different intensity of use and between certain zoning districts so as to mitigate the impacts of noise, light and glare and human activity.

     D.    All ornamental uses of water in the common areas of a development project, such as ponds, lakes and fountains shall be supplied, operated and maintained with alternative sources of water if they are available.

     E.     Exceptions to the specific requirements may be granted on a case-by-case basis due to either unusual site conditions or other extenuating circumstances.

     F.     The requirements are applicable to all landscaping for new and rehabilitated construction, including:

     1.     All residential development greater than one unit;

     2.     Model homes or temporary development;

     3.     Commercial;

     4.     Industrial;

     5.     Public authorities.

     G.    The requirements shall be used as a guideline for landscaping and irrigation for a single-family residence.

     H.    The requirements do not apply to that portion of a site irrigating edible crops or using nonpotable water. (Ord. 893 § 2, 2011)

 

17.630.003 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain works and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

     A.    “Landscaping” means vegetative plantings such as grass, trees, shrubs and vines and related improvements such as pools, walkways, rock work and sculpture which is of a design that will beautify and enhance a property and control erosion and reduce glare.

     B.     “Screening” means a masonry wall, board fence, screened chain link fence, hedge, berm or vegetative planting or combination thereof which is of a design that will provide a visual and audible barrier between land uses having different intensities of use.

     C.     “Shade tree” means trees of a variety approved by the city that will, under ordinary circumstances and growing conditions, provide shade upon reaching maturity.

     D.    “Automatic controller” means a mechanical or solid state timer, capable of operating valve stations to set the days and length of time of a water application.

     E.     “Check valve” means a valve located under a sprinkler head to hold water in the system so it minimizes drainage from the lower elevation sprinkler heads.

     F.     “Conversion factor (0.62)” means a number that converts the estimated total water use from acres-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year. The conversion factor is calculated as follows:

 

(325,851 gallons/43,560 square feet)/12 inches = (0.62)

 

325,851 gallons = one acre foot

43,560 square feet = one acre

12 inches = one foot

 

     To convert gallons per year to one hundred cubic feet per year, another common billing unit for water, divide gallons per year by seven hundred forty-eight. (Seven hundred forty-eight gallons equal one hundred cubic feet.)

     G.    “Estimated total water use” means the annual total amount of water estimated to be needed to keep the plants in the landscaped area healthy. It is based upon such factors as the local evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscaped area, the type of plants, and the efficiency of the irrigation system.

     H.    “Evapotranspiration” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil surfaces and transpired by plants during a specific time.

     I.      “Flowrate” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated. For example, a naturalized area planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation once established is a nonirrigated hydrozone.

     J.      “Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated. For example, a naturalized area planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation once established is a nonirrigated hydrozone.

     K.    “Irrigation efficiency” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. For the purpose of this chapter the following factors shall be used:

 

Spray heads (pop-up or riser)

0.60

Rotor or impact heads

0.70

Bubbler

0.70

Drip

0.76

 

     L.     “Landscape irrigation audit” means a process to perform site inspections, evaluate irrigation systems and develop efficient irrigation schedules.

     M.    “Landscaped area” means the entire parcel less the building(s) footprint, driveways, nonirrigated portions of the parking lots, hardscapes such as decks and patios and other nonporous areas. Water features are included in the calculation of the landscaped area. Areas dedicated to edible plants, such as orchards or vegetable gardens, are not included.

     N.    “Mulch” means any material such as leaves, bark, straw or other materials left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation.

     O.    “Nonpotable water” means water unfit for human consumption, such as treated or recycled waste water, untreated irrigation water or untreated groundwater.

     P.     “Overspray” means the water which is delivered beyond the landscaped area, wetting pavements, walks, structures or other nonlandscaped areas.

     Q.    “Plant factor” means a factor that when multiplied by reference evapotranspiration, estimates the amount of water used by plants. For purposes of this chapter, use the following plant factors:

 

Low water using:

0.1—0.3

Medium water using:

0.4—0.6

High water using:

0.7—0.9

 

     These plant factors are based on the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species Project (WUCOLS). The project list is intended solely as a guide to help landscape professionals identify irrigation water needs of landscape species. It is not intended to be used as a required, mandatory, approved or master list. The WUCOLS Project is available from the California Department of Water Resources or from the Contra Costa water district.

     R.     “Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given in inches per day, month or year and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool season grasses that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the estimated total water use so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. (For historical ETo rates see Exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.)

     S.     “Runoff” means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a severe slope.

     T.     “Soil composition” means the classification of soil based on the percentage of sand, silt and clay in the soil.

     U.    “Sprinkler” means a device which sprays water through a nozzle.

     V.    “Station” means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.

     W.    “Turf” means a surface layer of earth containing mowed grass and its roots. This can be either a cool season or warm season grass. For example, Red Fescue and Tall Fescue are cool season grasses; Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, St. Augustine, Zoysia grass, and Buffalo grass are warm season grasses.

     X.    “Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. (Ord. 893 § 2, 2011)

 

17.630.004 Landscaping required.
     Landscaping in conformance with Section 17.630.008 shall be required as follows:

     A.    Residential uses: within any front yard or side yard adjacent to a street;

     B.     Public and quasi-public uses: within any parking lot, front yard, side yards adjacent to a street or interior open space that is visible from a public right-of-way or accessible to the public;

     C.     Commercial and industrial uses: within any parking lot, front yard, side yard adjacent to a street or open land use that is visible from a public right-of-way or accessible to the public;

     D.    Where a parking lot abuts a public right-of-way there shall be required a landscaped strip of not less than five feet in width contiguous to and parallel to such right-of-way;

     E.     Except for single-family residential uses landscaping shall be subject to design and site development review. (Ord. 893 § 2, 2011)

 

17.630.005 Screening required.
     Screening in conformance with Section 17.630.009 shall be required as follows:

     A.    Along the interior boundaries between any R, A, or OS zone and any C, IC, PEC, PF or SPF zone.

     B.     Parking lots for more than six vehicles shall be enclosed, except for necessary driveway openings, by screening where contiguous to or within two hundred feet of any property in any R zone, any A zone or the OS zone.

     C.     Where a parking lot abuts a public right-of-way across from property in any R zone, any A zone or the OS zone, such lot shall be screened along that right-of-way to a height of forty-eight inches.

     D.    The following specific uses shall be screened:

     1.     Multiple residential projects having four or more dwellings;

     2.     Public and quasi-public uses such as churches, schools and similar uses;

     3.     The boundaries of new subdivisions upon development;

     4.     Mobile home parks. (Ord. 893 § 2, 2011)

 

17.630.006 Shade trees required.
     Shade trees in conformance with Section 17.630.008 shall be required as follows:

     A.    Within any public parking lot;

     B.     Within any area of required landscaping;

     C.     Within any area of open land use. (Ord. 893 § 2, 2011)

 

17.630.007 Exceptions—Landscaping and screening.
     The exception to the landscape and screening requirements are as follows:

     A.    The standards set forth in this chapter for location and height of landscaping or screening may be modified by the city when such landscaping or screening would constitute a danger to traffic by reason of impairment of vision at a street or driveway intersection.

     B.     Screening shall not be required along a lot line where a building wall, solid fence or freestanding wall of the required height exists immediately abutting and on the other side of the lot line. (Ord. 893 § 2, 2011)

 

17.630.008 Landscape standards.
     Required landscaping, to include shade trees, shall be installed in accordance with the following minimum standards. These standards may be exceeded voluntarily by the developer and greater standards may be imposed as a condition of an approved permit:

     A.    Parking lots and other open land uses which are visible to, or accessible to the public shall be landscaped at the following rate:

 

Parking Lot Size (Spaces)

Open Space Area (Acres)

Percent of Lot In Landscaping

6 or less

.1 AC

4%

7 to 15

.2 AC

7%

16 to 30

.3 AC

10%

31 to 70

.4 AC

13%

71 or more

.5 AC

16%

 

     B.     Landscaped areas, parking lots and other open land uses shall be required to have shade trees at the rate of sixteen trees per acre or fraction thereof.

     C.     Shade trees generally shall be of a fifteen-gallon can size having a minimum height of six feet and a one-inch caliper. Modification of these standards for equivalent quality of tree may be permitted by the city depending on tree species and quality of stock.

     D.    Shade trees shall be scattered within a parking lot approximately thirty feet apart and may be clustered within landscaped areas.

     E.     Landscaped areas and tree wells shall be contained by pavement, fences or walls, or shall be contained in planters and tree wells bordered by a minimum six-inch-high concrete curb or equivalent approved by the city.

     F.     Planters and tree wells shall have a width of not less than five feet and shall be protected from automobile overhang where necessary through the provision of tire stops or other barriers approved by the city.

     G.    Landscaped areas and planters shall be watered by an automatic irrigation system approved by the city and designed to maximize water conservation.

     H.    All landscaping shall be maintained in good growing condition. Maintenance shall include, where appropriate, pruning, mowing, weeding, cleaning, fertilizing and regular watering. Whenever necessary, planting shall be replaced with other plant materials to insure continued compliance with applicable landscaping requirements.

     I.      Paved and graveled walkways and the use of gravel or similar materials as a landscape feature shall not exceed twenty percent of the landscape area.

     J.      Vegetative materials shall be selected from among those known to be suitable to the climate of the city of Brentwood area.

     K.    In order to foster water conservation programs the use of native plants or other plant material proven to require minimal watering shall be permitted and encouraged.

     L.     Except for shade trees, landscaping or screening shall not exceed three feet in height within thirty-five feet of the street corner on any corner lots.

     M.    Within overhead utility line easements trees shall be of a type that customarily grows to a height not exceeding fifteen feet.

     N.    Within underground utility line easements the planting of trees shall be prohibited. (Ord. 893 § 2, 2011)

 

17.630.009 Screening standards.
     Required screening shall be installed in accordance with the following minimum standards;

     A.    Except where a greater height is required by the city for noise abatement, fences and walls shall not exceed a height of six feet.

     B.     Walls shall be constructed in conformance with the requirements of the city director of public works.

     C.     Fence supports should be on a maximum of six-foot centers and cemented in place and may be four-by-four wood posts, pipe or masonry piers.

     D.    Fence covering shall be masonry, wood boards of not less than one-inch thickness or a chain link type fence with slats, vegetative or other durable screening.

     E.     Fences or walls shall be maintained in good repair, including painting if required, without any signs or advertising thereon except in conformance with the city sign ordinance.

     F.     Vegetative screening may include an evergreen hedge or a mix of evergreen shrubs and trees of a type, density and spacing so that sight and illumination will be obscured through the screening within three years of planting.

     G.    Except for trees, vegetative screening shall be maintained at a height of not less than six feet or more than ten feet.

     H.    An earth berm may be used in combination with any of the above types of screening, but not more than two-thirds of the required height of such screening may be provided by the berm.

     I.      All screening shall follow the lot line of the lot to be screened, or the inside edge of the sidewalks or shall be so arranged within the boundaries of the lot as to substantially screen, from adjoining properties the building, facility or activity required to be screened. (Ord. 893 § 2, 2011)

 

17.630.010 Adoption of the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.
     A.    Applicability. The “Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance” of the state of California, as contained in California Code of Regulations Title 23 Waters, Division 2 Department of Water Resources, Chapter 2.7 Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, Section 490 et seq., is hereby adopted by reference as the water efficient landscape ordinance of the city of Brentwood, as the same may be amended from time to time, as if set out in full in this chapter.

     B.     Severability. If any section, subsection, provision or part of this ordinance, or its application to any person or circumstance, is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the remainder of this ordinance, and the application of such provision to other person or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and effect and, to that end, the provisions of this ordinance are severable. (Ord. 983 § 1, 2017)

 

17.630.011 Installation.
     All landscaping, shade trees and screening required pursuant to this chapter shall be installed prior to granting of any occupancy permit(s) approval. Except upon submittal of a bond or other surety acceptable to the city, installation may be deferred for a period not to exceed six months from the date of occupancy. (Ord. 893 § 2, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.640 SIGN ORDINANCE
17.640.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. This chapter shall be known as the sign ordinance of the city of Brentwood, California.

     B.     Authority. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city’s general and police powers, California Constitution Article XI, Section 7; California Government Code Sections 65000 et seq., 65850(b), 38774, and 38775; Business and Professions Code Sections 5200 et seq., 5230, 5490 et seq., 13530 et seq., and 13540; Penal Code Section 556 et seq.; and other applicable state laws.

     C.     Regulatory Scope. This chapter regulates signs, as defined herein, which are within the legal corporate limits of the city, but not on city property, as defined herein, or within the DT (downtown) zone. Signs on city property are controlled by Chapter 17.645. Signs on property located within the DT (downtown) zone are regulated by Chapter 17.280.

     D.    Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this chapter is to create and enforce a comprehensive system for the reasonable regulation of signs within the city. By adopting this chapter, the city intends to balance many competing interests, which include, but are not limited to, the following:

     1.     To allow exercise of the free speech right by the display of a sign.

     2.     To protect and enhance the character of residential neighborhoods and business areas, open views and vistas.

     3.     To protect and enhance property values.

     4.     To provide a reasonable and comprehensive system of sign controls.

     5.     To serve the city’s aesthetic interest by minimizing visual clutter while accommodating reasonable signage as a major and necessary form of communication.

     6.     To state rules for fair treatment of all sign users.

     7.     To promote public safety by reducing driver distraction while providing that official traffic regulation devices be easily visible and free from nearby visual obstructions such as blinking signs, and by prohibiting or limiting signs that constitute a traffic hazard or obstruct the visibility of motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians.

     8.     To reduce visual clutter by prohibiting the installation of new billboards, oversized signs, roof signs, animated signs and other types of signage. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.640.002 Compliance required.
     Signs, as defined herein, may be displayed within the city only in compliance with this chapter and the rules stated herein. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.640.003 General provisions.
     A.    Permit Generally Required. All signs shall conform to the standards set forth in this chapter and unless exempted from the permit requirement shall be installed or displayed only pursuant to a sign permit and any other applicable permits and approvals.

     B.     Maintenance. All signs and their immediate surroundings shall be maintained by the owner and/or occupant of the premises in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition and free and clean of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds.

     C.     Discretionary Approvals. Whenever a sign or a proposed sign is subject to any discretionary review, permit, or approval, such discretion may be exercised only as to the compatibility of the sign with its location, and other structural, architectural and location factors. Discretion may not be exercised as to the artistic merit of the proposed sign or the message itself so long as such message is not excluded from First Amendment (U.S. Constitution) protection under relevant court decisions.

     D.    Compatibility Factors. In determining compatibility of a sign with its surrounding environment, the following criteria may be considered:

     1.     Style or character of existing improvements upon the site and properties adjacent to the site.

     2.     Visual elements such as construction materials, design details, and the number and spacing of signs in the area.

     3.     The sign’s height, design, and location in relation to its proposed location and use.

     4.     The sign’s spatial and visual relationship with other nearby signs, other elements of street and site furniture and with adjacent structures.

     5.     Form, proportion, scale, materials, surface treatment, and overall sign size.

     6.     Potential effect of the proposed sign on driver and pedestrian safety.

     7.     Potential blocking of view (whole or partial) of a structure or façade or public view of historical or architectural significance.

     8.     Potential obstruction of views of users of adjacent buildings to side yards, front yards, open space, or parks.

     9.     Potential negative impact on visual quality of public spaces, including, but not limited to, recreation facilities, public squares, plazas, courtyards and the like.

     10.   Whether the sign structure will impose an aesthetically foreign or inharmonious element into the existing skyline or local viewscape.

     E.     Administrative Interpretations. All interpretations of this chapter are to be exercised in light of the message neutrality and message substitution policies. Where a particular type of sign is proposed, and the type is neither expressly allowed nor prohibited by this chapter, or whenever a sign does not qualify as a “structure” as defined in the Building Code, as adopted by the city of Brentwood, then the planning commission or director, as applicable, shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application based on the most similar sign type, using physical and structural similarity, that is expressly regulated by this chapter.

     F.     Message Neutrality. It is the city’s policy and intent to regulate signs in a manner consistent with the U.S. and California constitutions, which is content neutral as to non-commercial speech and does not favor commercial speech over non-commercial speech.

     G.    Message Substitution. Subject to the property owner’s consent, a non-commercial message of any category or content may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any allowed commercial message or any non-commercial message, provided that the sign structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular non-commercial message over any other non-commercial message. Message substitution is a continuing right which may be exercised any number of times. This provision does not:

     1.     Create a right to increase the total amount of sign area on a site.

     2.     Create a right to substitute an off-site commercial message in place of an on-site commercial message or in place of a non-commercial message.

     3.     Affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device must be properly permitted.

     4.     Authorize changing the physical method of image presentation (such as digital or neon) display without a permit.

     H.    Billboard Policy. New billboards, as defined herein, are prohibited. It is a fundamental land use policy of the city to completely prohibit the construction, erection or use of any and all billboards, other than those which legally exist in the city, or for which a valid permit has been issued and has not expired, as of the date on which this chapter, or when a prior version of this chapter containing a provision to the same effect, was adopted. In adopting this chapter, the city council affirmatively declares that it would have adopted this policy even if it were the only provision in this chapter. The city council intends for this billboard policy to be severable and separately enforceable even if other provision(s) of this chapter may be declared, by a court of competent jurisdiction, to be unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable. This prohibition does not apply to agreements to relocate presently existing legal billboards as encouraged by State law including, but not limited to, Business and Professional Code Section 5412, as that section may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.640.004 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

     “Animated sign” means a sign on which the visual image changes more frequently than once every twenty-four hours, regardless of the method by which the visual change is affected. This definition does not include hand-held signs, personally attended signs, personal apparel, commercial mascots, motor fuel price signs, time and temperature devices or scoreboards. Animated signs include electronic message signs, commonly called digital signs.

     “Awning” means a roof or cover which projects from a wall of a building over a window or door, which is made of canvas, aluminum or similar material, and may be fixed in place or be retractable.

     “Banner sign” means a sign made of a flexible material that projects from or hangs from a building, structure, pole or wire. Banner signs do not include pennants, flags or flex wing signs.

     “Billboard” means a permanent sign structure in a fixed location which meets any one or more of the following criteria:

     1.     It is used for the display of off-site commercial messages.

     2.     It is used for general advertising.

     3.     The message display area, or any part thereof, is made available to message sponsors other than the owner(s) or operator(s) of the sign.

     4.     The sign is a principal or secondary use of the land, rather than appurtenant or accessory to some other principal use of the land.

     “City property” means any parcel of land that is owned or controlled by the city of Brentwood, or any of its related entities, or that is within the public right-of-way.

     “Commercial mascot” means a person or animal attired or decorated with commercial insignia, images, costumes, masks or symbols, and/or holding signs displaying commercial messages, when a principal purpose is to draw attention to or advertise a commercial enterprise. This definition includes sign twirlers.

     “Commercial message” means a message which proposes a commercial transaction or pertains primarily to the economic and commercial interests of the message sponsor and/or the sign audience.

     “Construction site sign” means a sign that is displayed on the site of a construction development project during the period of time of actual construction.

     “Convenience sign” means a sign whose message provides functional information for the convenience of the public, such as hours of operation, credit cards accepted, entrance and exit locations and restroom directions.

     “Directional sign” means a sign whose message provides directional information for drivers and pedestrians.

     “Director” means the city’s community development director, or designee.

     “Electronic message sign” means an animated sign using electronic or digital technology, including, but not limited to, LED (light emitting diodes) or plasma, or their functional equivalent, which is capable of displaying changing or changeable images, whether as a series of still images or a full motion, or any combination thereof.

     “Establishment” means any legal use of land, other than long-term residential, which involves the use of structures subject to the Building Code. By way of example and not limitation, this definition includes businesses, factories, farms, schools, hospitals, hotels and motels, offices and libraries, but does not include single-family homes, mobile homes, residential apartments, residential care facilities, or residential condominiums. Multi-unit housing developments are considered establishments during the time of construction; individual units are not within the meaning of establishment, however, once a certificate of occupancy has been issued or once a full-time residency begins.

     “Flag” means a piece of fabric or other flexible material, usually rectangular, of distinctive design, used as a symbol.

     “Flex wing sign” means a sign which is typically inserted in the ground and is made of flexible material attached to a flexible pole (typically with a hook shape).

     “Freestanding sign” means a sign which is self-supported by mounting on the ground, in contrast to being attached to and/or supported by some other structure, such as a wall, door or window.

     “Garage sale sign” means a sign whose message concerns short-term rummage, estate, boutique or garage sales of used or handmade common household items from a residential property.

     “General advertising” means the enterprise of advertising or promoting other businesses or causes using methods of advertising, in contrast to self-promotion or on-site advertising. This is also known as “advertising for hire” or “general advertising for hire.”

     “Ground sign” means a freestanding sign, other than a pole sign, in which the entire bottom is in contact with or is close to the ground (also known as a pedestal or monument sign).

     “Illegal sign” means a sign that was installed without proper city or other approvals and/or permits at the time it was initially installed, and which has not been legalized by later action. This definition also includes a sign that was erected in conformance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations in effect at the time of installation, but which was subsequently altered so as to be out of compliance with applicable law, including the terms of permits which authorized construction. All signs described in Business and Professions Code Section 5499.1 and defined therein as an “illegal on-premises advertising display” are also within this definition.

     “Illuminated sign” means a sign that uses light sources (other than natural light or ambient light) to decorate, outline, accentuate or brighten the sign display area.

     “Inflatable object” means an object that is activated by natural or mechanical wind or air, including holiday decorations, symbols and other similar types of objects.

     “Legal nonconforming sign” means a sign which complied with all applicable laws, rules and policies at the time of installation, and which has not been expanded beyond the originally applicable rules, but which does not conform to current applicable law and rules.

     “Marquee” means a permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and projecting over any public property, street, alley or sidewalk, and used to display a visual message.

     “Master sign program” means a program that establishes the sign development regulations and specifies an integrated sign design concept for multiple occupancy commercial sites.

     “Mobile billboard” means a sign display area on a wheeled vehicle (whether motorized or not) or water craft, which may be legally operated upon any public road, street or waterway and meets any of the criteria listed under the definition of “billboard.”

     “Motor fuel price sign” means a sign as specified in Business and Professions Code Section 13530 et seq., with a message limited to that required by state law.

     “Multiple occupancy commercial site” means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land, as designated in the current assessor’s map book, whereon two or more separate independently owned or operated commercial structures or establishments are located.

     “Name plate” means a sign that displays information about the name of the occupants of a residential dwelling unit, and/or the street address.

     “Neighborhood identification sign” means a sign that identifies a neighborhood that is officially designated by the city.

     “Non-commercial message” means a constitutionally protected message that is not commercial in nature. Non-commercial messages on signs typically address topics of public concern or controversy such as, by way of example and not limitation, politics, religion, philosophy, science, art or social commentary. The on-site/off-site distinction does not apply to non-commercial messages or signs displaying them.

     “Off-site sign” means a sign that advertises commercial products, accommodations, services or activities not provided in or on the property upon which it is located. The on-site/off-site distinction applies only to commercial messages.

     “On-site sign” means a sign that advertises the commercial business, accommodation, services or activities provided on the premises on which the sign is located, or expected to be provided in the near future. In the case of redevelopment projects, all establishments within the project are on-site as to any and all signs that are also located within the project. In the case of developments subject to a master sign program, all establishments subject to the program are considered on-site whenever located within any space subject to the program. Similarly, all establishments within a shopping center are on-site as to any sign(s) also located within that shopping center. As to construction signs, “on-site” includes all parties involved in the specific construction project. The on-site/off-site distinction applies only to commercial messages.

     “Pennant” means any lightweight flexible plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, in a series of two or more, designed to move in the wind.

     “Permanent sign” means a sign which is constructed of rigid material and is securely attached to a building, wall, fence, sign structure, or into the ground, and is designed for and intended to be on display long term. All signs described in California Business and Professions Code Section 5490(b) as “on-premises advertising displays” are included within this definition.

     “Pole sign” means a freestanding sign that is wholly supported by a structure consisting of poles or posts in the ground, such that the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or more above grade.

     “Portable ground sign” means a sign which is self supported by one or more upright poles or faces and is placed upon or into the ground for a short period of time and is easily movable. This definition includes structures which are more commonly referred to as “A-frame” or “sandwich board” signs.

     “Portable sign” means a sign that meets one or more of the following criteria:

     1.     A sign that is not permanently attached or designed to be permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, and may be easily moved.

     2.     A sign that is designed to be transported by means of wheels, skids, runners, or moveable frames.

     3.     “A-frame” or “T-frame” signs.

     4.     The functional equivalent of any of these categories, however, “commercial mascots” are not included within this definition.

     “Professional name plate” means a sign indicating the name or names and occupations of a professional person or group of associated professional persons occupying the premises.

     “Projecting sign” means a sign that is attached to a wall in such a manner that the body of the sign extends perpendicular to the wall to which it is attached, or a ground sign that extends partially over a public right-of-way.

     “Protected” means a message that is within the protection of the First Amendment to the United States constitution and/or corollary provisions of the California constitution, and has not been excluded from such protection by court decisions.

     “Real estate sign” means a sign whose message concerns a proposed transaction, such as sale, lease, or exchange, of real property. Signs on establishments offering transient occupancy, such as hotels, motels, inns and bed and breakfast places, concerning vacancies and rates, are not included within this definition. All signs described in Civil Code Section 713 are included within this definition.

     “Roof sign” means a sign erected, painted or otherwise attached to the top of a roof of a building or other structure.

     “Safety code” means a code that defines and requires safe methods of construction or demolition, including but not limited to the codes for building, electrical, plumbing, grading, or demolition.

     “Sign” means the public display of visual images, which is intended to be communicative in some way, and which advertises, informs, projects, displays or identifies persons, businesses, commodities, services, ideas or information, when such is visible from any portion of the public right-of-way or from any exterior place which is open to the public. This definition includes, but is not limited to, all writing, trademarks, graphic design elements, illustrations and lighting primarily directed at facilitating communication, as well as all supporting structures. Notwithstanding the generality of the foregoing, the following are not within the definition of sign:

     1.     Aerial banners towed behind aircraft.

     2.     Architectural Features. Decorative or architectural features of buildings (not including lettering, trademarks or moving parts), which do not perform a communicative function (examples include color stripes around an office building or retail store).

     3.     Automated teller machines (ATMs), when not used for general advertising.

     4.     Cornerstones and foundation stones.

     5.     The legal use of fireworks, candles and artificial lighting not otherwise regulated by this chapter.

     6.     Grave markers, gravestones, headstones, mausoleums, shrines, and other markers of the deceased.

     7.     Historical monuments, plaques and tablets.

     8.     Holiday and cultural observance decorations, including inflatable objects, on private residential property which are on display for not more than forty-five calendar days per year (cumulative, per dwelling unit) and which do not include commercial messages.

     9.     Inflatable gymnasiums associated with legal residential uses. Inflatable, temporary, moveable, gymnasium devices commonly used for children’s birthday parties, and similar devices (also called “party jumps” or “bounce houses”).

     10.   Interior Graphics. Visual communicative devices that are located entirely within a building or other enclosed structure and are not visible from the exterior thereof.

     11.   California State Lottery signs, approved by the Lottery Commission for display by Lottery Game Retailers, in accordance with the California Government Code.

     12.   Manufacturers’ Marks. Marks on tangible products, which identify the maker, seller, provider or product, and which customarily remain attached to the product even after sale.

     13.   Mass Transit Graphics. Graphic images mounted on duly licensed and authorized mass transit vehicles that legally pass through the city.

     14.   News racks, newspaper vending devices and newsstands.

     15.   Searchlights used as part of a search and rescue or other emergency service operation (this exclusion does not apply to searchlights used as attention attracting devices for commercial or special events).

     16.   Shopping carts, golf carts, horse drawn carriages, and similar devices (any motorized vehicle which may be legally operated upon a public right-of-way is not within this exclusion).

     17.   Symbols Embedded in Architecture. Symbols of non-commercial organizations or concepts including, but not limited to, religious or political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a permanent building which is otherwise legal, by way of example and not limitation, such symbols include stained glass windows on churches, carved or bas relief doors or walls, bells and religious statuary.

     18.   Vehicle and Vessel Insignia. On street legal vehicles and properly licensed watercraft: license plates, license plate frames, registration insignia, non-commercial messages, messages relating to the business of which the vehicle or vessel is an instrument or tool (not including general advertising) and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of the vehicle or vessel.

     19.   Vending machines, automated intake devices and product dispensing devices which do not display off-site commercial messages or general advertising messages.

     20.   Window Displays. The display of merchandise in a store window, when such merchandise is immediately available for purchase.

     “Sign area” means that portion of a sign which consists of visually communicative copy, including the advertising surface and any framing, trim, or molding but not including the supporting structure, measured one side only (provided that the angle between faces for two-sided signs does not exceed thirty degrees).

     “Sign copy” means the visually communicative elements, including, but not limited to, words, letters, numbers, designs, figures or other symbolic presentation incorporated into a sign with the purpose of attracting attention to the subject matter or message.

     “Sign face” means the portion of a sign that is used for displaying sign copy, together with any frame, color, panel, ornamental molding, or condition which forms an integral part of the sign copy and which is used to differentiate such sign copy from any wall or background against which it may be placed. Those portions of the supports, uprights or base of a sign that do not function as a sign shall not be considered as part of a sign face.

     “Sign height” means the vertical distance of a sign from the uppermost point used in measuring the sign area to the ground immediately below such point or to the level of the upper surface of the nearest curb of a street or alley (other than a structurally elevated roadway), whichever measurement permits the greater elevation of the sign.

     “Temporary message” means a message that pertains exclusively to a special event which occurs on, or ends on, a particular day.

     “Temporary sign” means a sign that is constructed of lightweight or flimsy material, and is easily installed and removed using ordinary hand tools. Any sign that qualifies as a “structure” under the Building Code is not within this definition.

     “Visibility triangle” means at the intersection of any two or more streets, that area extending horizontally fifty feet from the corner of the intersection and vertically, from a height of three feet to a height of eight feet.

     “Wall sign” means a sign that is attached to, erected against or painted on the wall of a building or other vertical structure.

     “Warning sign” means a sign that is posted to provide notice of danger, such as “Beware of Dog,” “Railroad Crossing,” or noting the location of underground utilities.

     “Window sign” means a permanent sign that is painted or mounted onto a windowpane, or that is hung directly inside a window solely for the purpose or effect of identifying any premises from the sidewalk or street, or a temporary sign that advertises special sales, events, or products. This definition includes any interior sign that is located within five feet of the applicable window. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.640.005 Signs allowed without sign permits—Nonresidential land uses.
     The signs described in this section may be displayed without a sign permit, subject to the rules stated in this section and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations, such as compliance with all safety codes.

     A.    Professional name plates not exceeding one square foot in area for each occupant in a building.

     B.     Traffic and other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, warning signs and such temporary, emergency or non-advertising signs as may be duly authorized.

     C.     On land uses characterized by human assembly and periodically changing programs (such as churches, conference centers, meeting halls, and theaters), signs with a sign area not exceeding ten square feet per parcel, which advise the public of the offered programs. Such signs may include portable signs displayed on the day of an offered program.

     D.    Convenience signs and warning signs not exceeding a cumulative sign area of ten square feet per sign or fifty square feet per parcel; such signs must be affixed flush to the building or window and may not be freestanding.

     E.     Non-rotating barber poles not more than six feet in height, and bearing no advertising text, when mounted on an establishment offering hair cutting or styling services to the public.

     F.     Directional signs not exceeding four square feet per sign, or twenty-four square feet cumulative as to all directional signs per parcel.

     G.    Government signs displayed by the city or other governmental units in furtherance of their governmental duties, or expressing their own message to the public.

     H.    Time and temperature devices not exceeding ten square feet in area.

     I.      On-site directional signs designating special areas or features of a development for safety directional purposes, provided no sign exceeds three square feet in area nor exceeds four feet in height.

     J.      Real estate signs may be displayed with the property owner’s consent subject to a maximum height of eight feet. Illumination of real estate signs is prohibited, and such signs must be removed not later than ten days after the advertised transaction has closed.

     1.     On-site real estate signs shall be subject to the following additional provisions:

     a.     On-site real estate signs shall be limited to a maximum aggregate sign area of thirty-two square feet per parcel or multiple occupancy commercial site.

     b.     When concerning on-site signs for individual tenant spaces, each sign shall be placed in a window and the aggregate sign area for all signs shall not exceed eight square feet.

     2.     Off-site signs, where allowable under this chapter or under Chapter 17.645, may be no greater than sixteen square feet in area.

     K.    Construction site signs may be displayed on-site only during the period of actual construction, shall not exceed twenty-four square feet in sign area, and may not exceed eight feet in height. All such signs must be removed at the completion of the construction project, as measured by final inspection approval and/or grant of an occupancy permit.

     L.     In addition to the sign area otherwise allowed and subject to message substitution, temporary signs displaying only protected non-commercial messages may be displayed at all times and on all properties, subject to the property owner’s consent and a maximum cumulative sign area of sixteen square feet. The signs allowed by this provision may not be illuminated, may not be activated by natural or mechanical wind or air, and may not interfere with the visibility triangle.

     M.    Flags, not exceeding twenty-four square feet per legal parcel. Flags may be mounted on doors, walls, windows, fences, or on poles. If a flag is pole mounted, the height of the pole shall not exceed the maximum height limit identified in the applicable zoning district. No commercial message flags are allowed.

     N.    Temporary window signs, limited to a cumulative display period of seven days per month, per establishment. Maximum sign copy area shall not exceed more than twenty-five percent of the aggregate window area. Signs shall not be allowed within an area located between three feet and five feet above grade.

     O.    Commercial mascots. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.640.006 Signs allowed without sign permits—Residential land uses.
     The signs described in this section may be displayed without a sign permit on legal residential uses, subject to the rules stated in this section and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations, such as compliance with all safety codes. This section does not override rules in private contracts and agreements, such as leases or homeowners association rules.

     A.    General.

     1.     At all times, individual residential dwelling units may display signs with a cumulative sign area that does not exceed sixteen square feet. Name plates, address indicators and flags do not count toward this maximum area limit. This maximum display area may be used for any combination of the following:

     a.     Non-commercial messages.

     b.     Real estate (on-site or off-site) signs.

     c.     Garage sale signs, provided the following:

     i.      Total dimensions including support stake or pole not to exceed three feet in height by three feet in width.

     ii.     For each garage sale type event, no more than one sign may be displayed on-site and no more than four signs may be displayed off-site, in accordance with Chapter 17.645.

     iii.    Signs may be displayed on weekends and legal holidays only and shall be removed at the conclusion of the event.

     2.     Restrictions.

     a.     Residential signs may not be used for general advertising for hire, or commercial messages other than the listed categories.

     b.     Signs may not be illuminated.

     c.     Signs may be mounted on doors, building walls, windows or fences, but may not be mounted on roofs, eaves, soundwalls, trees, bushes, or other vegetation.

     d.     Freestanding signs are allowed provided they do not exceed four feet in height (as measured from grade) and do not block the visibility triangle.

     B.     Flags. Flags may be displayed in accordance with this section. Total flag area shall not exceed twenty-four square feet per legal parcel. Flags may be mounted on doors, walls, windows, fences, or on poles. If a flag is pole mounted, the height of the pole shall not exceed the maximum height limit identified in the applicable zoning district. No commercial message flags are allowed. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.640.007 Temporary signs requiring a sign permit.
     The temporary signs described in this section may be mounted or displayed only pursuant to a sign permit approved by the director or designee in accordance with Chapter 17.835 and the criteria and regulations stated in this section.

     A.    On-Site Housing Project Signs. When new homes within a housing development are being offered to the public, the developer thereof may display signs as described in this subsection, subject to the following restrictions:

     1.     The maximum number of signs allowed per project is three.

     2.     The maximum size for an individual sign is fifty square feet, and the cumulative sign area of all signs shall not exceed one hundred twenty square feet. On-site directional signs smaller than sixteen square feet are excluded from the above requirements but shall require a sign permit.

     3.     Signs shall be removed within thirty days of the sale of the last lot or closure of the model home complex, whichever comes first.

     4.     Signs shall not interfere with the visibility triangle. Streets without curbs shall use the edge of the right-of-way as the sides of the triangle.

     5.     Signs shall not be located within one hundred feet of an existing occupied residence.

     B.     Banner Signs. Banner signs may be displayed on-site, subject to the following restrictions:

     1.     Only one banner sign is allowed at any one time, per establishment.

     2.     The banner sign shall be on the same site as the sponsoring establishment.

     3.     Unless allowed by Chapter 17.645, the banner sign shall not be mounted on or project into the public right-of-way.

     4.     The banner sign shall be displayed for a maximum of four time periods each calendar year; each period may run not more than thirty consecutive days; after each display period, no successive banner sign may be displayed for at least sixty calendar days.

     5.     The banner sign shall not exceed the lesser of fifty square feet or ten percent of the building face.

     6.     The banner sign shall not be illuminated.

     7.     The banner sign shall be securely fastened on all sides to a permanent on-site structure, such as a building, fence or wall.

     8.     The banner sign shall be constructed of durable and weatherproof materials, such as vinyl or woven nylon, and shall be continuously maintained in good condition. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.640.008 Permanent signs requiring a sign permit.
     The permanent signs described in this section may be mounted or displayed only pursuant to a sign permit approved by the planning commission or director, as applicable, in accordance with Chapter 17.835 and the criteria and regulations stated in this section.

     A.    Administrative Approval Permits.

     1.     The following signs may be approved by the director or designee, subject to the criteria set forth in this subsection and review of compatibility of the surrounding area:

     a.     Management Offices at Attached Multifamily Residential Facilities. In addition to the signs allowed for individual residential dwelling units, the master unit or management office of a facility with four or more attached dwelling units may display one sign, subject to the following criteria and compatibility review.

     i.      The display face shall not exceed six square feet and the height shall not exceed four feet above finished grade.

     ii.     The sign shall be set back at least five feet from the front property line.

     iii.    The sign shall be freestanding or mounted on walls, fences or doors. The sign may not be attached to trees or other vegetation, or mounted on a roof.

     iv.    The sign shall consist of any combination of on-site commercial and/or protected non-commercial speech; general advertising for hire is prohibited.

     b.     Signs in Nonresidential Zoning Districts.

     i.      Signs subject to this section may not display off-site commercial messages or be used as general advertising for hire.

     ii.     Unless otherwise provided, the sign area shall not exceed one square foot of copy for each one foot of lineal public street frontage of the establishment. Where the building site is on a corner lot (but not including alleyways) the allowable sign area is increased on the basis of one square foot per lineal foot of the shorter lot line plus one-half square foot per lineal foot of the longer lot line.

     c.     Vehicle Service Stations. Establishments selling motor vehicle fuel to the public may display a total sign area of one hundred fifty square feet, plus the minimum necessary to comply with the applicable provisions of state law, including Business and Professions Code Sections 13430 et seq., 13440 et seq., and 13470 et seq.

     2.     General Requirements.

     a.     Sign Area Limits for Particular Physical Types.

     i.      The total allowable sign area of a single freestanding sign shall not exceed seventy-five square feet.

     ii.     The total allowable sign area of a wall or projecting sign shall not exceed ten percent of the face of the building on which it is located.

     iii.    The total allowable sign area of permanent window signs shall not exceed more than twenty-five percent of the aggregate window area.

     b.     Number of Signs. The total number of wall, projecting and freestanding signs is limited to three for each establishment. A maximum of one freestanding sign per parcel shall be allowed.

     c.     Maximum Height. Freestanding signs shall not exceed eight feet in height.

     d.     Sign Location.

     i.      Signs may not project above any roof line or parapet.

     ii.     Signs may be located on or suspended from marquees and awnings.

     iii.    Projecting signs may be located so as to project horizontally up to three feet, except that they shall not project more than one foot into a public right-of-way, and then only as allowed by Chapter 17.645 and subject to an encroachment permit.

     iv.    Permanent window signs shall not be located within an area between three feet and five feet above grade.

     e.     Lighting.

     i.      Building-mounted signs may be non-illuminated or incorporate any of the following methods of illumination:

     (A)   Internally-illuminated pan channel letters with translucent faces using neon or LED illumination sources.

     (B)   Halo illuminated reverse pan channel letters using neon or LED illumination sources.

     (C)   Exposed neon.

     (D)   External illumination using building-mounted lighting.

     (E)   Cabinet signs incorporating opaque metal faces and push-through or cut-out translucent lettering.

     ii.     Monument and other freestanding signs may be non-illuminated or incorporate any of the following methods of illumination:

     (A)   Halo illuminated reverse pan channel letters using neon or LED illumination sources.

     (B)   External illumination using sign structure-mounted lighting or ground-based lighting.

     (C)   Sign cabinets incorporating opaque metal faces and push-through or cut-out translucent lettering.

     iii.    Directional signage and other incidental signs may be non-illuminated or incorporate any of the following methods of illumination:

     (A)   External illumination using ground-based lighting.

     (B)   Sign cabinets incorporating opaque faces and push-through or cut-out translucent lettering.

     B.     Planning Commission Approval Permits. The following signs are subject to review and approval by the planning commission, subject to the criteria set forth in this subsection and review of compatibility of the surrounding area:

     1.     Off-site directional signs on private property to identify places of worship or public assembly, hospitals, schools, public and quasi-public institutions and similar uses located in the city. No more than two signs, not exceeding three square feet each, shall be permitted per use or establishment.

     2.     A master sign program for any multiple occupancy commercial site or separately identifiable commercial building group (such as a neighborhood or community shopping center, or for any other contiguous sites), or for any single occupancy retail site that is located on a parcel at least two acres in size. Such a program may deviate from the provisions of this section when the following findings can be made:

     a.     The program is of integrated and harmonious design and designed to be a part of or blend with the buildings proposed.

     b.     The program has been prepared and endorsed by a licensed architect or building designer.

     c.     The signs within the program are compatible with the surrounding area.

     d.     The program is consistent with the city’s Commercial and Industrial Design Guidelines, adopted by the city council, and as they may be amended over time.

     3.     Neighborhood identification signs may be installed at the entrance to neighborhoods or districts, subject to the following restrictions:

     a.     The maximum number of signs is two.

     b.     Signs shall be located at the corners of streets entering the area.

     c.     Signs shall be mounted on a legal fence, wall or similar structure (freestanding signs are not allowed).

     d.     The maximum copy area shall be fifteen square feet.

     e.     Where dedication of the sign is proposed, and subject to acceptance, the dedication shall include the structure on which the sign is located, and the land on which the structure is located, together with access to the nearest public right-of-way.

     f.      Illumination of signs shall be external and ground-mounted only. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.640.009 Prohibited signs.
     The signs described in this section are prohibited unless explicitly allowed by another provision of this chapter.

     A.    Roof signs.

     B.     Any signs projecting above any portion of a roof or parapet wall or above the sloping roofline of the gable end of a structure.

     C.     Except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, flags, pennants and similar objects designed to rotate or move with natural or mechanical wind or air.

     D.    Banners, except as otherwise permitted by this chapter.

     E.     Signs, whether by design or lighting, that may be mistaken for traffic lights or signals.

     F.     Signs mounted in such a manner as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape, or obstruct an outward view from any living area.

     G.    Signs attached to a standpipe or fire escape.

     H.    Signs located in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.

     I.      Signs projecting into the right-of-way of a public street or alley, except as specifically permitted elsewhere in this chapter or in Chapter 17.645.

     J.      Signs having less than eight feet clearance between the lowest edge of a sign projecting into a public right-of-way, any sidewalk or an area where pedestrians may walk.

     K.    Signs having less than seventeen feet clearance between the lowest edge of that portion of the sign projecting into that part of a public street or alley area used by vehicular traffic and the street grade.

     L.     Placards, posters, announcements and similar signs posted or attached to any fence, pole, tree, vehicle or any other object in a public right-of-way, except as specifically permitted by Chapter 17.645, or legal notices required by law or a valid court order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.

     M.    Signs on any portion of a street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way, except as specifically permitted by Chapter 17.645.

     N.    Signs that cause excessive glare on surrounding properties or conflict with the traffic regulations or traffic safety.

     O.    Signs producing noise, odor or fumes or smoke-making devices.

     P.     Billboards, as defined herein.

     Q.    Animated signs, as defined herein.

     R.     Changeable copy signs, streamers, propellers, discs, and searchlights, except as otherwise permitted by this chapter.

     S.     Signs that use lights which flash, blink, or turn on and off intermittently, unless located at the site of athletic events.

     T.     Mobile billboards, including motorized vehicles which are used for the purpose of general advertising or advertising for hire, when parked on city-owned streets or the public right-of-way, or when traversing upon public streets over which the city has the legal right to control vehicle access.

     U.    Private party signs posted on city-owned property or the public right-of-way, except as specifically permitted by Chapter 17.645.

     V.    Any kind of inflatable object, including balloons, used as advertising, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter.

     W.    Flex wing signs.

     X.    Building-mounted cabinet signs with translucent faces, unless they must be allowed pursuant to federal or state law.

     Y.    Portable signs, except as provided herein.

     Z.     Any sign which is in conflict with the specific standards set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.640.010 Nuisance—Enforcement.
     Each violation of any provision of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance per se, each day a separate offense, and subject to abatement by any means available at law. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.640.011 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

Chapter 17.645 SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
17.645.001 Capacity.
     In adopting this chapter, the city council acts in its proprietary capacity as to public property within the city. Private parties may post signs on public property only in accordance with this chapter or some other authorization duly adopted by the city council. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.645.002 Public forum designation.
     The city declares its intent that all public property in the city shall not function as a designated public forum for sign display, unless some specific portion of public property is designated herein as a public forum of one particular type; in such case, the declaration as to public forum type shall apply strictly and only to the specified area and the specified time period. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.645.003 Definitions.
     For purposes of interpreting and enforcing this chapter, the following words have the special definitions given. For words not defined in this chapter, definitions from Chapter 17.640 may be used as interpretive aids. In consultation with the city attorney, the administrator is authorized and directed to interpret these definitions in light of relevant court decisions.

     “Administrator” means the person authorized by the city council to enforce and interpret this chapter; in the absence of a contrary authorization by the city council, the administrator shall be the city manager or designee.

     “City” means for purposes of this chapter, the city of Brentwood and any of its related entities.

     “Cluster sign structure” means a permanent sign structure in a fixed location designed to advertise and give direction to a maximum of eight housing subdivisions, with four panels on each side, under development or construction in the city.

     “Neighborhood identification sign” means a sign that identifies a neighborhood that is officially designated by the city.

     “Non-commercial message” means a constitutionally protected message that is not commercial in nature. Non-commercial messages on signs typically address topics of public concern or controversy such as, by way of example and not limitation, politics, religion, philosophy, science, art or social commentary. The on-site/off-site distinction does not apply to non-commercial messages or signs displaying them.

     “Permit” means a written authorization from the city for third party display of a sign on public property.

     “Personally attended” means that a person is physically present within five feet of the sign at all times.

     “Public property” means land or other property in which the city is the owner or has the present right of possession and control, as well as areas which are either designated as public rights-of-way or which have long been used as such.

     “Sign” means the same as the definition of the word “sign” in Chapter 17.640.

     “Sign ordinance” means Chapter 17.640, as that chapter may be amended from time to time.

     “Special public events” means events such as public street closures, parades and demonstrations.

 

     “Traditional public forum” means the surfaces of city-owned streets, surfaces of city-owned parks, surfaces of city-owned plazas, surfaces of sidewalks which are connected to the city’s main pedestrian circulation system and the exterior surfaces of pedestrian areas immediately surrounding City Hall. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.645.004 General regulations.
     A.    General Prohibition. No sign may be displayed on public property unless a permit therefor has first been issued or the subject sign is expressly exempt from the permit requirement by this or another applicable policy statement or other authorization approved by the city council.

     B.     Abatement. All permits must be consistent with this chapter. Any sign posted on public property within the city, contrary to the sections stated herein, may be summarily removed as a trespass and a nuisance by the city pursuant to this chapter. Sign owners who have signs removed by the city may be charged for all costs associated with the removal. Removed signs will be held by the city for a period of thirty days and the property/sign owner notified of same. Failure to respond to the notification may result in the sign(s) destruction or disposal by the city. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.645.005 Permit for sign on public property.
     A.    Permit Application. The administrator shall prepare and make available to members of the public an application for a permit, which shall, when fully approved, constitute a permit and indicate the city’s consent, in its proprietary capacity, for placement of a sign on public property. The applicant for the permit must be the same person or entity who is to be the owner of the sign and who shall be responsible for its removal when required. The processing fee for each application, which shall not be refundable even if the application is denied, shall be the same as the fee for a sign permit under the sign ordinance, as that fee currently exists or may be amended from time to time, or such other fee as may be set by the city council. The application form shall require the applicant to state that he or she shall abide by the city’s policies, as well as any special terms or conditions which may be stated on the permit, and to abide by any new or different conditions which may be imposed on all permittees who are similarly situated.

     B.     Findings for Permits for Signs on Public Property. The administrator shall issue a permit for placement of a sign on public property only if, based on the information provided on the permit application and any testimony or evidence presented by the public, the following findings can be made:

     1.     The proposed sign complies with the development and design requirements of the underlying zoning district in which it is located and with the applicable development standards of this chapter; and

     2.     Placement of a proposed sign at or near any street or driveway intersection shall be subject to the satisfaction of the city’s community development department and traffic engineer with regard to sight-distance issues; and

     3.     The overall height of the proposed sign complies with the design requirements of this chapter, and, when combined with supports and/or tethers, will not interfere or come in contact with overhead utilities or be subject to tipping or other potential hazards; and

     4.     The city engineer or designee has determined that the proposed sign will not create an unlawful obstruction and will not be placed within the following areas:

     a.     Within a portion of a roadway, alley, or projecting into a portion of a roadway or alley;

     b.     Within four feet of any marked crosswalk;

     c.     Within fifteen feet of the curb return of an unmarked crosswalk;

     d.     Within four feet of a fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility;

     e.     Within four feet of a driveway, building entrance, or sidewalk leading to the entrance of the building;

     f.      Within four feet ahead of, and fifteen feet to the rear of, a sign or pavement markings designating a bus stop;

 

     g.     Within four feet of a bench, seat or chair placed for public use within a public right-of-way;

     h.     Within four feet of an above-ground utility cover or street furniture;

     i.      At any location where the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than four feet;

     j.      Attached to any parking meter, traffic signal, street light, fire hydrant, power pole, sign post, refuse container or tree;

     k.     In violation of local and state handicapped accessibility regulations.

     C.     Permits Issued in Error. Any permit issued in error may be summarily revoked by the administrator by informing, in writing, the applicant of the nature of the error in issuance. Any applicant whose permit is revoked as issued in error may, at any time thereafter, submit a new permit application which cures any deficiencies in the original application. The application fee shall apply separately to each new application, but shall be waived when the original issuing error was caused by the city. When a permit is revoked, the permittee must remove the sign within seven calendar days of the revocation. If the permittee does not do so, then the city may remove the sign and recover from the permittee the reasonable cost of removal, as may be set by resolution of the city council. Such cost recovery may be a condition to any future or additional permits.

     D.    Right to Permit—Appeal. An applicant whose application fully complies with the terms and conditions of this chapter shall be duly issued a permit. Applications which are denied or permits which are revoked or suspended may be appealed in the same manner as any sign-related decision under Chapter 17.835. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.645.006 Exemptions.
     The following signs are exempt from the permit requirement:

     A.    Exempt Signs—General.

     1.     Government Signs. Traffic control and traffic directional signs erected by the city or another governmental entity; official notices required or authorized by law; signs placed in furtherance of its governmental functions; and signs allowable under Chapter 17.640.

     2.     Legal Nonconforming Signs. Permanent signs which were erected in the past on public property in conformance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations then in effect may remain in that same location so long as they have not been and are not expanded or moved, and are properly repaired and maintained.

     3.     Commercial Mascots. Commercial mascots on the public sidewalk from sunrise to sunset, subject to a maximum sign area displayed of twelve square feet per person, with no special illumination and no inflatable objects.

     B.     Traditional Public Forum Areas.

     1.     This section applies only when city regulations concerning special public events, parades and demonstrations do not.

     2.     In areas qualifying as traditional public forums, private persons may display non-commercial message signs thereon without first obtaining a permit, provided that the signs conform to all of the following:

     a.     The signs must be personally held by a person or personally attended by one or more persons.

     b.     The signs may be displayed only during the time period of sunrise to ten p.m.

     c.     The maximum aggregate size of all signs held by a single person is twelve square feet.

     d.     The maximum size of any one sign which is personally attended by two or more persons acting in concert is thirty-two square feet.

     e.     The sign(s) shall have no more than two display faces and may not be inflatable or air-activated or produce noise, smoke or fumes.

     f.      In order to serve the city’s interests in traffic flow and safety, persons displaying signs under this section may not stand in any vehicular traffic lane when a roadway is open for use by vehicles, and persons displaying signs on public sidewalks must give at least five feet width clearance for pedestrians to pass by. Persons holding signs may not block the view within the visibility triangle.

     C.     Real Estate Signs; Garage Sale Signs. Signs displaying information about real estate open house events, garage sale events, or any non-commercial messages may be displayed without a permit, subject to the following:

     1.     Signs may be displayed on weekends, legal holidays and broker tour days only and shall be removed at the conclusion of the event, and in the case of real estate open house signs and non-commercial messages, at the end of the weekend, holiday or broker tour day.

     2.     The total dimensions including support stake or pole shall not exceed three feet in height by three feet in width.

     3.     Signs may be mounted in the public right-of-way in locations where they will not interfere with normal pedestrian or vehicle traffic, and must not block the visibility triangle. Signs may not be placed in the street median (middle of the street) or on any light standard or pole, and cannot block the view of other signs.

     4.     A maximum of four signs shall be allowed for each event or message. Personal attendance is not required, and illumination is not allowed.

     5.     Signs shall be temporary in physical structure and mounting method.

     6.     Signs described in this subsection which are displayed in times other than the allowable hours may be summarily removed by the city. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.645.007 Banners on city-owned light standards.
     A.    General. Subject to the conditions stated in this chapter, banners may be displayed on city-owned light standards in the downtown and on major and minor arterials as described in the general plan, for the purpose of identifying and promoting area themes or identities, or announcing or promoting special events which are open to the public and are sponsored or co-sponsored by the city.

     B.     Eligibility. Participation in this light standard banner program is open only to programs sponsored or co-sponsored by the city and commercial establishments with Brentwood locations which are open to the public, and educational institutions which are properly authorized, licensed and accredited with the California Department of Education, which comply with the mandatory public education requirements of state law. No more than twenty percent of the display area on each side of a banner promoting a special event or area theme may be devoted to commercial sponsorship identification.

     C.     Display Time. Eligible parties may display street banners only for a maximum of six months per year. Extensions may be granted by the administrator if the sponsor wishes to retain the banners, the banners remain current and no other eligible party has applied for that location. Requests to display banners in accordance with this chapter shall be prioritized in the order received. City sponsored banners have priority over all eligible applicants seeking to participate in the street banner program.

     D.    Technical Standards. The technical standards for such banners shall be developed by the administrator or designee, who is also authorized to establish and enforce policy regarding the physical installation and removal of banners.

     E.     Insurance and Indemnification. As a condition of approval, parties participating in the city’s light standard banner program must provide proof of insurance, in a form satisfactory to the administrator, that the participant carries insurance covering comprehensive general liability (including risks of personal injury including death and property damage, as well as advertising injury), with a coverage limit of at least one million dollars. Such insurance shall name Brentwood, including its city council, individual city council members, boards and commissions and their individual members, officers and employees as additional insureds, or name them as certificate holders. The participant shall also indemnify, hold harmless and defend Brentwood, its city council, individual city council members, boards and commissions and their individual members, officers and employees (including reasonable attorney’s fees) in the event of a challenge to the banner program, as well as against all claims of liability. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.645.008 Temporary banners for community events.
     A.    When the city sponsors or co-sponsors a program for a special public event, with or without co-sponsors, public property may be used to promote and identify the special event.

     B.     Off-site signs may be used to advertise parades, festivals, charitable or educational fundraisers, sports league sign-ups, holiday home tours and similar events, provided that the following standards are adhered to:

     1.     Signs on public property shall be limited to the following locations:

     a.     The northwest and southeast corners of the Sand Creek Road and Fairview Avenue intersection.

     b.     The southwest and southeast corners of the Sand Creek Road and O’Hara Avenue intersection.

     c.     The northeast corner of Dainty Avenue and Central Boulevard.

     d.     Within fifty feet of the southwest corner of Chestnut Street and Sellers Avenue.

     2.     No more than four signs per event shall be allowed, with no more than one sign at each location.

     3.     Signs shall not be placed more than thirty days in advance of the event and shall be removed no later than five days after the conclusion of the event.

     4.     Individual signs shall not exceed an area of thirty-two square feet.

     5.     Signs shall be non-illuminated, and shall not include reflective materials.

     6.     Signs shall be securely fastened on all sides to an on-site structure such as a building, fence or wall.

     7.     Signs shall be constructed of durable and weatherproof materials, including but not limited to vinyl and woven nylon, and shall be continuously maintained in good condition.

     8.     Signs shall only advertise events that are to take place within the Brentwood city limits, or that are sponsored by or raise funding for organizations located within the Brentwood city limits. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014; Ord. 900 § 2, 2012)

 

17.645.010 Cluster signs.
     Off-site cluster sign structures designed to advertise and give direction to a maximum of eight subdivisions (four sign panels on each side) under development within the city may be allowed on public property subject to the provisions of this section.

     A.    These signs shall be located at the intersection of two thoroughfares. The exact locations shall be considered on a case-by-case basis by the city.

     B.     No two cluster sign structures shall be located within one thousand feet of any other cluster sign structure with the exception that two cluster signs may be allowed at one intersection, provided that they are not on the same corner.

     C.     The maximum height of these signs shall be eleven feet and the maximum area shall be forty square feet (excluding base).

     D.    A refundable cash bond in an amount set by resolution of the city council shall be posted with the city prior to the issuance of building permits, as a guarantee for the removal of each sign structure.

     E.     If any sign falls into disrepair or is modified in any way that is not in compliance with this section, the city shall have the right to remove the sign and any deposits posted will be forfeited.

     F.     The signs authorized by this section may be used only for commercial messages related to development of tract housing projects. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.645.011 Neighborhood identification signs.
     Neighborhood identification signs may be installed at the entrance to neighborhoods or districts, subject to the following restrictions:

     A.    The maximum number of signs is two per neighborhood or district.

 

     B.     Signs shall be located at the corners of streets entering the area.

     C.     Signs shall be mounted on a legal fence, wall or similar structure.

     D.    The maximum copy area shall be fifteen square feet.

     E.     Where dedication of the sign is proposed, and subject to acceptance, the dedication shall include the structure on which the sign is located, and the land on which the structure is located, together with access to the nearest public right-of-way.

     F.     Illumination of signs shall be external and ground-mounted only. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

17.645.012 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. (Ord. 927 § 2, 2014)

 

Chapter 17.650 ACCESSORY AND SERVICE USES
17.650.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “accessory and service uses regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to allow and regulate certain uses accessory to principle uses and service uses within the various zones. (Ord. 727, 2002; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.650.002 Applicability of provisions.
     A.    In addition to the principal uses expressly included therein, each use category shall be deemed to include such permanent activities as are customarily associated with, and are appropriate, incidental and subordinate to, such principal use; are located on the same lot as such principal use except as expressly provided otherwise in this chapter and meet the further conditions set forth herein.

     B.     Within the city, zoning notwithstanding, certain facilities and activities are required to serve the city and the surrounding unincorporated area and the region. These uses are normally of a public or public utility nature and are either essential services or do not lend themselves to specific zone designation. (Ord. 727, 2002; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.650.003 Accessory uses permitted.
     Accessory uses shall be permitted as follows:

     A.    Uses accessory to a residential use as follows:

     1.     Home occupations subject to obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 17.840;

     2.     The storage within a dwelling of materials, possessions, supplies, equipment and other material objects normally found within a home;

     3.     The placement upon the premises of a dwelling equipment or goods such as toys, play equipment, yard or lawn furniture, minor yard maintenance tools and equipment and similar objects;

     4.     Rooming and boarding, defined as the renting of a room with or without table board to an individual for a duration of not less than thirty consecutive calendar days, shall be permitted as follows:

     a.     Occupancy to be limited to four paying guests,

     b.     Occupancy in excess of four guests may be permitted subject to obtaining a conditional use permit,

     c.     Rooming and boarding shall be conducted only by a person or persons residing on the premises,

     d.     Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 17.620,

     e.     The use of signs in conjunction with rooming and boarding shall be prohibited,

     f.      Rooming and boarding shall be subject to all other applicable city ordinances;

     5.     Transient housing, defined as the renting of a room to transient guests for periods of less than thirty days shall, subject to conditional use permit approval, be permitted in the R-2, R-3 and A zones as follows:

     a.     A conditional use permit shall be granted only for the rental of not more than two rooms,

     b.     Transient housing shall be conducted only by a person or persons owning the dwelling and residing therein as their principal place of residence,

     c.     Any conditional use permit issued for transient housing shall be nontransferable,

     d.     A conditional use permit issued for transient housing shall be issued for periods not to exceed two years,

     e.     Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 17.620,

     f.      The use of signs in conjunction with transient housing shall be prohibited,

     g.     Transient housing shall be subject to all other applicable city ordinances.

     B.     Uses accessory to a nonresidential use as follows:

     1.     Operation of an employee cafeteria by a firm engaging in a principal use on the same lot;

     2.     Subject to conditional use permit approval a residential occupancy in connection with a principal use on the same lot, where residency is required on the premises for protective, conference, or comparable technical purposes;

     3.     Operation of administrative office services for a use on the same lot;

     4.     Wholesale sale, or retail sale to the buyer’s custom order, of goods produced by a principal industrial use on the same lot;

     5.     Sale of goods on the same lot as a principal community service use, but only if such goods are available only to persons regularly participating in the principal activity;

     6.     The storage of the inventory of any retail or wholesale business, warehouse, parts house, industry or other commercial activity when such storage is the principal activity of the use or is incidental to the use and enclosed entirely within a building.

     C.     Signs pursuant to Chapter 17.640.

     D.    Subject to conditional use permit approval any other use not specifically permitted or determined by the zoning administrator to be similar to a use permitted within the zoning in which it is proposed. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.650.004 Service uses permitted.
     Within any zone, service uses shall be permitted as follows:

     A.    Essential service facilities to include the construction, extension, maintenance and operation of underground or overhead installations and incidental appurtenances, equipment and accessories thereto for the normal and regular distribution and supply within and for the benefit of properties within the city, such as electric, gas, telephone, telegraph, water, sewer and storm drain facilities, including electric distribution lines having fifty kV power or less, and gas, telephone and similar essential-service lines, poles, pipes, conduits, cables, mains, drains, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, but not including facilities listed as requiring conditional use permit approval in Section 17.680.003.

     B.     Subject to conditional use permit approval, essential service facilities to include underground or aboveground public utility electric transmission lines, and towers for transmission of electricity, telephone, telegraph, television, radio and other communications messages, such as high tension power lines and towers; underground or aboveground facilities for the transmission, storage or collection of petroleum, water, gas and sewage; public utility, office buildings, service or maintenance structures and yards, reservoirs, tanks, and substations; and routes of proposed reservoirs, tanks and substations; and routes of proposed electric transmission lines.

     C.     Subject to conditional use permit approval, airports and helicopter ports, cemeteries and hospitals. (Ord. 727, 2002; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.660 ENCROACHMENTS INTO REQUIRED YARDS
17.660.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    The provision of this chapter shall be known as the “encroachment into required yards” regulations of this title.

     B.     The purposes of the encroachment into required yards regulations are as follows:

     1.     To provide usable private open space to fulfill needs for outdoor leisure and recreation;

     2.     To preserve the intent of the zoning ordinance to provide light and air through the requirement and maintenance of certain yards and other open spaces;

     3.     To assure the conservation, protection and improvement in appearance of individual properties, rights-of-way, neighborhoods and the entire city. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.660.002 Applicability.
     The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the encroachment of any building, parts of buildings or structures and the location of accessory buildings and structures into any required yard or other open space and the maintenance of yards and open space. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.660.003 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined in Chapter 17.030. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.660.004 Maintenance of yards and open space—General.
     A.    Every part of each minimum required front, side or rear yard or other required open space shall be open and unobstructed from the finished grade or, where applicable, from such other specified level at which the yard or court is required, to the sky, except for the facilities allowed to project or encroach into such yard by provisions set forth elsewhere in this chapter.

     B.     All yards and open spaces shall be improved and maintained with a surface which prevents dust and allows convenient use for outdoor activities, and shall be any practicable combination of lawn, garden, flagstone, wood planking, concrete, asphalt or other serviceable, dust-free surface. The resulting space shall produce a pleasant and livable environment for human use and enjoyment.

     C.     Landscaping and screening, where required, shall be in conformance with Chapter 17.630.

     D.    In no case shall more than fifty percent of the horizontal area of a required minimum rear yard be covered by any buildings or structures. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.660.005 Allowable projections, required front, side and rear yards, courts and other open spaces.
     The following table prescribes the allowed projections into required yards and courts and other open spaces. Measurements are in lineal feet into the indicated yard or court, except that the notation “N/A” indicates that the facility is not allowed. Where the height of facilities within minimum yards or courts is not specifically limited by the table in this section, such facilities shall conform to the maximum height, if any, prescribed for facilities in the zone where they are located:

 

Facility

Front Yard

Side Yard on Street Side of Corner Lot

Side Yard along Interior Side Lot Line

Rear Yard

Court

A.  Eaves, awnings, louvers and similar shading devices; sills, cornices and similar features; flues, chimneys and similar architectural projections from a building.

4

4

2

4

2

B.  Patio roofs and similar structures projecting from and serving a residential use, which do not exceed 12 feet in height and which have open, unwalled sides along not less than 50 percent of its perimeter.

4

4

2

8

2

C.  Unwalled breezeways and similar structures projecting from and serving a residential facility, which do not exceed 12 feet in height and 8 feet in width.

4

4

N/A

Any distance but not within 5 feet of a lot line.

Any distance but not within 5 feet of a lot line.

D.  Cantilevered bay windows located above the first story of a building.

4

4

N/A

4

N/A

E.  Unroofed balconies, decks and similar structures projecting from and serving a residential facility, but excluding corridors and similar facilities providing access to 2 more dwelling units, except that a balcony or deck projecting from a higher story shall not be deemed a roof.

6

Any distance but not within 5 feet of a lot line.

Any distance but not within 5 feet of a lot line.

Any distance but not within 5 feet of a lot line.

Any distance but not within 5 feet of a lot line.

F.  Exterior access facilities which lead to the second or higher story of a building including open or enclosed fire escapes and open, unroofed outside stairways, landings and exterior corridors.

4

4

N/A

4

N/A

G.  Unroofed porches, steps and other similar raised structures projecting from a building and having a mean height, including railings of not more than 6 feet above the level of the yard or court.

Any distance, but not within 3 feet of any street line abutting a public right-of-way.

Any distance, but not within 3 feet of any street line abutting a public right-of-way.

Any distance, but not within 3 feet of any street line abutting a public right-of-way.

Any distance, but not within 3 feet of any street line abutting a public right-of-way.

Any distance, but not within 3 feet of any street line abutting a public right-of-way.

H. Covered, underground or partially excavated structures including, but not limited to, garages, fallout shelters, wine cellars and basements.

In any yard or court, provided that the surfaces of such facilities are landscaped or developed as patios or terraces whenever not covered by structures at higher stories, and provided that such facilities do not extend more than 30 inches above the average the average adjoining level of finished grade except where a use permit therefor has been granted.

I. Swimming pool

N/A

N/A

5

5

5

 

(Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.660.006 Accessory buildings.
     Within any residential, agricultural, or open space zone accessory buildings such as garages or carports, covered patios, gazebos, greenhouses or lath houses, storage sheds, recreation buildings, pool houses and similar buildings shall be permitted in conformance with the following regulations; except where they are in conflict with the regulations of the zone:

     A.    Accessory buildings shall be prohibited in any front yard or in any side yard adjacent to a street except that a minimal shelter for a water well site shall be permitted where the well site is the only possible location on the property.

     B.     Accessory buildings shall not be closer than eight feet from any other building on the lot or fifteen feet from the main building on any adjacent lot.

     C.     Accessory buildings shall be set back five feet from any side or rear property line except pursuant to subsections D and G of this section.

     D.    An accessory building may be located on the rear property line and/or one side property line provided as follows:

     1.     The accessory building is set back at least ten feet from the main building (including any of its roofed or walled projections) on the property and at least fifteen feet from the main building on an adjacent lot.

     2.     Within five feet of the property line the height at property line shall not exceed six feet which may be increased one-half of a foot for each one-foot of setback.

     3.     The accessory building shall be constructed in accordance with the Uniform Building Code with the appropriately rated fire wall on the property line.

     E.     The maximum height of accessory buildings shall be one story and fifteen feet.

     F.     The use of accessory buildings as living quarters shall be prohibited.

     G.    Within a required side yard a portable accessory building shall be permitted provided its height does not exceed six feet measured from the finished grade and its square foot floor area does not exceed sixty square feet and provided there exists unobstructed access from a public street to the rear yard of at least ten feet of width. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.660.007 Accessory structures.
     Within any residential, agricultural or open space zone, accessory structures shall be permitted in conformance with the following regulations; except where they are in conflict with the regulations of the zone:

     A.    Landscaped features and structures such as uncovered and unenclosed walkways, decks, patios and porches having a height of not more than one foot, ornamental gate archways having a height of not more than eight feet, planters, light standards, windbreaks, sun screens, outdoor fireplaces, posts designed to support landscape features, ornamental ponds, ornamental fixtures, flagpoles not exceeding the maximum allowable height in the zone, arbors, trellises, trees, shrubs and similar features shall be permitted anywhere on a lot.

     B.     Clotheslines, radios and television masts or antennas, trash enclosures and similar structures shall be prohibited in any front yard or side yard adjacent to a street.

     C.     Fences to include walls, hedges and other dividing instrumentalities shall be permitted subject to the following regulations:

     1.     Fences shall be permitted anywhere on the property; however, fences having a height in excess of six feet shall conform to the zoning ordinance requirements regulating principal or accessory buildings with respect to setbacks.

     2.     Within any required front yard fences shall not exceed a height of forty-two inches.

     3.     On a corner lot, the fence height shall not exceed forty-two inches within a triangle formed by the street frontage lot lines extended to their intersection and a line connecting such lot line measured thirty-five feet from their point of intersection.

     4.     In the event the ground elevation is not the same on both sides of a fence, the height thereof shall be measured from the higher grade elevation except that any portion of a retaining wall in excess of two feet in height shall be considered a portion of a fence.

     D.    In the event a fence or other accessory structure or landscape feature is located or grows in a manner so as to restrict visibility at a driveway or street intersection to a degree that, in the opinion of the city, they cause a hazard to public safety, such structure or feature shall be removed or modified within thirty days of notification to the owner by the city that a hazard does exist.

     E.     Swimming pools shall be permitted in any required rear or interior side yard but no closer than five feet from any property line or building line. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.670 ANIMALS
17.670.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “animal regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the “animal regulations” shall be to allow and regulate the keeping of animals in a manner such that they will not become a nuisance. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.670.002 Applicability of provisions.
     The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the keeping of animals in residential areas, the keeping of animals for agricultural purposes, and the keeping of animals in kennels. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.670.003 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

     “Animals, domestic” means fowl, sheep, goats, cows, horses and similar animals and excluding household pets and exotic animals.

     “Animal husbandry” means the breeding, buying, raising and keeping or domestic animals for commercial purposes such as dairying, slaughter, shearing and/or sale and necessary accessory uses related thereto but not including the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine, slaughter houses and similar activities or facilities.

     Animal Husbandry, Limited. “Limited animal husbandry” means the breeding, raising and keeping of domestic animals as pets, for sport and/or personal consumption when planned and provided for as part of the original design of the subdivision.

     Animal, Wild or Exotic. See Section 416.2.106 of the Contra Costa County animal code.

     “Contra Costa County Animal Code” means Division 416 of Title 4 of the Health and Safety Code of the county of Contra Costa as it pertains to the keeping of animals and as adopted by Title 6 of the municipal code of the city of Brentwood.

     Dog Fancier. A “dog fancier” is a person owning or keeping more than five dogs over the age of six months:

     1.     As pets;

     2.     For showing in recognized dog shows, field trials, or obedience trials;

     3.     For working and hunting; or

     4.     For improving the variety of breed in temperament or conformation with a view to exhibition in shows or trials or for use as working dogs in hunting.

     “Household pet” means dogs, cats and fish, mice, rats and similar rodents; guinea pigs and similar animals; snakes, lizards and similar reptiles which are indigenous to the area; and fowl but not including exotic animals.

     “Kennel, public” means the business of buying, selling, boarding, training and/or breeding and raising of dogs, cats or other household pets but not including a pet shop or a veterinarian office.

     “Stable, private” means the breeding, raising and keeping of horses. Private stables are not generally open to or accessible to the public and may include the boarding of horses as an accessory activity.

     “Stable, public” means the business of breeding, raising and boarding horses. Public stables are generally open to and accessible to the public and may include the training of horses and riders, limited retail sales of tack, feed and related items; the hiring of horses; and related activities. (Ord. 507 §§ 4, 5, 1992; Ord. 501 § 2, 1991; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.670.004 Animals—General.
     The keeping of animals shall be subject to any applicable zoning district regulations, the Contra Costa County animal code, where applicable, and the additional regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.670.005 Domestic animals—General.
     The keeping of domestic animals within the city shall be subject to the following regulations:

     A.    Within the residential zoning districts, the standards indicated in the following table shall apply:

 

Zoning

Animals Allowed

Number Allowed Per Acre

Min. Lot Size

R-E

Cows, pigs, goats, sheep, fowl, rabbits, horses, and similar animals

2 large livestock, or 4 small livestock, or 24 small animals (or combination thereof)

Large and small livestock: 1 ac. No min. lot size for small animals (no minimum needed due to 1 acre min. lot size required by zoning)

R-1-E

Same as above except no pigs

Same as above

Large and small livestock: 1 ac. Small animals: 20,000 sq. ft.

R-1-6, 8, and 10

Same as above

Same as above

Same as above

R-2 and R-3

Same as above*

Same as above

Same as above

 

*      Animals indicated in the above table are permitted in the R-2 and R-3 zones only on properties which are used for single-family residential or agricultural purposes.

 

Large livestock includes cows, horses, and similar animals. Small livestock includes goats, sheep, pigs and similar animals (pigs are only allowed in the R-E zone). Small animals includes fowl (such as chickens or geese), rabbits, and similar grain fed rodents.

     B.     Chicken houses, rabbit hutches, and similar accessory structures provided for the housing of smaller animals shall be set back not less than sixty feet from the front property line or any street line, and shall be not less than forty feet from any side or rear property line.

     C.     Barns, stables and other buildings or structures used to shelter livestock shall be set back not less than one hundred feet from the front property line and fifty feet from any side or rear property line.

     D.    Fenced pastures, paddocks, or other enclosed livestock areas shall not be located nearer than ten feet to any property line. The ten-foot setback need not be provided along property lines which are immediately adjacent to compatible uses such as the keeping of domestic animals, farming, or other agricultural operations.

     E.     Animal waste accumulations shall be removed from the premises, composted or spread in a manner that will minimize odor and fly propagation.

     F.     Animals at large shall be secured at all times by enclosure in pens, barns corrals, paddocks, or similar structures or within open areas sufficiently and adequately fenced for their restraint. (Ord. 501 § 3, 1991; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.670.006 Public stables.
     Public stables shall be subject to the following regulations.

     A.    Retail sales of feed, tack and related items shall be primarily for the convenience of the boarders and may be evidenced from the public right-of-way only by a sign having an area not exceeding eight square feet.

     B.     The conduct of horse shows and similar activities shall require conditional use permit approval.

     C.     Off-street parking shall be required pursuant to Chapter 17.620. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.670.007 Kennels.
     Kennels shall be subject to the following regulations:

     A.    Kennels shall not evidence any odor beyond the premises of the property on which they are located.

     B.     Kennels shall not evidence any barking beyond the premises within any R district or the MHP district.

     C.     Public kennels shall be subject to the applicable zoning district regulations and the additional regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 507 § 6, 1992; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.670.008 Miscellaneous regulations.
     A.    Private Stables. Shall not evidence by signs on the premises or other advertising any sales, breeding, boarding or other commercial activity.

     B.     Household Pets. Except for dogs and cats the provision of this chapter shall not apply to the keeping of household pets which are confined at all times within the household.

     C.     Exotic Animals. See Section 416.11 of the Contra Costa County animal code.

     D.    Dogs and Cats. No more than five dogs or cats over the age of six months may be kept in any residential zoning district, with the exception of the following: six or more dogs may be kept in any residential zoning district provided that a use permit is obtained for a dog fancier’s license, subject to the requirements of Section 17.670.009. (Ord. 507 § 7, 1992; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.670.009 Dog fanciers license.
     A dog fanciers license may be obtained in any of the residential zoning districts for the purpose of keeping or owning more than five dogs over six months in age. The license is subject to the following standards:

     A.    A use permit shall be obtain in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.830 of this code;

     B.     A minimum lot size of one acre shall be maintained;

     C.     All dogs shall be confined on the premises or exercised under the owner’s control;

     D.    All dogs shall be provided with adequate shelter;

     E.     There shall be no evidence of odor beyond the premises of the property on which the dogs are located;

     F.     No more than ten dogs, over the age of six months, per acre shall be allowed. The maximum number of dogs allowed shall be determined through the use permit process;

     G.    The keeping of dogs shall not cause a nuisance due to noise, as defined by County Code Section 416.12.202;

     H.    A violation of any of these standards shall be cause to conduct proceedings before the planning commission to have the license revoked. The planning commission may permanently revoke the license, temporarily revoke the license, or add additional conditions to the license. In order to revoke a license, the city shall provide notice in accordance with the requirements of Section 17.800.009 of this code. (Ord. 507 § 8, 1992)

 

Chapter 17.680 OIL AND GAS PRODUCTION
Note
*      Prior Ordinance History; Ord. 408 (part).

 

17.680.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The Provisions of Chapter 17.680 shall be known as the “oil and gas production regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the “oil and gas production regulations” is to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and controls for the present operation of and future drilling for and production of oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon substances within the city so that such activities may be conducted in harmony with other uses of land within the city, thus protecting the people of the city in the enjoyment and use of their property and providing for their comfort, health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.002 Definitions.
     A.    Those definitions provided in Public Resource Code Section (PRC) 3000 et seq., relating to oil and gas exploration and production shall apply to this chapter and are adopted herein by reference. In addition to those definitions in the PRC, the following shall apply:

     B.     All terminology used in this chapter, not defined below, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.

     “Ambient noise level” means the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made.

     “A-weighted sound level” means the sound level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA.

     “Decibel” means a unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty microPascals.

     “Emergency work” means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency.

     “Equivalent sound level, Leq (dBA)” means the level of a steady sound which, in a stated time period and at a stated location, has the same A-weighted sound energy as the time-varying sound. Mathematically, Leq is determined as follows:

 



 

     (REF EPA “—LEVELS—,” 550/9-74-004, March, 1974.)

 

     The Leq can be estimated from direct observations of a hand held sound level meter with the following equation:

 



 

     (REF; ANSI SI.13-1971, PAGE 23)

 

     “Noise control officer (NCO)” means the municipal agency or department having lead responsibility for this chapter. (If no such agency is designated, the term shall mean the municipal official having lead responsibility for this chapter.)

     “Noise disturbance” means any sound which, as judged by the noise control officer:

     1.     Endangers or injures the safety or health of human beings or animals, or

     2.     Annoys or disturbs reasonable persons of normal sensitivities, or

     3.     Endangers or injures personal or real property, or

     4.     Violates the factors set forth in Section 17.680.005.

     Compliance with the quantitative standards as listed herein shall constitute elimination of noise disturbance.

     “Production facilities” means all equipment, pipelines, etc., used for the purpose of producing or transporting oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances within or through the City of Brentwood, excluding normal public utility gas lines.

     “Pure tone” means any sound which can be judged as audible as a single pitch or a set of single pitches by the noise control officer. For the purposes of this chapter, a pure tone shall exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous one-third octave bands by five dB for center frequencies of five hundred Hz and above and by eight dB for center frequencies between one hundred sixty and four hundred Hz and by fifteen dB for center frequencies less than or equal to one hundred twenty-five Hz.

     “Sound level meter” means an instrument meeting or exceeding American National Standard Institute’s Standard S1.4-1971 for Type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.003 Permits required.
     Appropriate permits shall be obtained from the city for all oil, gas or other hydrocarbon operations including, but not limited to, seismic or geophysical oil or gas exploration or survey, drilling a new or reworking an existing well for oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances, construction of related facilities for oil, gas or other hydrocarbon production. The following permits shall be required:

     A.    A conditional use permit shall be obtained prior to the drilling of a new well or the reworking of an existing well which has not complied with these regulations, or prior to the construction of any new related facilities for the production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances within or through the city excluding normal public utility gas lines.

     B.     A temporary use permit shall be obtained prior to seismic or geophysical surface-based exploration or survey for the purpose of locating gas, oil or other hydrocarbons, excluding any exploratory drilling operations which are subject to a conditional use permit.

     C.     A temporary use permit shall be obtained by the operator prior to any reworking of a well that has previously complied with these regulations.

     D.    Emergency Work. Whenever it is necessary to do work on a well to prevent a hazardous condition or the loss of the well, the operator is authorized to do such work without permits; however, the operator must immediately report any emergency which has the potential of threatening adjoining properties. All other emergencies must have a preliminary report submitted to the city within twenty-four hours and a final report within five working days after the emergency work is completed. Such emergency work shall be excluded from the maximum permissible sound levels during the term of the emergency only.

     E.     Administrative Conditional Use Permit. Applications for new or redrilled wells and/or production facilities which are beyond one thousand five hundred feet of any residence, shall be reviewed and acted on by community development department staff, at a public hearing. Staff may refer any such case to the planning commission for review and action. Any staff decision may be appealed to the planning commission by any interested party upon filing a written appeal request and payment of an appeal fee as provided for under the provisions of appeal of a planning commission decision in the zoning ordinance.

     F.     Application Submittal. All applications for conditional use permits listed in subsection A of this section, shall include the following information in addition to the standard information required for a conditional use permit application:

     1.     Plan of drill site, production, storage and all surface facilities, including each derrick, tank, sump, pipeline, boiler and other existing and proposed equipment, including the distance to all existing and approved dwellings and other structures and land uses within a one thousand five hundred foot radius of the subject oil/gas facility;

     2.     Names and addresses of the mineral, surface and lease owners of the subject well and parcel;

     3.     A statement of the provisions for water for the drill rig;

     4.     Name and address of the person upon whom service of process upon applicant may be made, and a consent that service of summons may be made upon such person in any action to enforce any of the obligations of the applicant;

     5.     A statement that the applicant has the right, by reason of ownership or the permission of the owner, to pass through and enter all property through which such well is proposed to pass and that the applicant is duly authorized by the property owner to make and file the application;

     6.     A complete legal description of the subject site;

     7.     A brief description of the manner in which the oil will be produced and transported if the drilling operation is successful;

     8.     An oil spill contingency plan that specifies the location, description of responsibilities for cleanup and monitoring, disposition of wastes, and reporting incidents;

     9.     A phasing plan for the staging of the drilling operations, including but not limited to, an estimated timetable for project construction, operation, completion and abandonment, as well as location and amount of land reserved for future expansion;

     10.   Copies of all other required permits, insurance and bonds, including, but not limited to, those required by DOG, the Regional Water Quality Control Board and the Bay Area Quality Management District;

     11.   An acoustical study prepared by a qualified acoustical engineer documenting existing ambient noise levels over a twenty-four hour period on the drill site and within a five hundred foot radius, if there are any occupied buildings within that radius;

     12.   Any and all other information that the city may, in its discretion and from time to time, require;

     13.   A written agreement duly executed by the applicant that in the event a permit is issued to him or her by the city, he will as a condition to any of his operations within the city, faithfully comply with and abide by each and all of the provisions, requirements, and conditions of this chapter, and conditions of approval. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.004 Development standards.
     The following development standards are applicable to all drilling or production operations within the city unless approved otherwise through the conditional use permit procedure:

     A.    All drilling and production operations shall comply with California Public Resource Code Section 3000 et. seq., all regulations of the State Division of Oil and Gas, State Division of Industrial Safety and all other agency regulations which apply to such operations.

     B.     Minimum Production Site Size. All production sites shall be minimum of one acre in size in order to accommodate consolidation of drill site, equipment, soundproofing, landscaping, circulation, and allow for reuse of the property at such time as the site is not longer utilized for drilling operations, unless a smaller site is approved by the planning commission through the conditional use permit procedure after careful consideration and the planning commission determines that a smaller site can accommodate all equipment, landscaping, etc., and is of adequate size for reuse.

     C.     Access Roads and Production Site. All private roads used for access to the production site and the production site itself shall be surfaced with a permanent or semi-permanent surface such as rock or gravel and maintained to prevent dust or mud.

     D.    Sumps or Ponds. All sumps, sump pits, ponds or similar devices such as portable tanks constructed onsite for the purpose of holding waste material shall be lined to prevent such waste material from penetrating into the soil. Furthermore, when such sump, pit or pond is no longer needed, it shall be excavated of all foreign materials and filled with compacted earth to the level of the surrounding terrain.

     E.     Fencing. All sumps, pits, excavations and production sites shall be enclosed with a fence, the type of fencing and height to be determined by the planning commission at the time of consideration of the conditional use permit.

     F.     Abandonment of Site. At such time as the oil or gas drilling or production site is abandoned, the responsible party shall abandon the site in accordance with the Division of Oil and Gas regulations for urban areas and all other applicable regulations. Furthermore, the drill or production site and all access roads shall be restored to their original condition or as nearly as practicable unless approved otherwise by the Division of Oil and Gas and the planning director of the city upon receipt of a written request by the property owner. The responsible party shall furnish the city with a copy of the Division of Oil and Gas approval showing compliance with all abandonment proceedings under state law.

     G.    Nonproducing Well. Whenever the cost of production exceeds the revenue produced by an oil or gas well or whenever a well is shut down for a period of ninety consecutive days or more, it shall be considered a nonproducing well. When a well is determined to be nonproducing or is shut down for ninety consecutive days or more, the operator shall report to the city the status of such a well.

     The operator shall then have ninety days to conduct an engineering evaluation to determine the economic viability of continuing production operations. If it is determined that the well is no longer economically viable, the well shall be abandoned in conformance with Section 17.680.004(F)

     The operator shall submit, upon request, reports to the city on each well reflecting the cost/revenue ratio of each well in order to determined if the well is nonproducing.

     H.    Site Development. At the time of application for a conditional use permit to all drilling and production, the applicant shall submit a plan showing relationship to existing land use, ultimate land use if different and shall indicate proposed mitigation measures to all anticipated impacts including, but not limited to, noise, light or glare, odor, traffic, aesthetics, etc. Furthermore, the application shall include a plan for the ultimate reuse of the drilling or production site and how the ultimate use of the site will relate to adjacent uses.

     I.      Screening and Landscaping Production Sites. All oil or gas production sites shall be adequately screened from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way, the type of screening and landscaping to be determined by the planning commission at the time of consideration of the conditional use permit.

     J.      Well Location.

     1.     Setbacks. No new well, storage tank or production facility shall be located within:

     a.     One hundred feet of any building including dwellings, except buildings incidental to the operation of the well, unless written permission is obtained from each affected property owner, and subject to DOG standards;

     b.     Three hundred feet of any building used for public assembly, such as schools and churches.

     K.    Soundproofing. If drilling or redrilling operations are located within one thousand feet of an occupied building, noise sources associated with the operation shall be enclosed with soundproofing sufficient to ensure that expected noise levels do not exceed the noise limits contained in this chapter. Permittee shall install every device in the nature of exhaust mufflers and other equipment for the elimination of noise, obtainable and practicable for that purpose, on all operating machinery and equipment and on the well in all instances where objectionable noises might otherwise exist. Soundproofing shall be installed prior to commencement of operations and shall include but not be limited to the following:

     1.     Any well which is to be drilled or redrilled, and which is within five hundred feet of an occupied building shall have all parts of a derrick above the derrick floor, including the elevated portion used as a hoist, enclosed with fire resistive soundproofing blanket or panel material. Such soundproofing shall comply with accepted American Petroleum Institute standards and shall be subject to fire department regulations. All doors shall be closed during drilling, except for ingress and egress and necessary logging, testing and well completion operations. Alternative materials or methods of noise abatement may be used, such as electric power for drilling, provided such alternative is approved by the planning commission. The commission may approve any such alternative if they find that the proposed material and/or method have equal soundproofing properties and fire resistive qualities to being enclosed as stated above. Any alternative may require the submission of evidence by the permittee to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding the use of such alternatives. The planning commission may waive these soundproofing requirements if they find them unnecessary.

     2.     Any well which is to be drilled or redrilled, and which is within five hundred one to one thousand feet of any occupied building shall be enclosed by a plywood fence with fire resistive sound insulating material on the interior of the fence. The fence shall specifically enclose all generators and the drill rig itself, to a height of twenty feet from grade. Alternative materials or methods of noise abatement may be used, such as earthen berms, other sound insulating materials, or other methods proposed by applicant, or electric power for drilling, provided such alternative is approved by the planning commission. The commission may approve any such alternative if they find that the proposed material and/or method have equal soundproofing properties and fire resistive qualities to being enclosed as stated above. Any alternative may require the submission of evidence by the permittee to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding the use of such alternatives. The planning commission may waive these soundproofing requirements if they find them unnecessary.

     L.     Signs. All oil/gas facilities shall have a legible, permanent, prominently displayed and maintained metal sign no less than two square feet in area containing the following: name of the drilling contractor, name of the owner or operator, twenty-four hour emergency phone number, lease name and name and number of the well. If the operator changes, it will be the new operator’s responsibility to replace the sign within thirty days after the change.

     M.    Derricks. All derricks and masts shall be consistent with California Division of Industrial Safety and OSHA standards, be at least equivalent to the standards and specifications of the American Petroleum Institute (API), and meet the following standards:

     1.     All derricks or masts, standard or portable, used for drilling, redrilling, rework, production or servicing, within two hundred feet of a public right-of-way, school, residence or building, shall have derrick crown(s) shrouded to prevent oil and water spraying into the air.

     2.     All derricks and masts hereafter erected for drilling, redrilling or rework shall be removed within thirty days after completion of the work unless otherwise ordered by the director of the DOG.

     N.    Permittee shall immediately remove the derrick and all other structures not required in the event gas only be produced from the well and erect a suitable and sightly structure over the well of the most modern and approved design for the purpose, using only such space for the same as is necessary, and also shall fill all holes and excavations, save the well, and restore all surfaces to their original condition.

     O.    Storage Tanks/Production Equipment.

     1.     Unless otherwise permitted by the planning commission, the total capacity of oil storage facilities shall not exceed two thousand barrels per well, and no tank shall exceed one thousand barrels capacity. Tanks shall be constructed and maintained to be vapor tight.

     2.     Each oil, gas separator shall be equipped with both a regulation pressure-relief safety valve and a bursting head.

     3.     No storage tank shall be erected closer than fifty feet from any building, nor shall any building be erected within fifty feet of any storage tank. The city may permit this distance separation to be reduced for low occupancy industrial or warehouse buildings, subject to additional or special safety of fire systems requirements which may be approved and imposed by the fire district. These distance provisions shall not apply to any tank or related facility constructed prior to 1998.

     4.     All tanks and attached fixtures shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with American Petroleum Institute, OSHA, California Division of Industrial Safety, DOG, National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) and EPA standards.

     5.     Tanks shall rest directly on the ground or on foundations or supports of gravel, concrete, masonry, piling or steel. Tank foundations shall be elevated, level and larger in diameter than the tank itself. Exposed piling or steel tank supports shall be protected by fire resistive materials to provide a fire resistance rating of not less than two hours. Tank supports and connections shall be designed and installed to resist damage as a result of seismic activity.

     6.     No tank for storage of any flammable liquid shall be located closer than three feet to any other such tank.

     7.     New tanks used for storage of crude petroleum and other flammables shall be diked or provided with diversion walls and catchment basins, or combinations thereof, to meet the requirements of the DOG and NFPA. The volumetric capacity of a diked area shall not be less than capacity necessary to hold the full volume of the largest tank below the height of the dike.

     8.     Dike walls shall be of concrete, solid masonry or earth designed and maintained to be liquid tight and to withstand a full hydrostatic head, except that all dikes in residential zones shall be solid masonry or poured in place concrete. Asphaltic surfacing shall be required on all earthen dikes. Surfacing shall be impervious and prevent leaching through pavement.

     9.     All tank piping, valves, fittings and connections including normal and emergency relief venting, shall be installed and maintained in accordance with current API standards.

     10.   All production equipment shall be kept painted in neutral, earthtone colors and maintained at all times. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.005 Sound level measurement— General.
     A.    Any noise level measurements made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be performed using a sound level meter as defined in Section 17.680.002 and shall conform to methods prescribed by ANSI or its successor. Calibration of the measurement equipment, utilizing an acoustic calibrator, shall be performed immediately prior to recording any noise data.

     B.     The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at a point within the property line of the receiver’s location. Where feasible the microphone shall be at a height of three to five feet above ground level and shall be at least ten feet from walls or similar reflecting surfaces.

     C.     A microphone windscreen shall be utilized for all outdoor measurements.

     D.    Where possible, sound level measurements shall be conducted during fair to dry weather conditions with average wind velocities of less than ten miles per hour. In all cases weather information shall be documented during the sound survey interval. Items to report shall include but are not limited to wind velocity and direction, dry and wet bulb temperature (degree in Fahrenheit), and relative humidity (percent).

     E.     Although the use of sophisticated acoustical instrumentation for the measurement of equivalent sound level, Leq, (dBA) is available and its use is preferred; it is not essential for the purposes of this chapter. The equivalent sound level (Leq) of the noise source in question may be estimated using a hand held sound level meter by averaging at least twenty separate observations over a measurement interval that is representative of a typical one hour operation of the noise source. Depending on the character of the noise source the measurement interval may vary from as little as a few minutes to as long as one hour.

     F.     “Slow” meter response is generally preferred. However, if the noise source changes level rapidly in a random fashion several times a minute, exceeding a ten dB dynamic range, then “fast” response shall be used. The noise control officer can make a determination of the appropriate meter, meter response, “fast” or “slow” to be used in those cases that are unclear. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.006 Performance standards.
     The following noise performance standards are applicable to all drilling or production operations within the city unless approved otherwise through the conditional use permit procedure. The noise levels caused by drilling, redrilling or production operations shall be monitored on a complaint basis or periodically at the discretion of the noise control officer of the city. The cost of such noise monitoring shall be borne by the operator conducting such drilling, redrilling or production operations.

     A.    Maximum Permissible Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any oil drilling or production equipment at any location within the incorporated city which causes the noise level when measured on any other property, either incorporated or unincorporated, to exceed the noise level limits set forth for the receiving land use category in Tables 17.680.006(1) and 17.680.006(2)

 

Table 17.680.006(1)

 

EXTERIOR NOISE LIMITS FOR DRILLING OR REDRILLING OPERATIONS

 

Receiving Lane Use Category

Time Period

Equivalent Sound Level, Leq, (dBA) for any hour

Residential

7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m.

75

 

10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m.

50

Agricultural, Commercial or Industrial

7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m.

75

10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m.

70

 

 

Table 17.680.006(2)

 

EXTERIOR NOISE LIMITS FOR PRODUCTION OPERATIONS

 

Receiving Lane Use Category

Time Period

Equivalent Sound Level, Leq, (dBA) for any hour

Residential

7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m.

55

 

10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m.

45

Agricultural, Commercial or Industrial

7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m.

60

10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m.

50

 

     B.     Noise Abatement Methods. The noise abatement method(s) in which the operator meets the noise level standards in Table(s) 17.680.006(1) or 17.680.006(2) shall be determined by the operator to allow the operator the flexibility of utilizing the most efficient and cost effective method(s) available to the operator.

     1.     If noise complaints are received by the city, or if noise levels exceed those permitted by this chapter, a noise shall be issued to the operator.

     2.     Upon receipt of notice, the operator shall submit for the approval of the community development department the procedures the operator will undertake to correct the violation. Corrective measures must be initiated within twenty-four hours of operator’s receipt of the notice. The city may require additional or follow-up noise field tests by an acoustical engineer to ensure compliance, in which case the operator shall pay the actual costs to the city for such tests.

     3.     Failure to comply shall be reason for the city to limit drilling, redrilling or other operations to daylight hours (seven a.m. to seven p.m.)

     4.     Nothing shall preclude the city from pursuing other administrative or legal remedies to obtain compliance.

     C.     Adjustment for Ambient Noise Level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds those limits established in Tables 17.680.006(1) or 17.680.006(2), then the planning commission may adjust the “exterior noise limits” upward for the particular site in question to reflect said ambient level only after careful consideration of all pertinent data. However, in no case will the “exterior noise limits for production operation,” Table 17.680.006(2), be increased by more than ten dBA.

     D.    Correction for Character of Sound, Production Operations Only. In the event the alleged offensive noise, as judged by the noise control officer, contains a steady audible tone such as a whine, screech, or hum, the standard limits set forth in Table 17.680.006(2) shall be reduced by five dB.

     E.     Pulsating or intermittent noise activities such as hammering or rocking pipes, acceleration and deceleration of engines or motors, low speed compressors which fire intermittently and other such pulsating or intermittent noises shall be prohibited between the hours of ten p.m. to seven a.m. for all drilling operations and shall be prohibited at all times for all production operations if such noise creates a nuisance within any residential, commercial or industrial area.

     F.     Light or Glare. It is unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated any oil production equipment on any well, or incidental to a well, within the incorporated limits of the city in any manner so as to direct any light or glare such that it negatively impacts any adjoining residential or commercial land uses. Furthermore, such light or glare must be directed away from any public street such that it will not create a traffic hazard.

     G.    Waste Discharge. At no time shall any waste matter be discharged into the public sewer, storm drain, or irrigation systems, any stream or creek, or into the ground, except in accordance with the regulations or requirements of all applicable local, state or federal agencies.

     H.    Vibration. Any ground vibration generated by any oil or gas drilling or production operation which is discernible at any residentially developed property shall be prohibited. Vibration dampening equipment of the best available technology shall be installed as required by the city so as to reduce vibration to a minimum.

     I.      Fire, Safety and Explosion. All uses shall provide adequate safety devices against fire, explosion and other hazards and adequate fire fighting and fire suppression equipment in compliance with applicable fire prevention codes.

     J.      Air Pollution. All uses shall comply with regulations of the San Francisco Bay Area Air Pollution Control District.

     K.    Flaring Wells. The flaring of wells shall be limited to daylight hours only.

     L.     Heavy Equipment. Transport of heavy equipment or large trucks to and from the production site shall be limited to the hours of seven a.m. to ten p.m. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.007 Consolidation of drilling sites.
     A.    At all times when practical and reasonable, new drill sites shall be developed at an existing established drill site in order to free more land for other uses and reduce the interface between oil or gas activities and other land uses, thereby making the potentially adverse impacts from such operations easier to mitigate; and provide for the opportunity to establish greater buffers and separation between oil or gas facilities and other uses.

     B.     Whenever a new drilling site is proposed, the proponent shall analyze in conjunction with the city and the State Division of Oil and Gas, all gas or oil zones and the typical reach of directionally drilled wells in order to establish a site where all or most of the resource can be removed from one drilling site. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.008 Noise control officer designated.
     The noise control officer shall be the planning director or a person designated by the planning director of the city. The noise control officer is authorized to enter property for the purpose of investigating complaints of noise or for normal periodic checks of noise levels at drilling or production sites. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.009 Nonconforming drilling or production sites.
     Drilling or production sites legally established within the unincorporated area and subsequently annexed to the city of Brentwood may continue without complying with the requirements of this chapter provided the site or operations on the site do not create a public nuisance as defined within this chapter. Whenever an existing drilling or production site which has not complied with these regulations is reworked, it shall then comply with these regulations. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.010 Nuisance.
     No person shall conduct any oil or gas operation in a manner that would create any noise, odor or vibration detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the surrounding area or any reasonable number of persons. Such manner of operation is declared to be a public nuisance and when determined by the city that a drilling site or operation constitutes a public nuisance, the city shall take all actions necessary and available to abate such nuisance. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.011 Spills.
     In the event of any leak or spill of any pollution or deleterious substance, whatever the cause thereof, the permittee shall notify the community development department. If, in the judgment of the city, such leak or spill represents a potential environmental hazard, the city may issue whatever corrective orders deemed appropriate, and may require the appropriate testing of the surface and subsurface for pollutant incursion, the cost of such tests to be borne by the permittee. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.012 Building permits.
     Building permits shall be secured for all permanent structures in conformance with the Uniform Building Code. Electrical permits shall be required for all electrical connections for drilling/redrilling and/or pumping units if electrical motors are utilized. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.013 Insurance.
     No operations shall commence until the applicant files with the city insurance certificates as follows:

     Permittee shall carry a policy of standard comprehensive general public liability insurance for the drilling period, including coverages for: sudden and accidental pollution including the cost of environmental restoration, underground resources coverage and completed operations. The policy shall insure the city against all costs, charges and expenses incurred by it for cleanup of sudden and accidental pollution. The insurance shall name the city as an additional insured for third party liabilities arising from any oil/gas drilling operations insured under the certificate during the period of coverage. Insurance shall include contractual liability covering bodily injuries and property damage, naming the permittee and the city of Brentwood, in the amount of one million dollars per occurrence. The deductible must be no greater than ten thousand dollars. The policy shall provide for a thirty day cancellation notice to the city in the event the policy will be terminated for any reason except nonpayment of premium in which case the notice period shall be ten days. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.014 Indemnification.
     The operator shall indemnify, defend and hold the city, and their elected officials, officers, agents and employees free and harmless from all actions, suits, claims, demands, liability, costs, and expense, including prosecution claimed or established against them, or any of them, for damage or injuries to persons or property of whatsoever nature, arising out of or in connection therewith the acts or omissions of operator, its servants, agents, or employees, or to which operator’s negligence shall in any way contribute, or arising out of the operator’s failure to comply with the provisions of any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation applicable to the operator. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.015 Sale of wellsite.
     Whenever a well is to be sold, the permittee shall notify the community development department in writing a minimum of thirty days prior to the effective date of sale. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.016 Right of entry.
     Any officer or employee of the city whose duties require the inspection of the premises shall have the right and privilege at all reasonable times, to enter upon any premises upon or from which any operations being conducted for which any permit has been issued or is required, for the purpose of making any inspections. No owner, occupant, or any other person having charge, care of control of any premises shall fail or neglect to permit entry. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.017 Notices.
     Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who must be a resident of the state during all times he or she serves as agent, upon whom all orders and notices may be served in person or by mail. Every operator shall, within five days, notify the community development department in writing of any change in such agent or mailing address. The operator shall submit to the community development department a copy of the Division of Oil and Gas report of property/well transfer/acquisition within thirty days after sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance or exchange of any oil/gas facilities. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.018 Violations.
     Any use, operation, building, tank pipeline, site, structure, excavation or sump established or used contrary to the provisions of this chapter is deemed to constitute a public nuisance, and shall be subject to abatement, including injunctive relief against the creation, maintenance or allowance of any nuisance. In addition, any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.019 Stop orders.
     If any operator is violating any of the provisions of this chapter which affect public health and safety, the city may issue a stop work order for immediate cessation of operations. The operator shall immediately comply with the order and shall not resume operations until written consent from the city has been obtained, or unless ordered by the California Division of Oil and Gas due to special or emergency circumstances. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.020 Revocation of permit.
     Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the planning commission, or on appeal by the city council, upon finding either:

     A.    That permittee has failed, neglected, or refused to comply with and abide by any of the conditions of their permit; or

     B.     That permittee has failed, neglected, or refused to comply with and abide by, or has in any way violated any of the provisions of this chapter, any other ordinance of the city, or any other law, rule or regulation, either directly or indirectly, by reason of, in connection with, or incident to his or her operations under the permit or upon the premises covered by such permit; or

     C.     If any of permit tee’s operations, or the continuance thereof, upon the premises covered by his/her permit are or are likely to become a menace or hazard to business, to any public property, to any interest of the city, or to the lives or safety of persons; or

     D.    If permittee shall have made any wilful misrepresentation of fact in any application for such permit or in any report or record required by this chapter to be filed with or furnished to the city by permittee.

     E.     Any permit, either in connection with a proceeding for the revocation thereof or otherwise, may be suspended by the commission or council upon finding that the operations of the permittee constitute or have become an immediate menace or hazard to commerce, to any public property, to any interest of the city, or to the lives or safety of persons. The suspension and/or revocation of any permit shall be made and accomplished in the following manner.

     F.     Following a public hearing by the planning commission, or on appeal by the city council, notice of suspension and/or revocation shall be served upon permittee, stating the reasons and grounds upon which the proposed action is based, requiring permittee within fifteen days after the service upon him or her of such notice, to cure and remedy any fault, noncompliance, or violation of any condition for which suspension or revocation of the permit may be made. Said permit shall, without any further or other action of or by the city, be revoked five days after the time herein provided for the curing of any default, or within any further times as the commission or council may have granted, has expired.

     G.    At such hearing, the permittee and the public shall be given an opportunity to present information relevant to consideration of suspension or revocation of the permit.

     H.    It is unlawful to carry on any of the operations authorized by any permit during any period of suspension or after revocation; provided that nothing shall prevent the performance of such operations as may be necessary for safety, or to cure and remedy the default, noncompliance or violation for which suspension or revocation was ordered. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A), 1998)

 

17.680.021 Development encroachment in petroleum areas.
     A.    Onsite Petroleum Facilities. Where a developer proposes to subdivide, rezone or otherwise develop property which contains existing drilling and/or production operations, the developer shall provide a plan showing how all existing petroleum related facilities will be protected and integrated into the proposed development so such facilities will satisfy the requirements of this chapter. The developer shall also submit a plan of the ultimate use of the land after cessation of petroleum operations and abandonment of the wells. Any buildable lot containing an area which may be not built upon because development could not comply with this chapter shall be encumbered by the developer with a deed restriction specifying the area so encumbered and identifying the name and location of the well causing the encumbrance. If a final map is filed, such encumbrance shall be recorded concurrent with the final map. If a petroleum facility is subsequently abandoned, such lot may then be considered for development, pursuant to this chapter.

     B.     Abandoned Wells. Tentative maps, planned development and other development plans submitted to the city shall show the location of all wells drilled on the property. Prior to development of an area, any well shown as abandoned shall be accompanied by written verification for the DOG. Development shall be designed such that the building official is satisfied that no structure will be built within ten feet of any well that has been properly abandoned pursuant to DOG requirements. Any lot or parcel containing an abandoned well shall be encumbered with a deed restriction specifying the exact location of such well and prohibiting any construction within the ten-foot area. If a final map is recorded, the encumbrance shall be recorded concurrent with the final map. The DOG, at their discretion, may also require that any abandoned well be uncovered, tested for leakage, require remedial work on leaking wells, and be accurately located on the final map before recordation of the map.

     C.     Drilling Islands. As part of any rezoning, subdivision, or other development, the developer must provide the city with written documentation that he/she has contacted all mineral rights owners who have rights of surface entry on the property, to either reserve lands for future drilling and/or production operations as drilling islands, or to waive their rights to drill for oil and gas under the surface, within the subject site. Drilling islands shall be no less than two net acres in size, configured so that the proposed development and petroleum activities can be adequately buffered from one another, provide for adequate access, and be accompanied with a plan of the ultimate use of the site after abandonment or a decision not to pursue petroleum operations. Future drilling and/or production operations shall be required to acquire necessary permits as well as satisfy all well site development standards. (Ord. 597 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1998)

 

Chapter 17.690 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATIONS
17.690.010 Intent and purpose of chapter.
     A.    Intent. This chapter is intended to provide special design guidelines, standards, and development regulations to regulate the time, place, and manner of the operation of adult-oriented businesses in order to minimize the negative secondary effects associated with these businesses including, but not limited to, increased crime, decreased property values, and the deterioration of neighborhoods which can be brought about by the concentration of adult-oriented businesses in close proximity to each other or proximity to other incompatible uses, including churches, parks, playgrounds, schools, day care facilities, youth-oriented establishments, and residentially zoned districts or uses. The council finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of adult-oriented businesses causes an increase in the number of transients in the area, and an increase in crime, and in addition to the effects described above, can cause other businesses and residents to move elsewhere.

     B.     Purpose. It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to:

     1.     Establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult-oriented businesses or their close proximity to incompatible uses, while allowing the location of adult-oriented businesses in certain areas; and

     2.     Regulate adult-oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city.

     C.     Not Purpose, Intent or Effect. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent, nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.020 Definitions.
     The following terms and phrases are defined for the purposes of this chapter:

     “Adult arcade” means any business establishment or concern containing one or more coin- or slug-operated or manually or electronically controlled still or motion picture projectors, video machines, projector or similar image-producing devices, that are maintained to display images to an individual or group of individuals when those images are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

     “Adult bookstore” means any establishment which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, displays and/or distributes sexually oriented merchandise, sexually oriented material, other printed materials, or other form of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.

     “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, lounge, restaurant, or similar business establishment or concern which features, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, any type of live entertainment, films, motion pictures, computer-generated images, videos, discs, slides, or other photographic reproductions, or other oral, written or visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

     “Adult dance studio” means any business establishment or concern which provides for members of the public a partner for dance where the partner, or the dance is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

     “Adult hotel/motel” means a hotel, motel, or other similar business establishment or concern offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, provides to its patrons, through the provision of rooms equipped with closed-circuit television, films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, videos, discs, slides, pay per adult titles (unless parental locks are provided), other photographic reproductions, or other medium, material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a twelve-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than once in a twenty-four hour period.

     “Adult modeling studio” means any business or premises where there is furnished, provided, or procured, a figure model or models who pose in any manner which is characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas where the model(s) is being observed or viewed by any person for the purpose of being sketched, photographed, painted, drawn, sculpted, filmed, or videotaped or otherwise depicted for a fee, compensation, gratuity, or other thing of value as consideration for the right or opportunity to so observe the model or to remain on the premises. “Adult modeling studio” does not include any live art class or any studio or classroom which is operated by any public agency, or any private educational institution authorized to issue and confer a diploma or degree in compliance with standards set by the State Board of Education.

     “Adult-oriented business” means any business establishment or concern which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, operates as an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult dance studio, adult hotel/motel, adult modeling studio, adult theater; any business establishment or concern which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, sells or distributes or offers for sale or distribution sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented material; or any other business establishment or concern which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services, or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. “Adult-oriented business” does not include those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state law.

     “Adult-oriented business operator” means a person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls, or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof. This term shall hereinafter be referred to as “operator.”

     “Adult theater” means a business establishment or concern which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, presents live entertainment performances, motion pictures, videos, computer images, slide photographs, or other pictures or visual representations or reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

     “Applicant” means a person who is required to file an application for a permit under this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an adult-oriented business.

     “Bar” means any commercial establishment that by state law is required to be licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control as an “on-sale” licensee to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises.

     “Commission” means the planning commission of the city of Brentwood.

     “Director” means the community development director of the city of Brentwood.

     “Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” means and refers to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by the phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character or theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina (1981) 115 Cal.App.3d 151.

     “Entertainer” means any person who dances, models, entertains, and/or performs specified sexual activities or displays specified anatomical areas in an adult-oriented business.

     “Establishment of an adult-oriented business” means and includes any of the following:

     1.     The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as a new business;

     2.     The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business defined herein;

     3.     The addition of any of the adult-oriented businesses defined herein to any other existing adult-oriented business; or

     4.     The relocation of any adult-oriented business.

     “Figure model” means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire, or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted.

     “Live art class” means any premises on which all of the following occur: there is conducted a program of instruction involving the drawing, photographing, or sculpting of live models exposing specified anatomical areas; instruction is offered in a series of at least two classes; the instruction is offered indoors; an instructor is present in the classroom while any participants are present; and preregistration is required at least twenty-four hours in advance of participation in the class.

     “Nudity or a state of nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the areola.

     “Operate an adult-oriented business” means the supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling, or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult-oriented business or activities within an adult-oriented business.

     “Permittee” means the person to whom an adult-oriented business permit is issued.

     “Person” means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form or character.

     “Regular and substantial course of conduct” means that one or more of the following conditions exist:

     1.     The area devoted to sexually oriented merchandise and/or sexually oriented material exceeds more than twenty percent of the total display or floor space area open to the public;

     2.     The business establishment or concern presents any type of live entertainment which is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas at least four times in any month; or

     3.     The sale, trade, display, or presentation of services, products, or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas exceeds more than twenty percent of the total revenue generated by the business or total display or floor space open to the public.

     “School” means any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained in compliance with standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education or an institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university, but it does not include a vocational institution.

     “Semi-nude” means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.

     “Sexual encounter center” means any business, agency, or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons, not all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble, or associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas.

     “Sexually oriented material” means any element of sexually oriented merchandise, or any book, periodical, magazine, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, video, disc, cassettes, slides, tapes, records, computer-generated image, or other written, oral or visual representation which, for purposes of sexual arousal, provides depictions which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

     “Sexually oriented merchandise” means sexually oriented implements and paraphernalia including, but not limited to, dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, edible underwear, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery or electrically operated vaginas or penises, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity or which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

     “Specified anatomical areas” mean and include any of the following:

     1.     Less than completely and opaquely covered human (a) genitals or pubic region; (b) buttocks; and/or (c) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;

     2.     Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or

     3.     Any device, costume, or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition.

     “Specified sexual activities” mean and include any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:

     1.     Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory function in the context of a sexual relationship, any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: analingus, bestiality, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerastia;

     2.     Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence;

     3.     Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation;

     4.     Fondling, or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast;

     5.     Masochism, erotic, or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain;

     6.     Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal, or anal irrigation; or

     7.     The presence of any person who performs, or appears in a state of nudity or semi-nude.

     “Youth-oriented establishment” means any establishment likely to be frequented by minors, such as, but not limited to, video game arcades, skating rinks, bowling alleys, etc. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.030 Prohibited areas and minimum proximity requirements.
     A.    Planned Development Zoning Districts. Subject to the limitations set forth in this chapter, adult-oriented businesses may be established in the following planned development (PD) zoning districts provided that the separation requirements as outlined under subsections B and C of this section are adhered to: planned development six (PD-6); planned development thirty-six (PD-36); planned development thirty-eight (PD-38); planned development fifty-one (PD-51); planned development fifty-two (PD-52); and planned development fifty-three (PD-53).

     B.     Specified Distance Separation Requirements. Notwithstanding the above, no adult-oriented business shall be established or located within certain distances of certain specified land uses or zoning districts as set forth below. No adult-oriented business shall be established or located:

     1.     Within a one thousand foot radius from any existing residential zoning district or use. The distance between a proposed adult-oriented business use and a residential zoning district or use shall be measured from the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the adult-oriented business use or proposed adult-oriented business use to the nearest property line included within a residential zoning district or property in current residential use, along a straight line extended between the two points;

     2.     Within one thousand feet of any other adult-oriented business as defined in this chapter which is located either inside or outside the jurisdiction of the city. The distance between the two adult-oriented business uses shall be measured between the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the adult-oriented business use and proposed adult-oriented business use along a straight line extended between the two points; or

     3.     Within one thousand feet from any existing park, playground, religious facility, or school use or property zoned open space (OS), public facilities (PF) or semipublic facilities (SPF). The distance between a proposed adult-oriented business use and park, playground, day care facility, youth-oriented establishment, church or school uses or property zoned open space (OS), public facilities (PF), or semipublic facilities (SPF) shall be measured from the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the adult-oriented business use or proposed adult-oriented business use to the nearest property line where the park, playground, church, day care facility, youth-oriented establishment, or school use is located, or property zoned open space (OS), public facilities (PF), or semipublic facilities (SPF) along a straight line extended between the two points.

     C.     Separation Requirements Also Apply to the General Plan. The above distance limitations shall also apply to residential districts or uses and parks, playgrounds, schools, day care facilities, youth-oriented establishments, and church uses or property so designated in the general plan land use element of an adjacent jurisdiction. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.040 Adult-oriented business permit required.
     A.    Adult-Oriented Business Permit and Business License Required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, establish, carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted, established, or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city, the operation of an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect both an adult-oriented business permit and a business license from the city.

     B.     Not Allowed by Right. No adult-oriented business may be established within the city by right. All persons wishing to establish an adult-oriented business within the city shall first apply for and receive an adult-oriented business permit in compliance with this chapter.

     C.     Applicant to Supply Sufficient Evidence. It is the burden of the applicant for an adult-oriented business permit to supply sufficient evidence to justify the grant of an adult-oriented business permit. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.050 Application requirements.
     A.    Application Submittal. Any person desiring to operate or establish an adult-oriented business within the city shall file with the community development department an adult-oriented business permit application on a standard application form supplied by the community development department.

     B.     Required Information. All applications shall include the following information:

     1.     If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least eighteen years of age.

     2.     If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names and current addresses of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

     3.     If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names, addresses, and capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.

     4.     The notarized signature of the property owner and proof of ownership.

     5.     A nonrefundable deposit or fee as set forth by the city’s fee schedule.

     6.     Signed statement by the applicant verifying that applicant intends to and will comply with all of the adult-oriented business development standards of this chapter.

     7.     A description of the adult-oriented business for which the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult-oriented business will operate, plus the names and addresses of all the owners and leasers of the adult-oriented business site.

     8.     The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed.

     9.     The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other persons who will perform/work at the adult-oriented business.

     10.   A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult-oriented business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.

     11.   A straight-line drawing prepared within thirty calendar days before application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult-oriented business, and:

     a.     The property line of any residential zoning district or use within one thousand feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business;

     b.     The property line of any other adult-oriented business within one thousand feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business for which a business permit is requested; and

     c.     The property lines of any church, youth-oriented establishment, school, park, playground, or day care facility within one thousand feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business.

     12.   A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises and entries of the adult-oriented business showing the location of the lighting system required by this chapter. Such diagram shall include a photometric study by a licensed lighting engineer.

     13.   A security system plan shall be provided which shall minimally include web/browser-based video accessibility by the police department of all public areas of the establishment. This plan shall be submitted to, and approved by, the chief of police or their designee. Such system(s) shall be maintained in good, operable working order throughout the terms of the permit for operation.

     C.     Signature of Applicant Required. If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a ten percent or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application.

     D.    Fictitious Name, If Applicable. If the applicant intends to operate the adult-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult-oriented business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name.

     E.     CEQA Compliance. All applicants for an adult-oriented business permit shall also fill out the city’s environmental review package/initial study checklist for purposes of complying with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

     F.     Director’s Determination of Completeness. The director shall determine whether the application contains all the information required by this chapter. If it is determined that the application is not complete, the applicant shall be notified, in writing, within thirty days of the date of receipt of the application that the application is not complete and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. The applicant shall have thirty calendar days to submit additional information to render the application complete. Failure to do so within the thirty-day period shall render the application automatically void. Within thirty days following the receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the director shall again determine whether the application is complete in compliance with the procedures set forth in this subsection. Evaluation and notification shall occur as provided above until the time the application is found to be complete. The applicant shall be notified within ten days of the date the application is found to be complete. All notices required by this chapter shall be deemed given upon the date that they are either deposited in the United States mail or the date upon which personal service of the notice is provided.

     G.    Other Permits or Licenses. The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult-oriented business permit. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.060 Investigation and action on application.
     A.    Appropriate Investigation and Inspection. Upon the filing of a completed application, the commission shall cause to be made by its own members, or members of its staff, an appropriate investigation, including consultation with the building, police, fire and health departments and inspection of the premises as needed. Consultation is not grounds for the city to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed application.

     B.     Public Hearing Within Forty-Five Days. Within forty-five days of receipt of the completed application, the commission shall hold a public hearing on the application for an adult-oriented business permit. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in compliance with California Government Code Section 65091, as the same may be amended from time to time.

     C.     Relevant Evidence. In reaching a decision on an application for an adult-oriented business permit, the commission shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs.

     D.    Commission’s Decision Within Sixty Days. The commission shall grant, conditionally grant or deny an application for an adult-oriented business permit (“permit” or “adult-oriented business permit”). The commission shall render a written decision on the application for an adult-oriented business permit within sixty days of receiving a completed application. The failure of the commission to render a decision within this time frame shall be deemed to constitute a denial of the application. Any conditions imposed upon the permit shall be in keeping with the objective development standards of this chapter and the underlying zoning district in which the property is located.

     E.     Transmittal of Decision to Applicant. The commission’s decision shall be hand-delivered or mailed to the applicant. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.070 Appeal.
     A.    Appeal of Commission’s Decision. Any interested person may appeal the decision of the commission to the council in writing within ten days after the commission’s written decision. In addition, within ten days after the commission’s written decision, any member of the council shall have the authority to direct that the council review the decision of the commission on the grounds that the individual council member believes that the matter should be decided by the council.

     B.     De Novo Public Hearing. Consideration of an appeal of the commission’s decision shall be at a de novo public hearing which shall be noticed in the same manner as the public hearing of the commission and shall occur within thirty days of the filing of the appeal or initiation of review by the council.

     C.     Council’s Action on Appeal. The council action on the appeal of the commission’s decision shall be by a majority vote of the quorum, and upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the council shall grant, conditionally grant, or deny the application. The council’s decision shall be final and conclusive.

     D.    Relevant Evidence. In reaching its decision, the council shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.080 Judicial review of decision to grant, deny or revoke.
     A.    Court Challenge. The time for court challenge to a decision by the council to grant, deny or revoke an adult-oriented business permit is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

     B.     Transmittal of Decision to Applicant. Notice of the council’s decision and its findings shall be mailed to the applicant and shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

     C.     Prompt Judicial Review. The petitioner may seek prompt judicial review of the council’s action in compliance with California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.090 Permit expiration.
     Any adult-oriented business permit approved in compliance with this chapter shall become null and void unless the proposed use is established within one hundred eighty days of the date from the approval, except that, as to facilities that are a reuse of existing facilities, if before the expiration date the permittee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the commission that the applicant has a good faith intent to presently commence the proposed use, the permittee may receive up to two 180-day extensions. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.100 Findings.
     A.    Required Findings. The commission or council shall approve or conditionally approve an application for an adult-oriented business permit where the information submitted by the applicant substantiates all of the following findings:

     1.     The applicant is over the age of eighteen years;

     2.     The required application fee has been paid;

     3.     The proposed use complies with the development and design requirements of the underlying zoning district in which it is located and with the applicable development standards of this chapter;

     4.     The proposed site is not located within a one thousand foot radius from any existing residential zoning district or use. The distance between a proposed adult-oriented business use and a residential zoning district or use shall be measured from the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the adult-oriented business use or proposed adult-oriented business use to the nearest property line included within a residential zoning district or property in current residential use, along a straight line extended between the two points;

     5.     That the proposed site is not located within one thousand feet of any other adult-oriented business as defined in this chapter which is located either inside or outside the jurisdiction of the city. The distance between the two adult-oriented business uses shall be measured between the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the adult-oriented business use and proposed adult-oriented business use along a straight line extended between the two points;

     6.     The proposed site is not located within one thousand feet from any existing park, playground, church, school, or day care facility uses or property zoned open space (OS), public facilities (PF), or semipublic facility (SPF). The distance between a proposed adult-oriented business use and park, playground, church, day care facility, youth-oriented establishment, or school uses or property zoned open space (OS), public facilities (PF), or semipublic facilities (SPF) shall be measured from the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the adult-oriented business use or proposed adult-oriented business use to the nearest property line where the park, playground, church, day care facility, youth-oriented establishment, or school use or property zoned open space (OS), public facilities (PF), or semipublic facilities (SPF) is located, along a straight line extended between the two points;

     7.     The proposed site is not located within one thousand feet of a residential zoning district or use or within one thousand feet of a park, playground, church, or school use located in or property so designated in the general plan land use element of an adjacent jurisdiction; and

     8.     Neither the applicant, if an individual, nor any of the officers or general partners, if a corporation or partnership, have been found guilty or pleaded nolo contendere (no contest) within the past four years of a misdemeanor or a felony classified by the state as a sex or sex-related offense.

     B.     Conditions Imposed on the Permit. Any conditions imposed upon the permit shall be in keeping with the objective development standards of this chapter and the underlying zoning district in which the property is located. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.110 Registration of new employees.
     A.    Employee Registration Required. As a condition of approval of every adult-oriented business permit issued in compliance with this chapter, every owner or operator of an adult-oriented business shall register every employee with the police department within five business days of the commencement of the employee’s period of employment at the adult-oriented business.

     B.     Color Photographs and Other Information Required. Each employee shall be required to provide two recent color passport-quality photographs and, at the discretion of the police chief, shall allow him or herself to be fingerprinted by the police department for purposes of identification. In addition, each new employee shall provide the following information in a form provided by the police department:

     1.     Name, current resident address, and telephone number;

     2.     Date of birth;

     3.     Social security number;

     4.     Height, weight, color of eyes and hair; and

     5.     Stage name, if applicable, and other aliases used within the previous two years.

     C.     Current Employee Register Required. Each owner or operator of an adult-oriented business shall maintain a current register of the names of all employees currently employed by the adult-oriented business, and shall disclose the registration for inspection by any police officer for the purposes of determining compliance with the requirements of this section.

     D.    Failure to Comply. Failure to register each new employee within five days of the commencement of employment, or to maintain a current register of the names of all employees shall be deemed a violation of the conditions of the adult-oriented business permit and may be considered grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.120 Adult-oriented business development standards.
     A.    Unlawful Hours of Operation. It is unlawful for any operator or employee of an adult-oriented business to allow the adult business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, after the hours of ten p.m. and prior to ten a.m. of any day of the week.

     B.     Compliance with Building and Fire Regulations. Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles, and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed, and provided in compliance with the fire district and building regulations and standards adopted by the city.

     C.     Observation of Activities or Materials Outside Prohibited. No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of the establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window, or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.

     D.    Outdoor Lighting Level Required. All off-street parking areas and other exterior areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to two hours following or after the close of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light evenly distributed at ground level. The required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas, walkways, and outdoor areas serving the adult-oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises and shall be maintained in one hundred percent working order as approved in the submitted/required and approved photometric plan.

     E.     All Areas Shall Be Readily Accessible. The operator of an adult-oriented business shall not permit any doors on the premises to be locked during business hours and, in addition, the operator shall be responsible to see that any room or area on the premises shall be readily accessible at all times and shall be open to view in its entirety for inspection by any law enforcement official, including the viewing and access to the digital video security system and any other surveillance/security audio video system(s).

     F.     Posting of California Penal Code Section 314 Required. The adult-oriented business shall post in plain view inside the front portion of the business, a sign, in two-inch print which shall reference California Penal Code Section 314 which shall read as follows:

 

1.  Every person who willfully and lewdly either: (1) exposes his or her person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place, or in any place where there are present other persons to be offended or annoyed thereby; or (2) procures, counsels, or assists any person so as to expose him or herself or take part in any model artist exhibition, or to make any other exhibition of him or herself to public view or the view of any number of persons, which is offensive to decency, or is adapted to excite to vicious or lewd thoughts or acts, is guilty of a misdemeanor.

 

2.  Upon the second and each subsequent conviction under Subparagraph 1 above, or upon a first conviction under Subparagraph 1 above, after a previous conviction under [California Penal Code] Section 288, every person so convicted is guilty of a felony, and is punishable by imprisonment in State prison. “California Penal Code Section 314.”

 

     G.    Open to View by Management. All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms and customer changing rooms, if any, shall be open to view by the management at all times.

     H.    Additional “Adult Arcade” Provisions. Any adult-oriented business which is also an “adult arcade,” shall comply with the following additional provisions:

     1.     The interior of the premises shall be configured so that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms and customer changing rooms. Restrooms and customer changing rooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured so that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection (H)(1) shall be direct line of sight from the manager’s station. If viewing is to be accomplished by means of two or more manager’s stations, then both stations are required to be staffed during hours of operation and occupancy of such affected areas.

     2.     The view area specified in subsection (H)(1) of this section shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.

     3.     No viewing room or changing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one time.

     4.     The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths, changing rooms, restrooms, and stalls or spaces contained therein shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two of the rooms that would allow viewing from one booth or room into another or that would allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two of the booths or rooms.

     5.     Customers, patrons, or visitors who are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing, shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any video booths, or to remain in the common area of the business, other than the restrooms. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the video booths.

     6.     The floors, seats, walls, and other interior portions of all video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen, or saliva in any of the booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; instances of these conditions may justify suspension or revocation of the adult-oriented business permit.

     I.      Indoor Lighting Level Required. All interior areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following footcandles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level:

 

Location

Minimum Illumination Level (footcandles)

Adult arcades

10

Bookstores and other retail establishments

20

Modeling studios

20

Motels/hotels

20 in public areas

Theaters and cabarets

5, except that a minimum of 1.25 shall be required during performances

 

     J.      Separate Restrooms Required. The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate restrooms for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using a restroom for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using a restroom for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance, and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be free from any adult-oriented material. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording, or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not apply to an adult-oriented business that deals exclusively with sale or rental of sexually oriented material or sexually oriented merchandise that is not used or consumed on the premises and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public.

     K.    Additional Requirements for Live Entertainment. The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities, except for businesses regulated by the alcoholic beverage control commission:

     1.     No employee, owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager, or permittee of an adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment shall allow any person below the age of eighteen years upon the premises or within the confines of the business if no alcoholic beverage is served, or under the age of twenty-one if alcoholic beverages are served.

     2.     No entertainer shall dance with or otherwise be within four feet of a patron while performing for compensation or while on the adult-oriented businesses premises. This four-foot separation shall be marked by a railing or other physical barrier designed to obstruct any contact between the entertainer and the patron(s).

     3.     No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager, or permittee shall permit or allow at licensed premises any patron to approach within four feet of an entertainer, or permit or allow an entertainer to approach within four feet of a patron.

     4.     All employees, other than entertainers while performing, shall, at a minimum, while on or about the licensed premises, wear an opaque covering which covers their specified anatomical areas.

     5.     The adult-oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers’ use.

     6.     The adult-oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.

     7.     The adult-oriented business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If a separate access is not physically feasible, the adult-oriented business shall provide a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence, or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers.

     8.     No entertainer, either before, during, or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during, or after performances by the entertainer. This subsection (K)(8) shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult-oriented business.

     9.     No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.

     L.     Security Guards Required. Adult-oriented businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, consistent with the following standards:

     1.     Adult-oriented businesses featuring live entertainment shall provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than twenty-five persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty for each additional twenty-five occupants.

     2.     All adult-oriented businesses shall have a responsible person who shall be at least eighteen years of age and shall be on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. The individual designated as the on-site manager shall be registered with the police chief by the owner to receive all complaints and be responsible for all violations taking place on the premises.

     3.     All adult-oriented businesses shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors the exterior premises of the property including all parking lot areas, or in the alternative, uniformed security guards shall patrol and monitor the exterior premises of the property, including the parking lot areas during all business hours, with surveillance of the site continuing for two hours after closing. A sign indicating compliance with this provision shall be posted on the premises. The sign shall not exceed two by three feet and shall at a minimum be one foot by one and a half feet. This portion of the security system shall be integrated/incorporated in the video security system approved by the chief of police or their designee as part of the permit review process.

     4.     Security guards shall be uniformed in a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law. No security guard required in compliance with this subsection (L)(4) shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager’s station while acting as a security guard.

     M.    X-rated Movies or Videos. The availability of X-rated movies or videos shall be restricted only to persons over eighteen years of age. If an establishment that is not otherwise prohibited from providing access to persons under eighteen years of age sells, rents, or displays videos or other motion picture media that have been rated “X” or rated “NC-17” by the motion picture rating industry (“MPAA”), or which have not been submitted to the MPAA for a rating, and which consist of images which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the videos shall be located in a specific section of the establishment where persons under the age of eighteen shall be prohibited. All access to sexually oriented material or merchandise shall be restricted to persons over eighteen years of age.

     N.    Disposal in Locked Garbage Receptacles Only. Any and all sexually oriented materials or sexually oriented merchandise discarded by an adult-oriented business shall be fully contained within a locked garbage receptacle at all times so that minors are not exposed to sexually oriented materials or sexually oriented merchandise and all items which may constitute biohazard waste shall be properly disposed of in approved biohazard refuse containers, readily available to both staff and patrons. These items shall be lawfully removed from the premises on a daily basis.

     The foregoing applicable requirements of this section shall be deemed conditions of adult-oriented business permit approvals, and failure to comply with every requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the permit issued in compliance with these regulations. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.130 Display of permit.
     Each adult-oriented business shall display at all times during business hours the adult-oriented business permit issued in compliance with the provisions of this chapter in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult-oriented business. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.140 Persons under eighteen prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to employ, or provide any service for which it requires an adult-oriented business permit, to any person who is not at least eighteen years of age. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.150 Transfer of adult-oriented business regulatory permits.
     A.    Only at Approved Address. A permittee shall not operate an adult-oriented business under the authority of an adult-oriented business permit at any place other than the address of the adult-oriented business stated in the application for the adult-oriented permit.

     B.     No Transfer Without Permit Amendment. A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult-oriented business or transfer an adult-oriented business permit to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the commission stating that the transferee is now the permittee. The amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the commission in compliance with Sections 17.690.040 (Adult-oriented business permit required) and 17.690.050 (Application requirements) of this chapter, accompanies the application with a transfer fee as set forth in the city’s fee schedule, and the commission determines in compliance with Sections 17.690.060 through 17.690.100 that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an original adult-oriented business permit. The transfer fee shall be paid in lieu of the filing fee required by Section 17.690.050 of this chapter.

     C.     No Transfer When Subject to Suspension or Revocation. No adult-oriented business permit may be transferred when the permittee has been notified that the adult-oriented business permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.

     D.    No Transfer in Violation of this Section. Any attempt to transfer an adult-oriented business permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is declared void, and the adult-oriented business permit shall be deemed revoked. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.160 Permit revocation.
     A.    Findings Required for Revocation. Any adult-oriented business permit issued in compliance with the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city on the basis of any of the following:

     1.     The business or activity has been conducted in a manner which violates one or more of the conditions imposed upon the issuance of the permit or which fails to conform to the plans and procedures described in the application, or which violates the occupant load limits for the building in which the use is located set by the fire marshal;

     2.     The permittee has misrepresented a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report required to be filed with the city or has not answered each question in the application truthfully;

     3.     The permittee has failed to obtain or maintain all required city, county, and state licenses and permits;

     4.     The permit is being used to conduct an activity different from that for which it was issued;

     5.     The building or structure in which the adult-oriented business is conducted is hazardous to the health or safety of the employees or patrons of the business or of the general public under the standards set forth in the Uniform Building, Uniform Plumbing, or Uniform Fire Code;

     6.     The permitted business creates sound levels which violate the city’s noise regulations (Section 9.32.030 of this code);

     7.     The permittee, if an individual, or any of the officers or general partners, if a corporation or partnership, is found guilty or pleaded nolo contendere to a misdemeanor or felony classified by the state as a sex or sex-related offense during the period of the adult-oriented business’ operation;

     8.     The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult-oriented business:

     a.     Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation,

     b.     Use of the adult-oriented business site as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur,

     c.     Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code,

     d.     The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution including any conduct constituting violations of California Penal Code Sections 315, 316, 318, or 647(b),

     e.     Any act constituting a violation of provisions of the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors including, but not limited to, Sections 311 through 313.4, or

     f.      Any conduct prohibited by this chapter;

     9.     Failure to abide by any action previously imposed by an appropriate city official; and

     10.   The use for which the approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for one hundred eighty days or more.

     B.     Transmittal of Notice. Written notice of hearing on the proposed permit revocation, together with written notification of the specific grounds of complaint against the permittee shall be personally delivered or sent by certified mail to the permittee at least ten days before the hearing.

     C.     Relevant Evidence. The commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed revocation of the permit. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in compliance with California Government Code Section 65091, as the same may be amended from time to time. In reaching a decision on the proposed revocation, the commission shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs.

     D.    Commission’s Action. The commission shall revoke, not revoke, or not revoke but add additional conditions to, the permit tee’s adult-oriented business permit. Any additional conditions imposed upon the permit shall be in keeping with the objective development standards of this chapter and the underlying zoning district in which the property is located.

     E.     Transmittal of Commission’s Decision. The commission’s decision shall be in writing, and shall be hand-delivered or mailed to the applicant.

     F.     Decision Within Thirty Days. The commission shall make its final decision within thirty days of the public hearing.

     G.    Appeal of Commission’s Decision. Any interested person may appeal the decision of the commission to the council in writing within ten days after the commission’s written decision. In addition, within ten days after the commission’s written decision, any member of the council shall have the authority to direct that the council to review the decision of the commission on the grounds that the individual council member believes that the matter should be decided by the council.

     H.    De Novo Public Hearing. Consideration of an appeal of the commission’s decision shall be at a De Novo public hearing which shall be noticed in the same manner as the public hearing of the commission and shall occur within thirty days of the filing of the appeal or initiation of review by the council. In reaching its decision, the council shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs.

     I.      Council’s Action on Appeal. The council action on the appeal of the commission’s decision shall be by a majority vote of the quorum, and upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the council shall revoke, not revoke, or not revoke but add additional conditions to, the permit tee’s adult-oriented business permit. Any additional conditions imposed upon the permit shall be in keeping with the objective development standards of this chapter and the underlying zoning district in which the property is located. The council’s decision shall be final and conclusive.

     J.      No New Permit Within Twelve Months After Revocation. In the event a permit is revoked pursuant to this chapter, another adult-oriented business permit to operate an adult-oriented business shall not be granted to the permittee within twelve months after the date of the revocation. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.170 Violations.
     Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in compliance with the limits set forth in California Government Code Section 36901, as it may be amended from time to time, or any other legal remedy available to the city. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.180 Applicability to other regulations.
     The provisions of this chapter are not intended to provide exclusive regulation of the adult-oriented business uses. These uses shall comply with any and all applicable regulations imposed in other articles of this Land Use Code, other city ordinances, and state and federal law. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.190 Conduct constituting a public nuisance.
     The conduct of any business within the city in violation of any of the terms of this chapter is found and declared to be a public nuisance, and the city attorney or the district attorney may, in addition or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take other steps and shall apply to other courts as may have jurisdiction to grant relief that will abate or remove the adult-oriented business and restrain and enjoin any person from conducting, operating, or maintaining an adult-oriented business contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.200 Inspections.
     An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, community development department, or other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law and the development standards applicable to adult-oriented businesses, at any time it is occupied or opened for business. A person who operates an adult-oriented business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if he/she refuses to permit the lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

 

17.690.210 Severability.
     Each section and each provision or requirement of any section of this chapter shall be deemed severable and the invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other portion. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2005)

Article X. Supplementary Regulations—Continued
Chapter 17.700 SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS—CONTINUED
17.700.001 Chapters enumerated.
     Supplementary regulations include the following:

     A.    Chapter 17.710: Mobile Home Parks.

(Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.710 MOBILE HOME PARKS
17.710.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “mobile home park regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the mobile home park regulations shall be to assure the development of well-planned and designed mobile home parks compatible with the uses of adjacent properties, and located so as to allow for convenient access to and from major thoroughfares. Mobile home parks shall be designed and provided with residential amenities so as to blend well with the residential character of their neighborhood, and to provide a suitable residential environment for their occupants. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.710.002 Applicability of provisions.
     The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the development of mobile home parks in all residential zones. These regulations are in addition to those of the California Health and Safety Code and the applicable regulations thereunder and except where this chapter imposes more restrictive regulations the regulations of the state shall be applicable. The regulations of this chapter shall be considered minimum and where special circumstances exist more stringent or additional regulations may be imposed as a condition to conditional use permit approval. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.710.003 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

     A.    “Awning” means a shade structure supported by posts or columns and partially supported by a mobile home and installed, erected or used on a mobile home lot.

     B.     “Driveway” means a street designed primarily for use of vehicular traffic within a mobile home park.

     C.     “Greenbelt” means a usable open area unobstructed from ground to sky.

     D.    “Lot” means any area or tract of land or portion of a mobile home park designated or used for the occupancy of one mobile home.

     E.     “Mobile home” means for the purposes of this chapter, a structure, transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped to contain not more than one dwelling unit, and shall not include a recreational vehicle, commercial coach, or factory-built housing.

     F.     “Mobile home park” means any area or tract of land where two or more mobile home lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. The rental paid for any such mobile home shall be deemed to include rental for the lot it occupies. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.710.004 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following uses may be permitted within a mobile home park subject to approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.830:

     A.    Mobile home lots for the placement of mobile homes intended for occupancy as single-family residences and one or more of the following accessory uses:

     1.     Management office and maintenance equipment storage,

     2.     Coin-operated laundry and/or dry cleaning facilities, for residents only,

     3.     Vending machines, for residents only,

     4.     Storage facilities, for residents only,

     5.     Swimming pools, tennis courts and similar outdoor recreation facilities for use of residents only,

     6.     Car washing facilities, for residents only,

     7.     Retail sale of mobile homes and accessories; provided, that each mobile home offered for sale is located on or to be delivered upon an individual mobile home lot within the park and provided no signs, other than on the mobile home being sold, shall be permitted to advertise the sale of mobile homes and accessories,

     8.     Private day care center, nursery schools and kindergartens predominantly serving residents of the mobile home park,

     9.     Signs pursuant to Chapter 17.640,

     10.   Any other use which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a mobile home as a residence;

     B.     One single-family dwelling unit for the use of the owner or manager;

     C.     Noncommercial recreation hall, meeting hall or clubhouse for resident’s use only;

     D.    Overnight accommodations for guests of mobile home park residents but excluding use of campers and travel trailers. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.710.005 Mobile home park regulations.
     The following regulations shall apply to the development of mobile home parks:

     A.    Minimum park size: five acres;

     B.     Maximum park size: fifty acres;

     C.     Minimum street frontage required: two hundred fifty feet on a “thoroughfare” street;

     D.    Maximum allowable density: as specified in the general plan for the property on which the mobile home park is located but not more than ten dwelling units per acre;

     E.     Minimum front yard: twenty feet;

     F.     Minimum side and rear yard: ten feet;

     G.    Required front, rear and side yards shall be a landscaped greenbelt free of all structures, buildings, storage and other parking areas and mobile home lots;

     H.    Maximum building height: fifteen feet except for the managers or owners dwelling which shall not exceed a height of two stories or thirty feet. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.710.006 Regulations for mobile home lots, yards and related matters.
     The following regulations shall apply to the development and occupancy of mobile home lots:

     A.    Minimum mobile home lot regulations:

     1.     Minimum lot area: two thousand five hundred square feet;

     2.     Minimum lot width: forty feet.

     B.     Minimum Setback. Mobile homes and any structure attached thereto, except awnings, shall not be closer than five feet of any lot boundary or ten feet of any driveway.

     C.     Lot Frontage. Each mobile home lot shall have frontage on a driveway or shall have an accessway width of not less than fifteen feet to a driveway.

     D.    Miscellaneous Regulations.

     1.     Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a concrete patio or raised wood deck having a width of at least eight feet and an area of at least two hundred forty square feet.

     2.     A hose bib shall be provided on each lot or within fifty feet of any portion of each lot.

     3.     Each mobile home shall be required to install awnings, cabanas or porches and shall be fully skirted.

     4.     A masonry walkway shall connect each mobile home to the driveway.

     5.     All utilities and service lines shall be underground.

     6.     Individual exterior TV antennas shall be prohibited. Service shall be provided by cable from a commercial service or a central TV antenna.

     7.     Trailer hitches shall be removed or concealed and storage areas, refuse containers, tanks and similar structures shall be screened or otherwise concealed. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.710.007 Driveway and other access regulations.
     A.    Park Entrances and Exits.

     1.     No vehicular entrance or exit from any park shall be within two hundred feet from the boundary of any commercial zone or the boundary of any parcel occupied by a school, public park or playground, church, hospital, library or institution for dependent children except where such zone or use is in another block or another street on which the premises of the park does not provide access.

     2.     At least one vehicular entrance and exit shall be provided for each twenty-five acres of a mobile home park. In addition, emergency entrance and exit roads shall be provided as may be required by the city.

     B.     Driveways.

     1.     Driveways shall have not less than twenty-five feet in clear width except as follows:

     a.     If parking is to be provided on one side, the driveway shall not be less than thirty-two feet in width.

     b.     If parking is to be provided on both sides, the driveway shall not be less than fifty feet in width.

     2.     Driveways intersecting any other driveway shall intersect at as near a right angle as is practicable but not less than sixty degrees.

     3.     Driveways intersecting at an angle less than eighty degrees shall be turned so as to provide the minimum eighty-degree intersection required and a minimum of fifty feet of tangent from the intersection of the driveway centerline with the intersecting curb line.

     4.     A block corner shall be rounded at the curb by a radius of not less than twenty feet.

     5.     Driveways shall be improved with the provision of paving and either a center street gutter or a four-inch high concrete curb and a gutter.

     6.     Driveway improvement shall be in conformance with California Public Works Roadway Design Standards for a Traffic Index of 4.5.

     7.     Vertical curbs shall be required adjacent to all recreational facilities, open areas and landscaped areas, where designated by the city.

     C.     Other Access.

     1.     Fire Lanes. Shall be designated, posted and recorded as fire lanes and shall at no time be obstructed in a manner that will prohibit vehicular access through the fire lane system;

     2.     Pedestrian Access. There shall be provided a system of pathways to be used exclusively by pedestrians. Pathways shall serve all mobile home spaces and all buildings used in common. In the event such pathways are provided adjacent to a driveway, the pedestrian pathway shall be at a grade height of at least four inches higher than the adjacent driveway. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.710.008 Additional regulations.
     A.    Off-street parking: shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.620.

     B.     Landscaping and screening: shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.630.

     C.     Fire protection facilities: including hydrants, shall be installed by the developer as required by the city and the East Diablo fire protection district.

     D.    Recreational Areas and Facilities.

     1.     There shall be recreational open area/s provided in each park at the ratio of at least two hundred fifty square feet for each mobile home lot, at least twenty-five percent of which shall be open turf.

     2.     Recreation areas shall have a minimum dimension of twenty feet, a minimum area of six hundred square feet and may include required side and rear yard area.

     3.     Recreational areas shall be centrally located within the park unless another location or allocation is deemed advisable by the city and is so indicated on the approved plot plan.

     4.     Community facilities within the park, excluding driveways, parking areas, pedestrian pathways, storage facilities and central laundry facilities and drying yards, may be considered as recreational areas for purposes of fulfilling the requirements of this section.

     5.     Except in the case of a park restricted to adult occupancy, there shall be provided at least five thousand square feet of area and facilities for elementary school age children.

     6.     There shall be provided a recreation hall which shall include a kitchen, meeting and social room, and rest rooms.

     E.     Storage Areas.

     1.     Centralized common storage area/s must be provided at a ratio of at least one hundred square feet for each mobile home lot.

     2.     All mobile homes in dead storage, travel trailers, trailers, unmounted camper tops, boats, and immobile motor vehicles must be stored in an area set aside specifically for this purpose.

     3.     Storage areas shall be enclosed by a six-foot- high chain link fence with either redwood slats or plants located in such proximity so as to form a screen.

     4.     Storage shall be limited to belongings of the occupants of the park with access to be controlled and limited to owners, managers and occupants of the mobile home park. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.720 DENSITY BONUS PROGRAM
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ord. 448.

 

17.720.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of Chapter 17.720 shall be known as the “density bonus program” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of the density bonus program is to provide a means for granting density bonuses and incentives in compliance with Government Code Sections 65915 through 65917. This chapter provides for density bonuses and incentives for projects that are affordable to extremely low, very low, low and moderate income households and projects, restricted to occupancy by senior citizens. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.720.002 Definitions.
     Unless otherwise specified in this chapter or unless the context plainly requires otherwise, the words and phrases used in this shall have the meanings defined by this section and the meanings attributed to them in Government Code Section 65915 et seq.

     A.    “Project” or “development” as used in this section, means either a project with five or more residential units, including projects to substantially rehabilitate existing residential units as defined by Government Code Section 65863.4 where the rehabilitation would result in a net increase in residential units.

     B.     “Density bonus” means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density as of the date of application by the applicant to the city.

     C.     “Affordable housing unit” means any extremely low, very low, low, or moderate income unit created pursuant to this section.

     D.    “Senior housing unit” means any housing unit restricted to occupancy by a senior citizen household pursuant to this chapter.

     E.     “Extremely low income households” means persons and families earning less than thirty percent of the area median income adjusted for household size and whose incomes do not exceed the qualifying limits for very low income families as established and amended from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, per Section 50106 of the Health and Safety Code.

     F.     “Very low income households” means persons and families earning less than fifty percent of the area median income adjusted for household size and whose incomes do not exceed the qualifying limits for very low income families as established and amended from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, per Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code.

     G.    “Low” or “lower income households” means persons and families earning less than eighty percent of the area median income adjusted for household size and whose incomes do not exceed the qualifying limits for very low income families as established and amended from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, per Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code.

     H.    “Moderate income households” means persons and families whose income exceeds the amount established for low income households and is less than one hundred twenty percent of area median income per Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code.

     I.      “Child care facility” is defined as meaning a child day care facility other than a family day care home. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.720.003 Eligibility for density bonus and incentives.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following types of projects that meet the following affordability and/or age requirements.

     A.    Types of Projects. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to residential projects of five or more units as defined by Government Code Section 65915(i), including:

     1.     New residential projects, including projects with a mix of residential and other uses, of five or more dwelling units, regardless of the type of dwelling units proposed;

     2.     Renovation of one or more multifamily residential structures containing at least five units so as to result in a net increase in the number of residential units.

     3.     Development that will change the use of an existing building from nonresidential to residential and that will provide at least five residential units.

     4.     Developments that include the conversion of at least five residential rental units to ownership housing.

     B.     Affordability and Age Requirements. In order for a project to receive a density bonus, incentives, and/or concessions under this chapter, the project shall meet one of the following requirements:

     1.     A minimum of ten percent of the dwelling units are for low income households; or

     2.     A minimum of five percent of the dwelling units are for very low or extremely low income households; or

     3.     A minimum of ten percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest development, as defined in Civil Code Section 1351, are for households of moderate income, provided that all units are offered to the public for purchase.

     4.     A senior citizen project or a mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing older persons in compliance with Civil Code Section 51.2, 51.3, 798.76, or 799.5. Senior citizen projects shall be restricted to occupancy by senior citizens in perpetuity.

     5.     Length of Affordability. Extremely low, very low, and low income units shall be affordable to eligible households for a minimum period of thirty years, beginning at the initial occupancy of each affordable housing unit, or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. Projects that provide moderate income units in a common interest development shall ensure the initial occupancy of the unit by a moderate income household and the occupancy and resale of the unit shall be governed by an affordable housing agreement. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.720.004 Amount and calculation of density bonus.
     A project that complies with the eligibility requirements of Section 17.720.003 shall be entitled to a density bonus. The applicant shall elect whether the density bonus shall be awarded on the basis of subsection A, B, C, D, E, or F of this subsection. The applicant may request a smaller density bonus.

     A.    Bonus for Units for Extremely Low and Very Low Income Households. For developments that include five percent of the total dwelling units for very low income households, the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

 

Table 17.720-1 Extremely Low and Very Low Income Density Bonus

Percentage of Base Units Proposed

Density Bonus Percentage

5

20

6

22.5

7

25

8

27.5

9

30

10

32.5

11

35

 

     B.     Bonus for Units for Low Income Households. For developments that include ten percent of the total dwelling units for low income households, the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

 

Table 17.720-2 Low Income Density Bonus

Percentage of Base Units Proposed

Density Bonus Percentage

10

20

11

21.5

12

23

13

24.5

14

26

15

27.5

16

29

17

30.5

18

32

19

33.5

20

35

 

     C.     Bonus for Units for Moderate Income Households. For developments that include ten percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest development for households of moderate income, the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

 

Table 17.720-3 Moderate Income Density Bonus

Percentage of Base Units Proposed

Density Bonus Percentage

10

5

11

6

12

7

13

8

14

9

15

10

16

11

17

12

18

13

19

14

20

15

21

16

22

17

23

18

24

19

25

20

26

21

27

22

28

23

29

24

30

25

31

26

32

27

33

28

34

29

35

30

36

31

37

32

38

33

39

34

40

35

 

     D.    Bonus for Senior Citizen Housing. For an eligible senior citizen project, the density bonus shall be twenty percent of senior citizen housing units.

     E.     Bonus for Land Donation. When an applicant for a residential development agrees to donate land to the city for very low income households, the applicant shall be entitled to a density bonus for the entire market rate development, provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authority of the city to require a developer to donate land as a condition of development.

     1.     The applicant shall be entitled to a density bonus increase above the maximum allowed residential density for the entire market-rate residential development. The density bonus for land dedication shall be in addition to any other density bonus allowed by this chapter, up to a maximum total density bonus of thirty-five percent. The density bonus for land donation shall be calculated as follows:

 

Table 17.720-4 Extremely Low and Very Low Income Density Bonus—Land Donation

Percentage of Extremely Low or Very Low Income Units Accommodated

Density Bonus Percentage

10

15

11

16

12

17

13

18

14

19

15

20

16

21

17

22

18

23

19

24

20

25

21

26

22

27

23

28

24

29

25

30

26

31

27

32

28

33

29

34

30

35

 

     2.     Eligibility for Land Donation Bonus. An applicant shall be eligible for the increased density bonus described in this section if all of the following conditions are met:

     a.     The applicant donates and transfers the land to the city no later than date of approval by the city of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development that is the subject of the density bonus.

     b.     The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low income households in an amount not less than ten percent of the number of market-rate residential units of the proposed development.

     c.     The transferred land: (i) is at least one acre in size or of sufficient size to permit development of at least forty units; (ii) has the appropriate general plan designation and is appropriately zoned for development of very low income housing; (iii) is or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure for the development of very low income housing; (iv) has appropriate zoning and development standards to make the development of the very low income housing units feasible; and (v) has all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the very low income housing units, except that the city may subject the proposed development to subsequent design review, if the design is not reviewed by the city prior to the transfer.

     d.     The transferred land and very low income housing units shall be subject to a deed restriction, which shall be recorded on the property upon dedication, ensuring affordability consistent with Section 17.720.003(B)(5).

     e.     The land is transferred to the city or to a housing developer approved by the city.

     f.      The transferred land is within the proposed development or, if approved by the city, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development.

     g.     A proposed source of funding for the development of very low income units shall be identified not later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application.

     F.     Bonus for Condominium Conversions. When a development is the conversion of an existing apartment complex to a condominium complex and the applicant agrees to make at least thirty-three percent of the total units of the development affordable to moderate income households for thirty years, or fifteen percent of the total units of the proposed development affordable to lower income households for thirty years, and agrees to pay for the administrative costs incurred by the city to process the application and to monitor the continued affordability and habitability of the affordable housing units, the city shall either:

     1.     Grant a density bonus of twenty-five percent; or

     2.     Provide other incentives of equivalent financial value as determined by the city.

     An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other incentive(s) under this section if the apartments proposed for conversion are part of a project for which a density bonus or other incentive(s) were previously provided under this chapter or Government Code Section 65819 et seq.

     G.    Bonus for Projects with a Child Care Facility. When an applicant proposes to construct a development that conforms to the requirements of Section 17.720.003 and includes a child care facility located on the premises, or as part of, or adjacent to, the development, the city shall grant either of the following:

     1.     An additional density bonus of five percent provided that the total density bonus for the project does not exceed thirty-five percent. The density bonus is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility and shall not exceed a maximum of five square feet of floor area of new structures for each one square foot of floor area contained in the child care facility; or

     2.     An additional incentive or concession designated by the city that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility. This incentive or concession is in addition to the number of incentives the project may be granted under Section 17.720.003(A).

     H.    Calculation of Density Bonus.

     1.     All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

     2.     For the purposes of this chapter “total dwelling units” does not include units added by a density bonus awarded pursuant to this chapter or any other density bonus allowed by the city or state law.

     3.     If the site of a development proposal that requests a density bonus is located in two or more general plan designations or zoning classifications, the number of dwelling units permitted in the development is the sum of the dwelling units permitted in each of the zones. The permitted number of dwelling units may be distributed within the development without regard to the zoning boundaries.

     4.     If the applicant desires to develop a density bonus project available to a mix of income levels or age groups, the project may combine its allowed density bonus, based on calculations approved by the director, to a maximum density bonus of thirty-five percent.

     5.     The density bonus shall be based on “maximum allowable residential density” which means the density allowed under the zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan, or if a range of density is permitted, means the maximum allowable density for the specific zoning range and land use element of the general plan applicable to the project. Where the density allowed under the zoning ordinance is inconsistent with the density allowed under the land use element of the general plan, the general plan density shall prevail.

     6.     For the purpose of calculating a density bonus, the residential units shall be on contiguous sites that are the subject of one development application, but do not have to be based upon individual subdivision maps or parcels. The density bonus shall be permitted in geographic areas of the project other than the areas where the units for the lower income households are located. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.720.005 Incentives and concessions.
     When an applicant seeks a density bonus or seeks to donate land for housing, the city shall provide the applicant with incentives or concessions for the production of housing units. These incentives are also applicable to child care facilities as described under Section 17.720.004(G). The applicant must request a density bonus on their project application identifying the specific incentives or concessions that the applicant requests.

     A.    Number of Incentives. The city shall grant the following number of incentives, except as provided in Section 17.720.004:

     1.     One incentive or concession for a project that includes: at least ten percent of the total units affordable to low income households, at least five percent of the total units affordable to very low income households, or at least ten percent of the total units affordable to households of moderate income in a common interest development; or

     2.     Two incentives or concessions for a project that includes: at least twenty percent of the total units affordable to low income households, at least ten percent of the total units affordable to very low income households, at least five percent of the total units affordable to extremely low income households, or at least twenty percent of the total units affordable to households of moderate income in a common interest development; or

     3.     A total of three incentives or concessions for a project that includes: at least thirty percent of the total units affordable to low income households, at least fifteen percent of the total units affordable to very low income households, or at least thirty percent of the total units affordable to households of moderate income in a common interest development.

     4.     One additional incentive for a project that is affordable to low income households and provides any of the following: at least twenty-five percent of the units as three- or four-bedroom units, at least twenty-five percent of the units accommodate disabled persons and are set-aside for occupancy by disabled persons, or at least ten percent of the units are affordable to extremely low income households.

     5.     Any combination of the above incentives shall not exceed three incentives per project.

     B.     Types of Incentives or Concessions. For the purposes of this chapter, “incentive” or “concession” means any of the following:

     1.     A reduction in the site development standards that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. The reduction may include, but is not limited to:

     a.     Reduced minimum lot size;

     b.     Reduced minimum lot width;

     c.     Reduced minimum setback;

     d.     Increased maximum building height;

     e.     Reduced onsite open-space requirement;

     f.      Increased maximum lot coverage;

     g.     Increased floor area ratio; or

     h.     Reduced parking requirement.

     2.     A reduction in architectural design requirements that exceeds the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission in compliance with Health and Safety Code Section 18901 et seq., that would otherwise be required, that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.

     3.     Approval of mixed use development in conjunction with the proposed development if nonresidential uses will reduce the development cost of the residential portion of the proposed development, and if the nonresidential uses are compatible with the proposed development and with existing or planned development in the area.

     4.     Expedited Project Processing. The project will receive expedited project processing, which will include:

     a.     Mandatory Pre-Development Review Meeting. An applicant requesting expedited project processing must participate in a mandatory pre-development review meeting prior to submittal of the project application, and must pay all applicable pre-development meeting fees.

     b.     The review period(s) to determine completeness of the project application will be reduced from thirty calendar days to twenty-five calendar days.

     c.     Upon completion of project processing, including completion of the environmental document, if necessary, at the applicant’s request the city will schedule the project for a public hearing, if required, and for project consideration by the decision-making body.

 

     5.     Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or the city that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.

     6.     A direct financial contribution, waiver of fees, or reduction of fees, when financially feasible, at the sole discretion of the city council. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the provision of direct financial incentives for the development, including the provision of publicly owned land by the city or other waiver of fees or dedication requirements. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.720.006 Maximum parking standards.
     A.    Upon the request of the applicant, a project shall be required to comply with the following parking standards:

     1.     Zero to one bedroom: one on-site parking space.

     2.     Two to three bedrooms: two on-site parking spaces.

     3.     Four and more bedrooms: two and one-half on-site parking spaces.

     B.     If the total number of parking spaces required for a development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

     C.     For purposes of this section, a development may provide “on-site parking” through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking.

     D.    This subsection shall only apply at the specific written request of the applicant to a development that meets the requirements the criteria of Section 17.720.003. An applicant may request parking incentives or concessions beyond those provided in this subsection pursuant to Section 17.720.005. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.720.007 Processing of density bonus, incentives, and concessions.
     A.    Application. In order to receive a density bonus, concessions, and/or incentives pursuant to this section, an applicant must submit to the city a density bonus request which will be treated as part of the development application. At any time during the review process, the director may require from the applicant additional information reasonably necessary to clarify and supplement the application or to determine the development’s consistency with the requirements of this section. The density bonus request shall include the following:

     1.     A description of the project, including the total number of proposed market rate units, affordable housing units, and/or senior housing units;

     2.     The zoning and general plan designations and assessor’s parcel number(s) of the project site;

     3.     A vicinity map and preliminary site plan, drawn to scale, including building footprints, driveways and parking layout;

     4.     A description of the concessions or incentives requested;

     5.     If an additional incentive(s) is requested, the application shall describe why the additional incentive(s) is necessary to provide the affordable housing units;

     6.     The draft affordable housing plan meeting the requirements described in subsection B of this section; and

     7.     Any other information reasonably requested by the city to aid in the implementation of this section.

     B.     Affordable Housing Plan. An applicant shall submit an affordable housing plan as part of the density bonus request. The affordable housing unit plan shall include the following:

     1.     The location, structure (attached, semi-attached, or detached), proposed tenure (sale or rental), and size of proposed market-rate, and affordable housing units and the proposed tenure and size of nonresidential uses included in the development;

     2.     A floor or site plan depicting the location of the affordable housing units and a floor plan describing the size of the affordable housing units in square feet;

     3.     The income level to which each affordable housing unit will be made affordable;

     4.     Draft of the documents to be used to assure that the units remain affordable for the desired term, such as resale and rental restrictions, deed of trust, and rights of first refusal and other documents;

     5.     For phased developments, a phasing plan that provides for the timely development of affordable housing units in proportion to other housing units in each proposed phase of development as required by this section;

     6.     A marketing plan that describes how the applicant will inform the public, and those within the appropriate income groups, of the availability of affordable housing units;

     7.     A financial report (pro forma) to evaluate: (a) whether the concessions or incentives sought would result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions, and (b) whether the concessions or incentives sought would reduce the cost of the project; and

     8.     Any other information reasonably requested by the director to assist with evaluation of the affordable housing plan or density bonus request.

     C.     The granting of a density bonus, incentive, and/or concession shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval.

     D.    Approval Authority. The entity with approval authority for the administrative permit, minor use permit, subdivision map, parcel map, or other primary entitlement requested by the applicant shall consider the requested density bonus, incentives, and concessions.

     E.     Affordable Housing Agreement. Applicants, including the property owner, receiving a density bonus, incentives, and/or concessions pursuant to this section shall enter into an affordable housing agreement with the city.

     1.     Condition of Approval. An affordable housing agreement shall be a condition of approval for all residential developments subject to this chapter and shall be recorded as a restriction on any residential development on which the affordable and/or senior housing units will be constructed.

     2.     Timing. The affordable housing agreement shall be recorded prior to or concurrently with final parcel map or final subdivision map approval, or, where the residential development does not include a map, prior to issuance of a building permit for any structure in the residential development. The affordable housing agreement shall run with the land and bind all future owners and successors in interest.

     3.     Duration. The affordable housing agreement shall be binding on all future owners and successors in interest for the applicable affordability period, which shall begin at the initial occupancy, of each affordable housing unit. Senior projects shall be restricted to occupancy by senior citizens in perpetuity.

     4.     Contents. The affordable housing agreement shall address the occupancy, affordability, resale, and other restrictions identified at Government Code Section 65915(c) and shall include the following, at a minimum without limitation:

     a.     The total number of units approved for the residential development and the number, location, and level of affordability of the affordable and senior units.

     b.     Standards for determining affordable rent or affordable ownership cost for the affordable units.

     c.     The location, unit size in square feet, and number of bedrooms of the affordable and senior units.

     d.     Provisions to ensure initial and continuing affordability, including the execution and recordation of subsequent agreements.

     e.     A schedule for completion and occupancy of affordable and senior units in relation to construction of market rate units.

     f.      A description of remedies for breach of the agreement by either party. The city may identify tenants or qualified purchasers as third party beneficiaries under the agreement.

     g.     Procedures for qualifying tenants and prospective purchasers of affordable and senior units.

     h.     Provisions requiring maintenance of records to demonstrate compliance with this chapter.

 

     i.      Provisions requiring fair housing practices, as defined by the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Government Code Section 12900 et seq.) in the marketing, rental, or sale of any affordable housing unit.

     j.      Other provisions to ensure implementation and compliance with this chapter.

     F.     Child Care Facility Agreement. Applicants, including the property owner, receiving a density bonus, incentives, and/or concessions for a child care facility pursuant to this section shall enter into an affordable housing agreement with the city. The city shall require a child care facility agreement as a condition of approving the development. The agreement shall include the following conditions governing the use and operation of the child care facility during the use restriction period:

     1.     The child care facility shall remain in operation as long as or longer than the time period during which the affordable housing units are required to remain affordable pursuant to the affordable housing agreement.

     2.     Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of extremely low income households, very low income households, low income households, and moderate income households shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are made affordable to extremely low, very low income households, low income households, or moderate income households pursuant to the affordable housing agreement.

     3.     If the developer uses the space allocated for the child care facility for purposes other than for a child care facility, an assessment based on the square footage of the project shall be levied and collected by the city. The assessment shall be consistent with the market value of the space. If the developer fails to have the space allocated for the child care facility within three years, from the date upon which the first temporary certificate of occupancy is granted, an assessment based on the square footage of the project shall be levied and collected by the city. The assessment shall be consistent with the market value of the space. If the assessment is levied against a consortium of developers, the assessment shall be charged to each developer in an amount equal to the developer’s percentage square feet participation. Funds collected pursuant to this requirement shall be deposited by the city into a special account to be used for child care services or child care facilities.

     4.     Once the child care facility has been established, the facility shall not be closed, undergo change in use, or be reduced in physical size unless the city makes a finding that the need for child care is no longer present, or is not present to the same degree as it was at the time the facility was established.

     G.    Administrative Fee. The city shall charge an administrative fee to applicants to cover the city’s cost of on-going enforcement of this section. The amount of the administrative fee shall be established from time-to-time by city ordinance or resolution. Fees will be charged for costs, including staff time and materials, associated with: review and approval of applications for the project; project marketing and lease-up materials associated with the affordable housing units; and long-term compliance with the applicable provisions of this section.

     H.    Denial of Density Bonus, Incentives, and/or Concessions for Affordable Housing. The density bonus, incentives, and/or concessions requested shall be granted unless the city denies specific incentives and/or concessions based on the entity with approval authority making any of the following written findings, based on substantial evidence:

     1.     The incentive or concession is not required to provide for affordable housing costs as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5, or for rents for the targeted units set as specified in this section; or

     2.     The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), upon public health and safety, the physical environment, or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historic Resources, the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low and moderate income households; or

     3.     The incentive or concession would be contrary to state or federal law.

     I.      Denial of Density Bonus, Incentives, and/or Concessions for a Child Care Facility. Notwithstanding any requirement of this section, the city need not provide a density bonus, incentive, or concession for a child care facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child care facilities. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.720.008 Design, distribution and timing of development of affordable housing units.
     A.    Affordable housing units shall be constructed concurrently with market-rate units. Affordable housing units shall be integrated into the project and be comparable in infrastructure (including sewer, water and other utilities), construction quality, and exterior design to the market-rate units. The affordable housing units shall also comply with the following criteria:

     1.     Rental Developments: Rental units shall be integrated within and reasonably dispersed throughout the project. All affordable housing units shall reflect the range and numbers of bedrooms provided in the project as a whole, and shall not be distinguished by design, construction, or materials.

     2.     Owner-Occupied Developments. Owner-occupied units shall be integrated within the project. Affordable housing units may be smaller in size and have different interior finishes and features than market-rate units so long as the interior features are durable, of good quality and consistent with contemporary standards for new housing as determined by the director. All affordable housing units shall reflect the range and numbers of bedrooms provided in the project as a whole, except that affordable housing units need not provide more than four bedrooms.

     B.     No building permits will be issued for market-rate units until permits for all affordable housing units have been obtained, unless affordable housing units are to be constructed in phases pursuant to a plan approved by the city.

     C.     Market-rate units will not be inspected for occupancy until all affordable housing units have been constructed, unless affordable housing units are to be constructed in phases pursuant to a plan approved by the city. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.720.009 Compliance.
     The provisions of this section shall apply to all agents, successors and assignees of an applicant receiving a density bonus, incentive, and/or concession pursuant to this chapter. No tentative map, use permit, special development permit or occupancy permit shall be issued for any project that has been granted a density bonus under this section unless that map or permit is exempt from or in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

     A.    If the director determines that rents in excess of those allowed by the affordable housing agreement have been charged to a tenant residing in a rental affordable housing unit, the city may take the appropriate legal action to recover, and the rental unit owner shall be obligated to pay to the tenant (or to the city in the event the tenant cannot be located), any excess rent paid.

     B.     If the director determines that a sales price in excess of that allowed by the affordable housing agreement has been charged for an ownership affordable housing, the city may take the appropriate legal action to recover, and the seller of the affordable housing unit shall be obligated to pay to the purchaser (or to the city in the event the purchaser cannot be located), any excess sales costs.

     C.     Failure of any official or agency to enforce the requirements of this section shall not constitute a waiver or excuse any applicant or owner from the requirements of this section. No permit, license, map, or other approval or entitlement for a residential development shall be issued, including, without limitation, a final inspection or certificate of occupancy, until all applicable requirements of this section have been satisfied. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.725 AFFORDABLE HOUSING
17.725.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “affordable housing program” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of this affordable housing program is to:

     1.     Enhance the public welfare and assure that further housing development contributes to the attainment of the city’s housing goals as described in the housing element of the general plan, by creating, preserving, maintaining, and protecting housing affordable for households of very low-, low- and moderate-income;

     2.     Assure that the remaining developable land in the city’s planning area is utilized in a manner consistent with the city’s housing policies and needs;

     3.     Increase the number of affordable housing units in Brentwood in recognition of the insufficient number of existing affordable housing units in relation to the community’s current and future needs, and

     4.     Assure that new affordable housing units that are constructed are distributed throughout the city as part of mixed-income developments in order to obtain the benefits that flow from economically diverse communities, increase access to opportunity, and affirmatively further fair housing. (Ord. 1014 § 1, 2020)

 

17.725.002 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, each of the following terms shall be defined as follows:

     “Affordable housing agreement” means a recorded agreement between the city and a residential developer setting forth the residential developer’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

     “Affordable housing cost” means the cost defined in the California Health and Safety Code Sections 50052.5 and 50053 (as may be amended from time to time) for owner-occupied and tenant-occupied units, respectively, and adjusted for assumed household size. The housing manager, on or about July 1 of each calendar year shall publish the maximum affordable housing costs for sales prices and rents as calculated in accordance with the applicable provisions of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Affordable unit” means an ownership or rental-housing unit, including senior housing, occupied by and available to households of very low, low and moderate incomes at an affordable housing cost, adjusted for assumed household size as defined in this chapter, with deed restrictions as defined in this chapter in favor of the city.

     “Assumed household size” means the assumed number of persons residing within a dwelling unit. For the purposes of this chapter, assumed household sizes for affordable units for a given number of bedrooms are as follows, or as may be amended by the California Health and Safety Code.

 

Assumed Household Size

1

2

3

4

5

6 or more

Unit Size

Studio

1 Bedroom

2 Bedroom

3 Bedroom

4 Bedroom

5 Bedroom

 

     “Custom home development” means any residential development being subdivided by one party and sold as individual lots or parcels to separate owners for construction and development of dwelling units.

     “Divided in-lieu fee” means the total amount of the in-lieu fees due for the residential development at the time of first building permit issuance divided by the total number of market-rate units in the residential development. The divided in-lieu fee shall be adjusted annually in accordance with appropriate factors or indexes as adopted by the cost allocation plan.

     “Dwelling unit” means a dwelling designed and intended for occupancy by one household.

     “First time homebuyer” means a household which has not owned its principal place of residence within the last three years.

     “In-lieu fee” means a fee paid to the city by an applicant in lieu of providing the required affordable units.

     “Low-income household” means a household whose annual income does not exceed the qualifying limits set for “lower income households” in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Market-rate unit” is defined as a residential unit that is not an affordable unit.

     “Moderate-income household” means a household whose annual income does not exceed the qualifying limits set for “moderate-income households” in Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code and does not include a very low- or low-income household.

     “Ownership development” means any residential development that includes the creation of one or more additional dwelling units that may be sold individually. An ownership development also includes the conversion of a residential rental development to a residential ownership development.

     “Refinance and Resale Limitation Agreement and Option to Purchase” means a recorded agreement between the city and an individual homebuyer of an ownership affordable unit documenting resale controls and/or rent restrictions.

     “Rental development” means any residential development that creates one or more additional dwelling units that cannot be lawfully sold individually in conformance with the Subdivision Map Act.

     “Resale controls and/or rent restrictions” means legal restrictions by which affordable units shall be restricted to ensure that the unit remains affordable to very low-, low- or moderate-income households, as applicable, for a period of not less than forty-five years for ownership units and not less than fifty-five years for rental units, or longer periods if required by state housing or federal law or a financing assistance program. Resale controls for owner-occupied units shall be in the form of resale restrictions, deeds of trust, and/or other similar documents recorded against the subject property. Rent restrictions for rental units shall be in the form of a regulatory agreement recorded against the subject property.

     “Residential development” means and includes, without limitation, for-sale single-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings, groups of dwellings, condominium or townhouse developments, condominium conversions, cooperative developments, mixed use developments that include housing units, manufactured housing, mobilehomes, and residential land subdivisions intended to be sold, leased or rented to the general public.

     “Very low-income household” means a household whose annual income does not exceed the qualifying limits set for “very low-income households” in Sections 50093 and 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code. “Very low-income households” include “extremely low-income households” as defined in Sections 50093 and 50106 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1014 § 1, 2020)

 

17.725.003 General requirements.
     A.    Applicability. This chapter shall apply to all new residential developments of five or more lots or dwelling units designed and intended for residential occupancy in the city. No residential development, other than that exempted in subsection C of this section, shall be undertaken, and no building permits shall be accepted for processing or issued, unless the development has been approved in accordance with this chapter.

     B.     Affordability Requirement. Developers of residential developments of five or more lots or dwelling units designed and intended for residential occupancy shall construct or make possible the construction of a minimum of six percent of the total number of dwelling units within the residential development as affordable units, allocated to income levels as set forth in this chapter, or as provided in an affordable housing agreement which specifies the means of satisfying this chapter. Commencing on January 1, 2021, the required percentage of affordable units shall be increased to ten percent of the total number of dwelling units for any residential development of five or more lots, unless the application was determined to be complete by December 31, 2020 under Government Code Section 65589.5(o). The foregoing requirement shall be applied prior to the application of a density bonus and no more than once to an approved residential development regardless of changes in its character or ownership, provided that the total number of dwelling units does not change.

     1.     Residential Developments of Five to Nine Dwelling Units. Developers of residential developments consisting of five to nine dwelling units may either construct one low-income affordable unit, pay a fee equal to fifty percent of the low-income in-lieu fee, as established by resolution of the city council, or provide an “alternative equivalent” as established in this chapter. However, if all or any portion of a residential development of five to nine dwelling units is later re-subdivided into ten or more parcels or dwelling units, the city’s affordable housing requirement may not be satisfied by payment of an in-lieu fee.

     2.     Application to Residential Development of Ten or More Dwelling Units. In applying this requirement to residential development consisting of ten or more dwelling units, any decimal fraction less than 0.50 dwelling units shall be disregarded and any decimal fraction equal to or greater than 0.50 dwelling units shall be construed as one dwelling unit.

     C.     Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

     1.     Residential development governed by a development agreement expressly precluding compliance with this chapter or an ordinance of this nature. In cases in which the development agreement does not expressly preclude compliance with this chapter, the project shall comply with this chapter;

     2.     Replacement housing due to natural disaster on a one for one basis (i.e., one dwelling unit replaced for each legally existing dwelling unit);

     3.     Modifications to existing properties or structures that do not increase the number of dwelling units;

     4.     Residential care facilities with dwelling units that are nonself-sufficient units; that is, they do not include kitchen facilities (if a project includes both self-sufficient and nonself-sufficient units, only the latter are exempt);

     5.     Subdivisions consisting of between one and four lots or dwelling units;

     6.     Development of up to four new dwelling units on an existing residential lot of record;

     7.     Development of up to three additional dwelling units on a lot zoned to accommodate up to a maximum of four dwelling units, and which already contains at least one existing dwelling unit, provided that the maximum limit of dwelling units is not increased;

     8.     A residential second unit or accessory dwelling unit (as defined by state law) on an existing residential lot, subject to compliance with the zoning ordinance;

     9.     Residential developments whose applications were determined to be complete under Government Code Section 65943 or any successor provision prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, provided that such residential developments shall comply with the predecessor ordinance, resolution, or policy in effect immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

     10.   Residential developments exempted by California Government Code Section 65589.5(o) or successor provision, provided that such residential development shall comply with any predecessor ordinance, resolution, or policy in effect on the date a preliminary application for the development containing all of the information required by Government Code Section 65941.1 was submitted to the city.

     D.    Allocation of Affordable Units to Income Levels. Dwelling units located within the Brentwood city limits for very low-, low- and moderate-income households as required by this chapter shall be allocated as follows:

     Allocation through December 31, 2020 (six percent affordability requirement):

 

Ownership Development

 

Moderate-Income Households

1%

Low-Income Households

4%

Very Low-Income Households

1%

 

Rental Development

 

Low-Income Households

3%

Very Low-Income Households

3%

 

     Allocation applicable commencing January 1, 2021 (ten percent affordability requirement):

 

Ownership Development

 

Moderate-Income Households

3%

Low-Income Households

4%

Very Low-income Households

3%

Rental Development

 

Low-Income Households

5%

Very Low-Income Households

5%

 

     E.     Concurrent Construction. All affordable units in a residential development or phase of a residential development shall be constructed prior to or concurrently with market-rate units, as set forth, and in the location specified, in a schedule of construction approved by the city and set forth in the affordable housing agreement. The building permits for the last ten percent of the market-rate units shall not be issued until the last affordable unit has been issued a building permit and construction of the last affordable unit has begun.

     F.     Design and Distribution of Affordable Units. All affordable units within a residential development shall be comparable to the market-rate units in exterior design, quality, materials, architectural elements and overall construction quality, as well as number and proportion of bedroom types. If approved by the planning commission in the design review approval process as specified in Section 17.725.006(D),the developer may request an exception to the foregoing in order to reduce the cost of the affordable units by permitting reduced front, side and backyard landscaping and smaller square footage for bedrooms. Otherwise, affordable units shall be comparable to the approved landscape plans, exterior elevations, and bedroom square footage found in the approved plans for the remainder of the residential development. In addition, all affordable units shall include the same or similar interior amenities offered for market-rate units within a residential development. Affordable units shall be dispersed throughout the residential development so as to prevent the concentration of affordable units, unless the planning commission has approved an exception to this standard to accommodate senior housing or to reduce affordable unit costs as described above, or approval of an off-site location has been granted.

     1.     Very Low- to Medium-Density Zoning. For residential developments with very low- to medium-density zoning designations as defined by the general plan, the affordable unit may be smaller in size than other models in the residential development. The minimum permissible affordable unit size is one thousand six hundred square feet on a three thousand square foot parcel. As a means to provide massing and lot proportions consistent with the residential development, a duet unit will satisfy the city’s affordable housing requirement. For example, a duet unit can be located on a corner with each duet unit being one thousand six hundred square feet on two separate three thousand square foot parcels.

     2.     High- to Very High-Density Zoning. For residential developments with high- to very high-density zoning designations as defined by the general plan, the affordable units shall be comparable to market-rate units in square footage.

     G.    Length of Affordability. All affordable ownership units shall remain affordable for a period of at least forty-five years from date of original occupancy and each subsequent ownership, and any affordable rental units provided as an agreed-upon alternative equivalent proposal pursuant to Section 17.725.004 shall remain affordable for a period of at least fifty-five years from the date of the initial rental or leasing period, or longer periods as may be required by state housing law.

     H.    Concurrently with applicant’s submission of a universal application to the city with respect to any proposed residential development subject to this chapter, applicant shall also submit a narrative describing how the proposed residential development will comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1014 § 1, 2020)

 

17.725.004 Alternative equivalent proposal.
     As an alternative to constructing affordable units on site, a residential developer may propose one of the alternative equivalents set forth below to meet the requirements of Section 17.725.003. Such proposed alternative shall be processed in accordance with Section 17.725.005 of this chapter. An alternative equivalent proposal may include, but is not limited to, payment of an in-lieu fee for ownership development, dedication of vacant developable land, dedication of constructed units to the city’s rental housing program, construction of affordable units on another site, or conversion of existing market-rate units (either for-sale or for-rent) within the city to affordable units through acquisition and enforcement of required affordability restrictions consistent with this chapter. All alternative equivalent proposals must be submitted in writing, demonstrate that the alternative equivalent will provide as much or more affordable housing in the city as would be achieved through the construction of required on-site affordable units required under Sections 17.725.003(D), be consistent with the city’s housing element, and not increase residential segregation. Additionally, for ownership developments, an alternative equivalent proposal must result in an approximately equal geographic distribution of affordable units throughout the city.

     A.    Approval of Payment of In-Lieu Fees. In-lieu fees may be paid for: (1) residential developments consisting of between five and nine dwelling units; or (2) the very low-income requirement for a residential development consisting of ten or more dwelling units. The amount of the in-lieu fee shall be adopted by resolution of the city council, and may be amended from time to time.

     1.     In-lieu fees for custom home developments shall be paid at time of building permit issuance for each custom home. For each permit pulled, the developer shall pay either the divided in-lieu fee or in a lump sum with the total fee, as elected by the developer.

     2.     In-lieu fees for all other residential developments shall be paid at building permit issuance for each market-rate unit constructed within the development. For each permit pulled, the developer shall pay either the divided in-lieu fee or in a lump sum as with the total fee, as elected by the developer.

     3.     Except as may otherwise be required by law, the amount of the fee shall be as set forth in the in-lieu fee resolution in effect at the time of payment. In-lieu fees paid to the city shall be deposited into the affordable housing in-lieu fee fund in accordance with Section 17.725.007.

 

     4.     The in-lieu fee paid by the developer of an ownership development shall be calculated using a market rate median sales price based in-lieu fee. This fee is based on the twelve-month median sales price for a three-bedroom, one thousand five hundred to one thousand seven hundred square foot, market-rate home in Brentwood, minus the current affordable housing cost as defined in the California Health and Safety Code for owner-occupied units for the applicable household income level.

     The amount of the in-lieu fee for each affordable unit shall be the difference between the market rate median sales price, calculated as above, and the affordable housing cost for a for-sale three-bedroom unit.

     5.     Developers of rental developments must construct affordable units on site or satisfy the affordable requirements through an alternative equivalent proposal other than payment of in-lieu fees unless, prior to the last discretionary approval for the development, the applicant requests a waiver under Section 17.725.011, and the city council approves the in-lieu fee based on specific findings demonstrating that the city’s goals of increasing affordable housing production are equally met through use of applicant’s proposed alterative.

     B.     Dedication of Vacant Developable Land. An applicant may dedicate vacant developable land to the city or city-approved nonprofit housing developer in-lieu of constructing a portion of the required affordable units, if the city council finds all of the following:

     1.     The dedication of vacant land in lieu of constructing affordable units is consistent with this chapter’s goal of creating, preserving, maintaining, and protecting housing for very low-, low- and moderate-income households;

     2.     The dedicated vacant land is large enough and appropriately zoned to accommodate the number of affordable units that the applicant would otherwise be required to construct by Sections 17.725.003(D);

     3.     The dedicated vacant land is improved with infrastructure and utilities required to serve the property, including, but not limited to, power, telephone, cable, gas, water, sewer and fiber optics, grading, and all applicable fees, taxes, and assessments, including, but not limited to, school and flood control fees, and excluding any affordable housing in-lieu fees, have been or will be paid by the applicant;

     4.     The dedicated vacant land is located inside the city, or the vacant land will be annexed to the city prior to issuance of any building permits to the applicant for his/her related market-rate dwelling unit(s);

     5.     That the off-site location would not increase segregation; and

     6.     That the development of affordable units on the dedicated land will be financially feasible.

     C.     Off-Site Construction of For-Sale or For-Rent Affordable Units or Conversion of Market-Rate For-Sale or For-Rent Units to Affordable Units. An applicant may construct the required affordable units off site from the proposed market-rate development site by causing the construction of new ownership or rental affordable units or convert existing market-rate ownership or rental affordable units with the approval of the city council and subject to the city council’s approval of each of the following findings and imposition of the following conditions of approval on each tentative map or other entitlement:

     1.     Required Findings for Construction and Conversion.

     a.     The construction of the affordable units off site or conversion of the existing market-rate units, excluding mobile-home units and units within cooperative developments, in lieu of constructing affordable units on site is consistent with this chapter.

     b.     The developer has submitted documentation to the satisfaction of the city manager or designee that demonstrates that the construction of the affordable units on site would be impractical or that off-site construction or conversion of market-rate units to affordable units will significantly benefit the city.

     c.     The residential development will be subject to the conditions of approval set forth in subsection(C)(3) of this section. The conditions of approval for the market-rate development shall require that any off-site affordable units be governed by resale controls and/or rent restrictions similar to those required for on-site affordable units.

     d.     The quality and quantity of affordable units constructed off site and market-rate units converted to affordable units shall be equivalent to affordable units that would have been constructed on site to satisfy the city’s affordable housing requirement.

     2.     Additional Finding Required for Construction of Ownership or Rental Affordable Units.

     a.     The conditions of approval and subdivision guarantee for a residential project, or other security such as a cash deposit, are adequate to provide for the construction of the off-site affordable units prior to or concurrently with the completion of the on-site construction of the market-rate units.

     3.     Required Conditions.

     a.     Affordable units constructed off site shall be constructed at the time specified in the affordable housing agreement.

     b.     Affordable units converted from market-rate units shall be both converted and inspected at the time specified in the affordable housing agreement. Market-rate units converted to affordable units shall require inspection by the community development department to ensure that the affordable units are in good condition and repair, and conform to all applicable city building and zoning codes.

     c.     Existing very low-, low-, or moderate-income-households that occupy market-rate units being converted to affordable units shall not be displaced from those units. If temporary or permanent displacement occurs while the converted units are being repaired or rehabilitated, the developer shall be responsible to pay relocation and moving benefits to the displaced households in accordance with the California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Chapter 6, (California Relocation Assistance Guidelines). The calculation of relocation and moving benefits to be provided by developers to temporarily or permanently displaced households shall be submitted to and approved by the city for verification of compliance with the California relocation assistance guidelines.

     D.    Dedication of Affordable Units to the City of Brentwood. An applicant may dedicate constructed or converted on-site or off-site affordable units to the city’s rental housing program to satisfy the requirements of this chapter. Mobile homes and units within cooperative developments are excluded from dedication. Each unit dedicated to the city shall equate to the construction of two affordable units that would otherwise be required pursuant to Section 17.725.003(D). Any units dedicated to the city’s rental housing program shall be from the rental stream from these affordable rental units shall be deposited into a Brentwood rental housing trust fund administered by the city’s finance director in accordance with Section 17.725.008.

     All units dedicated to the city pursuant to this chapter shall meet the following requirements prior to acceptance by the city:

     1.     All applicable fees (including development impact fees), capital improvement financing program assessments, and bond interest payments shall have been prepaid by the developer.

     2.     The units shall be less than twenty years old and in good condition and repair, as verified by an inspection conducted by the community development department. A second such inspection may need to be performed to confirm that any repair punchlist generated by the initial inspection is completed prior to the city’s acceptance of the unit into the rental housing program.

     3.     The developer shall have installed any front yard, side yard, any backyard landscaping and the unit’s interior shall meet the city’s minimum interior finish and appliance requirements.

     4.     The sprinkler system, window coverings, and all appliances shall have been installed in the unit in accordance with the list of required items maintained by the city manager or designee.

     5.     Each unit must be on a subdivided parcel in accordance with Government Code Section 66426, 66427, or 66428.

     6.     The developer shall pay all recording, escrow and title fees involved in the transfer of title to the city, including the costs of a title policy insuring city’s title in a form and with exceptions approved by the city.

     E.     Other Means of Fulfilling Affordable Housing Requirements. Subject to city manager or designee approval, any developer may fulfill its affordable housing requirement through additional alternative equivalent methods not specifically mentioned in this chapter, including through the provision of rental affordable units by developers of ownership development projects (in accordance with Government Code Section 65589.8), provided that the city council determines such alternative results in the same number of affordable units that would have been provided with on-site construction of affordable units and that the affordable units otherwise meet all requirements of subsections F through G of Section 17.725.003. (Ord. 1014 § 1, 2020)

 

17.725.005 Implementation procedures.
     A.    Satisfaction of Affordable Housing Requirement. Each proposal for satisfying the city’s affordable housing requirement, together with a proposed affordable housing agreement per subsection B of this section, shall be reviewed by the city manager or designee, considered for recommendation by the city council committee having jurisdiction, and forwarded to the city council for approval on its consent calendar agenda. The requirements of this chapter shall be satisfied by all ownership and rental developments subject to this chapter, the applicant receives a waiver under Section 17.725.011.

     B.     Agreements. Prior to the approval of a final map for any residential development, or issuance of a building permit for a unit within a residential development, to which this chapter applies, whichever comes first, the city and the residential developer shall enter into an affordable housing agreement in a form approved by the city attorney. For those residential developments for which affordable units will be constructed or converted on or off site, the affordable housing agreement shall include appropriate resale controls and/or rent restrictions. For ownership affordable units, the city and the individual homebuyer shall be required to enter into a recorded refinance and resale limitation agreement in a form approved by the city attorney. The city manager or designee is authorized to execute affordable housing agreements, resale controls and/or rent restrictions and any other documents necessary to effectuate the implementation of this chapter, provided such agreements and documents are consistent with the requirements of this chapter.

     C.     Annual Monitoring and Transfer Fees. Agreements involving rental units provided off site or by conversion of market-rate units as specified in Section 17.725.004(C) shall require the owner of the affordable rental units to submit an annual monitoring report to the housing division, in a format approved by the city manager. For each affordable rental unit provided hereunder, the current owner may be required to pay an annual monitoring fee for the term of required affordability in the amount set forth in the affordable housing agreement. For each owner-occupied affordable unit provided under this chapter, the current owner may be required to pay a transfer fee for any change of ownership as adopted from time to time by the city council during the term of required affordability in the amount set forth in the refinance and resale limitation agreement.

     D.    Resale Prices for Affordable Ownership Units. The maximum resale price for an affordable ownership unit and terms of resale to an eligible household shall be set by the community development director pursuant to the affordable housing cost as defined in Section 17.725.002(A) and as set forth in a refinance and resale limitation agreement.

     E.     City’s Right of Option to Purchase Affordable Ownership Units. The resale restrictions as set forth in the refinance and resale limitation agreement shall provide that in the event the owner cannot in good faith and despite his/her best reasonable efforts, locate an eligible household to purchase an affordable ownership unit at an affordable housing cost, the owner shall give written notice of such circumstances, and an option to purchase, to the city. The city shall also have an option to purchase the affordable unit at the maximum resale price, as limited by any applicable affordability restrictions, if the owner defaults on the terms of the refinance and resale limitation agreement.

     F.     Selection Criteria for Rental or Ownership Units. No household at the time of move-in shall be permitted to rent, purchase or occupy an affordable unit that is required under this chapter unless its qualifications are consistent with this chapter and the housing manager has approved the household’s eligibility. Eligible potential occupants of ownership affordable units must be first-time homebuyers and will be qualified on the basis of household income as defined in this chapter, including all sources of income and assets, the relationship between household size and the size of the available units, and any further criteria required by law and/or established by the city council. The affordable housing developer shall use an equitable selection method established in conformance with the terms of this chapter and in compliance with state and federal law. Selection of qualified households shall be based on the affordable housing priorities established below:

     Priority 1. Eligible applicants for an affordable unit that live or work within Brentwood city limits. Preference will not be allowed if not permitted by state or federal law or other fair housing restrictions.

     Priority 2. Other qualified applicants that do not live or work within Brentwood’s city limits.

     The community development director shall establish and maintain eligibility selection contact lists for qualified households based on the two housing priority groups mentioned in subsection F of this section. Proof of qualification for a priority group shall be provided by a household before placement on one of the selection contact lists. The lists shall be updated as needed.

     By virtue of their position or relationship, city senior management employees and officials and their children, or members of the city’s agencies, authorities, or commissions who have, by the authority of their position, policy making authority or influence affecting city housing programs, are ineligible to occupy an affordable unit. (Ord. 1014 § 1, 2020)

 

17.725.006 Affordable unit concessions and construction incentives.
     For any residential development meeting the requirements specified in Section 17.725.003 of this chapter, the city may offer incentives or financial assistance to encourage compliance with this chapter to the extent resources for this purpose are available and approved for such use by the city. In order to provide flexibility in the application of these concessions and incentives, and to ensure that they fit the variety of circumstances and different development projects regularly processed by the city, such incentives may include, but shall not be limited to, any of the following items, applied alone or in any combination upon the city council’s finding that a developer has proven that the incentive is necessary to the financial feasibility of the residential development.

     A.    Development Processing Fee Deferral. The city manager or designee may approve deferring payment of city processing and plan check fees applicable to the review and processing of the project. The terms and payment schedule of the deferred processing fees shall be subject to the approval of the city manager or designee. In no case shall deferred development processing fees be paid later than occupancy of any of the units in the residential development. In no case shall fees be waived.

     B.     Development Impact Fee Deferral. The city manager or designee may authorize the deferred payment of development impact fees applicable to the affordable units. Approval of this incentive requires demonstration by the applicant that the deferral increases the project’s feasibility. The applicant must provide appropriate security to ensure future payment of applicable development impact fees. In no case shall deferred development impact fees be paid later than occupancy of any of the units in the residential development. In no case shall fees be waived.

     C.     Density Bonus. Concurrently with consideration of an application for a residential growth management program allocation, the city may award a density bonus for developments that comply with the very low-, low- or moderate-income affordability provisions of this chapter by constructing units on site, paying the appropriate in lieu fee, providing an acceptable alternative equivalent proposal, or a combination of the above, in accordance with this chapter. In the event that a development is also eligible for a density bonus pursuant to Government Code Section 65915, the density bonus authorized pursuant to this chapter shall be included in any density bonus obtained pursuant to state law and shall not increase the amount of the density bonus above that afforded by state law. An application for a density bonus must be received concurrently with an application for residential growth management program allotments. The density bonus provided shall initially be set at nine percent above the midpoint of the density range established in the general plan and zoning code. Fractional density bonus units shall be rounded in the manner set forth in Section 17.725.003(B)(2) of this chapter. The density bonus amount shall be periodically reviewed by the city engineer, the community development director, and the housing manager, who will recommend that adjustments, as appropriate, be adopted by resolution of the city council. Density bonus units authorized under this chapter shall be excluded from the affordability requirements specified in Section 17.725.003 of this chapter.

     D.    Flexible Design Standards. The approving body may modify city standards, including design guidelines, for affordable units that reduce the costs of and are necessary to result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing, including, but not limited to, the following:

     1.     Reduced lot sizes;

     2.     Reduced setback requirements;

     3.     Reduced open space requirements;

     4.     Construction of duets, duplexes, triplexes or fourplexes on corner lots within single-family areas;

     5.     Reduced landscaping requirements;

     6.     Reduced parking requirements;

     7.     Height restriction waivers.

     The applicant shall be responsible for documenting to the satisfaction of city manager or designee, that the modification is necessary for the financial or other feasibility of the residential development. Except for any standards modified by the planning commission, the residential development must otherwise be consistent with all required general plan, zoning code, Uniform Building Code, and other applicable city regulations and policies.

     E.     Fast Track Processing. The city manager or designee may authorize prioritized application review and project processing including environmental review, report preparation, entitlement meetings, plan checks and project inspections.

     F.     Direct Financial Assistance. The city council may authorize provision of direct financial assistance in the form of a loan or grant from collected affordable housing trust funds as described in Section 17.725.007 of this code for developments which include dwellings units affordable to very low-, low-, or moderate-income households that exceed minimum affordable unit counts required under Section 17.725.003 of this code.

     G.    Additional Concessions and Incentives. The city council may consider, on a case-by-case basis, at its sole discretion, the provision of additional concessions or incentives consistent with state law and the housing element of the city of Brentwood general plan for residential development projects that exceed the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1014 § 1, 2020)

 

17.725.007 Affordable housing in lieu fee fund.
     A.    Creation. in-lieu fees shall be deposited into the affordable housing in-lieu fee fund, which is part of the housing enterprise.

     B.     Use. The finance director shall administer all monies in this fund including any interest earnings. Funds shall be disbursed at the discretion of the city council for the purpose of assisting in the construction of very low-, low- or moderate-income dwelling units, or helping with other affordable housing opportunities. Use of this fund may include the provision of loans to help fund rental housing projects. The finance director is authorized to utilize the city council approved budget to annually fund the city housing operating costs. In addition, the finance director is authorized to make budget adjustments as required to forgive the interfund receivable that has accumulated prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1014 § 1, 2020)

 

17.725.008 Brentwood rental housing trust fund.
     A.    Creation. Net rental income from all rental units dedicated to the city’s previous rental housing program shall be deposited into a Brentwood rental housing trust fund, which is part of the housing enterprise.

     B.     Use. The finance director shall administer all monies in this fund including any interest earnings. All funds other than those specified in subsection C of this section shall be utilized to purchase, construct or repair single- or multi-family rental unit inside the city limits. One-half of the rental income may be utilized from time to time at the city council’s discretion to further the provision of affordable housing in the city of Brentwood so long as sufficient funds remain to pay for the maintenance and operation of existing affordable housing in the city’s rental housing program.

     C.     Withholding. The finance director is authorized to utilize the city council approved budget to annually fund the city housing operating costs from the rental stream of these affordable rental units to fund city housing personnel and administrative costs directly related to management and administration of the Brentwood rental housing trust fund and program. The finance director is further authorized to withhold up to an additional fifteen percent of net proceeds from the rental stream to reimburse city development fees and agricultural mitigation fees for these units until the city development fee accounts are whole. (Ord. 1014 § 1, 2020)

 

17.725.009 First time homebuyer fund.
     A.    Creation. Contributions to the city’s first time homebuyer program in accordance with Section 17.725.004(D) shall be deposited into the first time homebuyer fund, which is part of the housing enterprise.

     B.     Use. The finance director shall administer all monies in this fund, including any interest earnings. All monies in the fund, other than those specified in Section 17.725.009(C) shall be loaned to first time homebuyers that qualify as a moderate-income, low-income or very low-income household, in accordance with terms and provisions of the approved first time homebuyer program approved by the city council.

     C.     Withholding. The finance director is authorized to utilize the city council approved budget to annually fund the city housing personnel and administrative costs directly related to the management and administration of the first time homebuyer fund and program. (Ord. 1014 § 1, 2020)

 

17.725.010 Enforcement.
     A.    General. The city shall enforce this chapter, and its provisions shall be binding on all agents, successors, and assigns of an applicant. The city may suspend or revoke any building permit or approval upon finding a violation of any provision of this chapter. No land use approval, building permit, or occupancy approval shall be granted for any residential development unless it is in compliance herewith, including, but not limited to, actions to revoke, deny, or suspend any permit or development approval.

     B.     Excessive Sales Price and Rents/Legal Action. It is unlawful, a public nuisance and a misdemeanor for any person to sell or rent an affordable unit at a price or rent exceeding the maximum allowed under this chapter or to a household not qualified under this chapter, and such person shall be subject to a five hundred dollar fine per month from the date of original noncompliance until the affordable unit is in compliance with this chapter. If the city determines that the sales price or rents in excess of those allowed by operation of this chapter have been charged to a household residing in an affordable unit, the city may take appropriate legal action.

     C.     Violation Abatement. The city of Brentwood city attorney or the Contra Costa County district attorney, as appropriate, shall be authorized to abate violations of this chapter and to enforce the provisions of this chapter and all implementing regulatory agreements and affordability controls placed on affordable units by civil action, injunctive relief, and any other proceeding or method permitted by law. Remedies provided for in this chapter shall not preclude the city from any other remedy or relief to which it otherwise would be entitled under law or equity. (Ord. 1014 § 1, 2020)

 

17.725.011 Waiver.
     A.    A developer of any project subject to the requirements of this chapter may request that the requirements of this section be waived or modified by the city council, based upon a showing that applying the requirements of this section would result in an unconstitutional taking of property or would result in any other unconstitutional result.

     B.     Any such request for a waiver shall be made in writing to the city council, submitted to the city concurrently with applicant’s submission of a universal application for any proposed residential development subject to this chapter.

     C.     The request for waiver shall set forth in detail the factual and legal basis for the claim of waiver or modification. The city council shall consider the request at the public hearing on the permit application. The applicant shall bear the burden of presenting substantial evidence to support the waiver request, including comparable technical information to support applicant’s position.

     D.    A waiver of an affordable housing requirement may only be approved by the city council to the extent necessary to avoid an unconstitutional result, based upon legal advice provided by or at the behest of the city attorney, after adoption of written findings, based on legal analysis and substantial evidence. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a modification or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver or modification of the affordable housing requirement, and a new application shall be required for any waiver or modification under this section. (Ord. 1014 § 1, 2020)

 

Chapter 17.730 AGRICULTURAL PRESERVATION PROGRAM
17.730.010 Purpose and findings.
     A.    Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to implement the agricultural preservation policies contained in the Brentwood general plan with programs designed to support preservation, and provide appropriate programs for lands located within, or adjacent to the Brentwood planning area or its approved sphere of influence. This includes mitigating the loss of productive agricultural lands converted for urban uses within the city by permanently protecting agricultural lands planned for agricultural use through the use of agricultural conservation easements or fee title purchase of lands and permitting a transfer of agricultural credits (TAC) from “agricultural donor parcels” within the TAC target area to “receiver parcels.” This also includes the development of programs that create incentives for the continuation of agricultural operations.  It is the policy of the city that conservation easements and fee title purchase programs are important for the long term protection of agricultural lands.  It is further the policy that additional incentive-based programs and measures should be taken to encourage the continuation and expansion of agricultural operations, including but not limited to, place-based marketing to increase the value of the agricultural crops grown around Brentwood, grants to fund local co-ops and marketing programs, agri-tourism and agri-business development, as well as loan programs that promote the planting of permanent crops and value-added production.

     B.     Findings. The city council finds this chapter is necessary for the following reasons: (1) viable and active agricultural operations around the City’s urban edge provide unique visual and economic benefits to the City; (2) agricultural land around Brentwood is of highly productive quality; (3) the Brentwood general plan sets forth policies to preserve productive agricultural lands and provide for appropriate programs; (4) loss of agricultural land is determined to be a significant impact under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA); and (5) loss of productive agricultural land will have a cumulatively negative impact on air quality, traffic, noise, public services demands, and aesthetics in the city and in the county of Contra Costa. (Ord. 877 § 2, 2010)

 

17.730.020 Definitions.
     “Agricultural conservation easement” means an easement over certain agricultural lands designated in this chapter for the purpose of restricting its use to agricultural operations. The interest granted pursuant to an agricultural conservation easement is an interest in land which is less than fee simple. Agricultural conservation easements can be permanent. However, mitigation funds should be available to fund term easements at minimum lengths to be determined by the city council.

     “Agricultural enterprise” means activities and programs that encourage the continued use of agricultural lands, including, but not limited to marketing support for area farmers, and grant and loan programs that reinvest in the agricultural economy, (plantings of key crops or additional agricultural operations, wholesale and/or retail, to make farming economically feasible). The following are examples of agricultural enterprise programs:

     1.     Place-based marketing efforts to increase the value of products grown in the Brentwood region, such as the certification program “Brentwood Grown.”

     2.     Agri-tourism programs and activities that encourage visits to the Brentwood region and benefit the local economy.

     3.     Investment in value-added infrastructure programs to promote growth industries, such as wine and olive oil in Brentwood, including but not limited to:

     a.     Funding for city-sponsored tasting rooms, incubators for processing grapes and olives, and commercial kitchens.

     b.     Loan programs for the development of private facilities, such as wineries, commercial kitchens and tasting rooms.

     4.     Loan programs to area farmers for the planting of permanent crops, such as orchards and vines.

     5.     Marketing grants for local cooperatives and organizations.

     “Agricultural land” for the purposes of this chapter means those land areas of Contra Costa County specifically designated as agricultural core (AC) or agricultural lands (AL) as defined in the Contra Costa County general plan; those land areas near the city designated as agricultural conservation (AC) as defined in the Brentwood general plan; and/or other lands upon which agricultural activities, uses, operations or facilities exist or could exist that contain Class I, II, III or IV soils as defined by the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service.

     “Agricultural operations” means normal and customary farming and agricultural activities which may occur during any twenty-four hour period of the day. Normal and customary farming and agricultural activities include, but are not limited to, the cultivation and tillage of the soil, the irrigation, cultivation, growing, harvesting, and processing of any agricultural commodity for wholesale or retail markets, including viticulture, horticulture, the keeping and raising of livestock, fur bearing animals, fish or poultry, and any commercial agricultural practices, including value-added production of an agricultural commodity, performed as incident to or in conjunction with such activities including preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market, carriers for transportation to market, or for retail sales allowed by zoning on-site.

     “Agricultural preservation” means those activities and programs that preserve productive agricultural lands in Brentwood’s planning area. These activities include programs to secure agricultural lands, as well as agricultural enterprise programs that create incentives for the continuation of agriculture.

     “Fee title purchase” means a real estate transaction in which the city or a qualified entity purchases the entire property fee simple.

     “Qualified entity” means any individual or group representing a property owner in the agricultural areas identified for conservation. All entities must be approved by the city council or its designee to receive any financial benefits associated with an agricultural easement or fee title purchase transaction.

     “Qualified land trust” means a nonprofit public benefit 501(c)3 corporation operating in Contra Costa County for the purpose of conserving and protecting land in its natural, rural or agricultural condition. All land trusts or conservation groups must be approved by the city council or its designee to hold, administer or steward lands acquired by the city.

     “Receiver parcel” means a residentially zoned parcel within the city’s jurisdiction to which agricultural credits are transferred.

     “Transferable agricultural credit” means a potential transferable credit to construct dwelling unit(s) in a city residential zoning district, which can only be exercised when the agricultural credit has been transferred pursuant to the provisions of this section from a donor to a receiver parcel and all other legal requirements are fulfilled. (Ord. 877 § 2, 2010)

 

17.730.030 Agricultural preservation program and requirements.
     A.    The city shall require agricultural preservation by any applicant for a subdivision or any other discretionary land use entitlement which will permanently change agricultural land over one acre in size to any nonagricultural use. The city shall impose a condition of approval requiring the applicant to comply with this chapter.

     B.     Agricultural preservation shall be satisfied by one of the following mechanisms:

     1.     Granting an agricultural conservation easement to or for the benefit of the city and/or a qualified land trust approved by the city on agricultural land deemed acceptable by the city. The easement shall encumber the exact acreage of the proposed entitlement, including any land used for park and recreation purposes and may encumber land acquired by the city and/or qualified land trust in fee; or

     2.     Payment of an in-lieu fee established by city council resolution. The fee may be adjusted annually but may not be increased by more than ten percent during any twelve-month period. (Ord. 877 § 2, 2010)

 

17.730.040 Eligible land for agricultural conservation easement.
     A.    In the establishment of any agricultural conservation easement, the city shall avoid the creation of any situation in which a property owner who does not participate in the program, would have any access, utility or infrastructure easements negatively impacted, unless the nonparticipating property owner consents. In addition, any nonparticipating property owner shall not have their land unduly impacted as to present or future development potential, by the creation of nonparticipating land “islands” (where the nonparticipating land is completely surrounded by properties participating in the program), unless the nonparticipating property owner consents.

     B.     The following minimum criteria shall be met for a property to be eligible for placement in an agricultural conservation easement:

     1.     The property shall have adequate water supply to support viable agricultural use on the land. The water supply for the land shall be protected in the agricultural conservation easement;

     2.     The property shall be of adequate size, configuration and location to be viable for continued agricultural use; and

     C.     In addition, a property that meets any or all of the following criteria can be considered as agricultural mitigation land:

     1.     The mitigation land is located along a roadway and contains unique visual values;

     2.     The mitigation land is not strategically located for other economic development purposes;

     3.     The mitigation land is contiguous with other areas sought for agricultural protection which comprise a minimum of ten acres; and

     4.     The mitigation land provides open space and wildlife habitat values.

     D.    The lands to be conserved are to be located in the following areas:

     1.     First priority will be given to the Brentwood agricultural conservation area as defined on the Brentwood general plan land use map.

     2.     Lands to be conserved may also be located in the following areas: the Contra Costa County agricultural core lands as defined on the Contra Costa County general plan urban limit line map.

     3.     Agricultural land within the city limits that possess unique agricultural, visual, historic or other important values may also be considered.

     E.     A property is ineligible to serve as agricultural mitigation land if one or both of the two circumstances below apply.

     1.     The property is already subject to easements or physical conditions that legally or practicably prevent modification of the property’s land use to a nonagricultural use.

     2.     The property is currently encumbered by a conservation easement of any nature or kind. (Ord. 877 § 2, 2010)

 

17.730.050 Procedure for establishment of transferable agricultural credits.
     A.    Transferable agricultural credits are eligible to be allocated to the property owners of record of agricultural land within the approximately two thousand one hundred sixty acre portion of the established Contra Costa County Agricultural core area, that is bounded by Marsh Creek on the west, the East Contra Costa Irrigation District Main Canal on the north, Sellers Avenue on the east, and Marsh Creek Road on the south except as noted in Exhibit 1 for approximately one hundred sixty acres south of Marsh Creek Road. This area consists of donor parcels and is identified in Exhibit 1 which is by reference made part of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     B.     Transferable agricultural credits shall run with the land. Existing agricultural parcels in the subject area over an acre in size are eligible to transfer two credits for one acre of agricultural land which is placed in a permanent conservation easement. For parcels of land that include fractional acreage, the calculation of agricultural credits above 0.5 shall be considered a full agricultural credit (Example: Parcel size: 19.8 acres x 2 = 39.6 credits, rounded to 40 credits; Parcel size: 19.6 acres x 2 = 39.2 credits, rounded to 39 credits). (Ord. 877 § 2, 2010)

 

17.730.060 Terms of agricultural conservation easement.
     A.    All owners of the property shall execute an agricultural conservation easement or other legal instrument. The instrument shall be in recordable form and contain an accurate legal description setting forth the description of the land. The instrument shall prohibit any activity that substantially impairs or diminishes the agricultural productivity of the land. The instrument shall protect the existing water rights and retain them with the agricultural mitigation land.

     B.     The city or a qualified land trust shall pay the costs of administering, monitoring and enforcing the instrument. The city shall be a named beneficiary under any instrument conveying the interest in the agricultural mitigation land to a qualified land trust, unless waived by the city council.

     C.     Interests in the property shall be held in trust by a qualified land trust and/or the city.

     D.    If a court of law finds that the public interests described in this section of this chapter can no longer reasonably be fulfilled as to an interest acquired, the interest in the agricultural mitigation land may be extinguished through sale, and the proceeds shall be redeposited into the city’s mitigation fund account, and be used to continue agricultural preservation programs as approved by the city and provided in this chapter.

     E.     If any qualified land trust owning an interest in agricultural mitigation land ceases to exist, the duty to hold, administer, monitor and enforce the interest shall pass to the city. (Ord. 877 § 2, 2010)

 

17.730.070 Use of in-lieu fees.
     The in-lieu fee paid to the city shall be placed in a separate account, and funds from this account, as well as interest earned shall be used to fund conservation easements, fee title purchases by the city, as well as the agricultural preservation and enterprise programs that are consistent with the land use designations and policies included in the city’s general plan and municipal code. Twenty percent of the fees collected may be used for administrative purposes and be placed in a separate account. (Ord. 877 § 2, 2010)

 

17.730.080 Precedence.
     This chapter shall take precedence over any other provision of the Brentwood Municipal Code in conflict with this chapter. (Ord. 877 § 2, 2010)

 

17.730.090 Monitoring.
     On a periodic basis the community development director shall publish a report delineating the activities undertaken pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and an assessment of these activities. The report shall list and report on the status of all lands and easements acquired under this chapter. (Ord. 877 § 2, 2010)

 

17.730.100 Violations—Enforcement.
     Any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the maximum prescribed by law.  In addition, any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable to the transferee of the property for actual damages. In an action to enforce such liability or fine, the prevailing party shall be awarded reasonable attorneys’ fees. (Ord. 877 § 2, 2010)

 

Chapter 17.740 RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
17.740.010 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “Residential Condominium Conversions” regulations of this title.

     B.     The purposes of the residential condominium conversions regulations are as follows:

     1.     To establish criteria for the conversion of existing multiple-family rental housing to a condominium;

     2.     To promote the concept of home ownership and increase the amount of owner-occupied housing affordable by all economic segments of the community;

     3.     To ensure that converted housing achieves a high degree of appearance, quality, and safety and is consistent with the goals of the city;

     4.     To provide a reasonable balance of ownership and rental housing and a variety of choices of tenure, type, price and location of housing;

     5.     To maintain a supply of rental housing for very-low, low and moderate income persons;

     6.     To reduce the impact of conversion on residents in rental housing who may be required to relocate due to the conversion of apartments to condominiums by providing procedures for notification and adequate time and assistance for such relocation; and

     7.     To assure that purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed as to the physical condition of the structure which is offered for purchase. (Ord. 859 § C, 2008)

 

17.740.020 Applicability of provisions.
     The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the conversion or subdivision of a single ownership parcel of existing improved residential real property typically containing five or more units, or of an existing mobile home park, into a form of ownership for residential purposes involving the right of exclusive occupancy or separate ownership of individual units or mobile home spaces, including, but not limited to condominiums, community apartments, or stock cooperatives. (Ord. 859 § C, 2008)

 

17.740.030 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined in Chapter 17.030, Definitions. (Ord. 859 § C, 2008)

 

17.740.040 Application requirements.
     In addition to the other subdivision requirements and procedures, a conversion is subject to the requirements of this chapter. An application for approval of a tentative map for the condominium subdivision shall be accompanied by the following items:

     A.    Physical Elements Report. A report on the physical elements of each structure and facility, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     1.     A report detailing the condition of each element of the property, including foundation, electrical, plumbing, utilities, walls, ceilings, windows, recreational facilities, sound transmission of each building, mechanical equipment, parking facilities, and appliances prepared by a qualified California-licensed professional approved by the city. Regarding each element, the report shall state to the best knowledge or estimate of the applicant when the element was constructed or installed, when the element was last replaced, the approximate date upon which the element will require replacement, the cost of replacing the element, and any variation of the physical condition of the element from the zoning and building code in effect on the date that the last building permit was issued for the structure. The report shall identify each known defective or unsafe element and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed;

     2.     A report from a licensed structural pest control operator, approved by the city, on each structure and each unit within the structure;

     3.     A report on the condition of the common area improvements, including landscaping, lighting, utilities and streets;

     4.     A report on any known soil and geological conditions regarding soil deposits, rock formation, faults, groundwater and landslides in the vicinity of the project, and a statement regarding any known evidence of soils problems relating to the structure prepared by a California-licensed soils engineer approved by the city. Reference shall be made to any previous soils report for the site and a copy submitted with the report; and

     5.     A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the subdivider necessary to refurbish and restore the project to achieve a high degree of appearance, quality and safety.

     B.     Site Plan. A site plan of the project, including the location and sizes of structures, parking layout (covered, uncovered, and guest) and access areas, sewer, water and storm drains, trash enclosures, easements and any other information required by the city.

     C.     Development Plans. Scaled development plans showing typical floor plans and building elevations. If the subdivider intends to make any modifications to the exterior elevations or to the project site, a design review application shall be proposed and processed concurrently with the tentative map application.

     D.    Landscape Plan. A landscape plan of the project including the location of all existing trees and shrubs and other landscape features on the project site. This plan shall be accompanied by evaluations by a registered landscape architect and certified arborist in the state of California to insure that trees, shrubs, and groundcovers are thriving, are not at the end of life maturity, are pruned properly, are not tripping hazards by uplifting foundations or walkways, or have invasive plant materials that need to be addressed. A water audit shall be conducted by an irrigation consultant and accompany these evaluation reports.

     E.     CC&Rs. A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions which would be recorded and would apply to each owner of a condominium unit within the project. The declaration shall include, but not be limited to, pertinent information regarding the conveyance of units and the assignment of parking, an agreement for common area maintenance, including common sewer, water and electrical lines, facilities and landscaping, together with an estimate of any initial assessment fees anticipated for maintenance, a plan for equitable sharing of communal water metering, description of a provision for maintenance of all vehicular access areas within the project, a requirement that all assigned parking areas including garages remain clear of storage and available for parking of vehicles, and an indication of appropriate responsibilities for maintenance of all improvements and utility systems for each unit. The CC&Rs will provide for a manager to be responsible for maintenance and repair, with each condominium owner responsible for his or her pro rata share of the maintenance costs. The manager may be an owner, a third party manager designated by the owners, or a special purpose entity such as an owners’ association. The CC&Rs shall be subject to the review and approval of the community development director in consultation with the city attorney prior to recordation of the final parcel map, and shall include the following: (1) The manager shall be responsible for the maintenance of all common areas, such as landscaping, parking, and access roads, and (2) The city shall be granted the rights and remedies of the association, but not the obligation, to enforce the maintenance responsibilities of the manager. The city has the right to review and approve the CC&Rs to ensure that (a) the appropriate conditions of approval are included in them and (b) those provisions reflecting the city’s conditions of approval may not be amended without city approval.

     F.     Project Characteristics. Specific information concerning the characteristics of the project, including, but not limited to, the following:

     1.     Square footage and number of rooms in each unit;

     2.     Rental rate history for each type of unit for either the previous five years or since construction, whichever is less;

     3.     Monthly vacancy rate for each month during either the preceding two years or since construction, whichever is less;

     4.     Characteristics of existing tenant households, including family size, length of residence, age of tenants and whether receiving federal or state rent subsidies;

     5.     A list of the proposed sales prices for each unit;

     6.     Proposed homeowners’ association fee;

     7.     Estimated lighting and landscaping district and park maintenance assessments;

     8.     Financing available; and

     9.     Names and mailing address of all tenants.

     When the subdivider can demonstrate that this information is not available, this requirement may be modified by the community development department.

     G.    A signed copy from each tenant of notice of intention to convert as specified in Section 17.740.070 (A), or evidence that a certified letter of notification was sent to each tenant for whom a signed copy of the notice is not submitted.

     H.    Any other information which, in the opinion of the community development department, will assist in determining whether the proposed project will be consistent with the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 859 § C, 2008)

 

17.740.050 Procedures.
     A.    Subdivision Procedures. Under Government Code Section 66426, a condominium conversion is treated as a subdivision subject to the provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act and this title.

     B.     Acceptance of Reports. The final form of the physical elements report and other documents required under Section 17.740.040 shall be as approved by the city. The reports in their accepted form shall remain on file with the community development department for review by the public. They are referred to collectively in this chapter as “the reports.”

     C.     Copy to Buyers. The subdivider shall provide each purchaser with a copy of the reports (in their final accepted form), except the information required by Section 17.740.040(F) and (G), before the purchaser executes an agreement to purchase a unit in the project, and the developer shall give the purchaser sufficient time to review the reports. A copy of the reports shall be made available at all times at the sales office and shall be posted at various locations, as approved by the city, at the project site. The subdivider shall provide the city with evidence of receipt of the reports by each tenant and prospective tenant.

     D.    Notice to Tenants and Prospective Tenants. Before tentative map approval, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing. In addition to all other notices required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the subdivider shall give notice prior to filing the tentative map to prospective tenants and tenants in the manner provided by Government Code Sections 66452.8 and 66452.9 and Section 17.740.070 of this chapter.

     E.     Inspection and Fees.

     1.     The premises to be inspected include structures, common areas, site improvements, public improvements and other related facilities. The purpose of the inspection is to develop a list of deficient conditions that may exist by reason of non-compliance with this code, and to have the deficient items refurbished and restored in accordance with Section 17.740.060.

     2.     Before submitting the final map, the owner shall request that an inspection of the premises be made by the community development department for conformance to Section 17.740.060.

     3.     A project inspection shall be made by the community development department and public works department. A deficiency list shall be transmitted to the subdivider. All deficiencies must be corrected to the satisfaction of the city before filing of the final map or parcel map. When plans for corrective work are required, they shall be as approved by the appropriate city department listed above before filing of the final map or parcel map.

     4.     The city shall charge fees as set forth in a resolution by the city council for the processing of the application. In addition, the developer shall post a cash deposit in an amount equal to the estimated cost of inspection. The deposit will be applied towards the inspection fee with any refund or balance due to be resolved before the approval of the final map by the city council. Any balance due shall be paid before recordation of the final map.

     F.     Affordable Housing. A condominium conversion is subject to the affordable housing requirements in Chapter 17.725. However, if the project was required to comply with the affordable housing requirements when the project was constructed, the project shall receive a credit for: (1) the number of affordable units required at the time the project was constructed, assuming those existing affordable units remain affordable units; and (2) any fees paid in lieu of creating affordable units, as to that portion of the obligation under the then-current affordable housing requirements that may be satisfied by the payment of fees. If the current affordable housing requirements in Chapter 17.725 are higher than those originally imposed at the time of construction, the project shall abide by the current requirements and provide additional affordable units and/or payment of in-lieu fees in a manner acceptable to the city. If the current affordable housing requirements in Chapter 17.725 are lower than those originally imposed at the time of construction, the project shall maintain any existing affordable units as affordable units.

     G.    Submittal of Budget. Prior to final map approval, the subdivider shall provide the City with a copy of the proposed budget for maintenance and operation of common facilities including needed reserves for review and approval. The budget shall show estimated monthly costs to the owner of each unit, projected over a five-year period, and shall include a component inventory and analysis and reserve study financial analysis for all building components with an identified service life of less than thirty years. Such budget shall be prepared, or reviewed and analyzed, by an independent professional management firm, or other qualified entity, experienced with management of condominium complexes. The budget preparer or reviewer shall submit a statement of professional qualifications, subject to the review and approval by the city.

     H.    Final Information Submitted. Prior to the close of escrow for any unit, the subdivider shall submit the following information to the community development department:

     1.     Name, address and phone number of the homeowners’ association;

     2.     Actual sale price of units;

     3.     Actual homeowner’s association fee;

     4.     Number of prior tenants who purchased units;

     5.     Number of units purchased with intent to be used as rentals; and

     6.     Disclosures statements to purchasers. (Ord. 859 § C, 2008)

 

17.740.060 Standards for condominium conversion.
     The following standards apply to a condominium conversion. These standards must be satisfied, or security provided in a form approved by the city, before the final map is approved.

     A.    Eligibility. Units less than five years old are not eligible for conversion to condominiums.

     B.     Building Regulations. All buildings and structures shall conform to and comply with the applicable Brentwood Municipal Codes and Building Codes in effect at the time of construction, unless subsequent modifications have been approved by the community development department, excepting, however, a minimum one hour fire separation shall be either in place or constructed between all units prior to any offer of sale. A code compliance inspection by the Brentwood building division will be required to assess code compliance. Buildings or building modifications constructed under previous versions of the Uniform Building Code will require that the developer provide a disclosure statement of this fact to any prospective purchaser of a unit.

     C.     Fire Prevention.

     1.     Fire Warning Systems. Each living unit shall be provided with a smoke alarm system conforming to the California Building Code at the time of the condominium conversion.

     2.     Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems. All fire hydrants, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers and other fire protective appliances shall be retained in an operable condition at all times. Prior to occupancy of any dwelling unit, a fire code compliance inspection shall be performed by the Contra Costa County fire district.

     D.    Sound Transmission.

     1.     Vibration Transmission. All permanent mechanical equipment (such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors) which is determined by the community development department to be a source of structural vibration or structural-borne noise shall be vibration isolated with inertia blocks or bases or vibration isolator springs in a manner approved by the community development department.

     2.     Noise Standards. The structures shall conform to all interior and exterior sound transmission standards of the State Administrative Code, Title 24, and Uniform Building Code, Appendix Chapter 35. Where present standards cannot reasonably be met, the planning commission may require the applicant to notify potential buyers of the noise deficiency currently within the unit.

     E.     Utilities.

     1.     Each dwelling unit shall be separately metered for gas and electricity.

     2.     Each unit shall have a main water shutoff valve or shut-off valves on each fixture in the unit.

     3.     Each unit shall have its own electrical panel or access thereto for electrical circuits that serve the unit.

     4.     Easements for gas, sewer and electric lines shall be provided in the common ownership areas.

     F.     Private Storage Space. Each unit shall have a minimum of two hundred cubic feet with no less than twenty-five square feet of enclosed weatherproofed and lockable private storage space in addition to guest, linen, pantry and clothes closets customarily provided. The space shall be provided in any location approved by the community development department, but shall not be divided into two or more locations. Where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the planning commission.

     G.    Laundry Facilities. A laundry area shall be provided in each unit unless the planning commission approves a common laundry area. If a common laundry area is provided, it shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and one automatic dryer for each ten dwelling units or fraction thereof. Where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the planning commission.

     H.    Landscape Maintenance. All landscaping shall be restored and/or new landscaping shall be installed to achieve a high degree of appearance and quality. Provisions shall be made for continuing maintenance of all landscaped areas. Existing and new landscaping shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.630 and is subject to review and approval by the community development and parks and recreation departments.

     I.      Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as required by the Chapter 17.620 for condominium or similar single-family residential projects.

     J.      Refurbishing and Restoration. Each main building, structure, fence, patio enclosure, carport, accessory building, sidewalk, driveway, landscaped area, utility, and additional elements as required by the community development department shall be refurbished and restored as necessary to achieve a high degree of appearance, quality and safety. The refurbishing and restoration is subject to review and approval by the community development department.

     K.    Disabled Persons Accessibility. Conversions of five or more units shall be in compliance with the disability access requirements of the state Department of Housing and Community Development. This may include the installation of an elevator.

     L.     Warranties. A one-year warranty shall be provided to purchasers of all units on all appliances in each unit and on all electrical, heating, air conditioning, plumbing and ventilation equipment. At such time as the homeowners’ association takes over management of the development, the developer shall provide a warranty to the association that any pool and pool equipment (filter, pumps, chlorinator) and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the association have a useful life of one year. Prior to final map approval, the developer shall provide the city with a copy of warranty insurance covering equipment and appliances pursuant to this section.

     M.    Reserves for Capital Maintenance Replacement. Before approval of the final map, the subdivider shall provide to the community development department evidence of the establishment of a fund in the name of the homeowners’ association. The funds shall be earmarked for long-term reserves for capital and maintenance replacement and shall be equal to full funding of the budget and reserve amounts identified in the independent budget analysis described in Section 17.740.050(G) or per the budget calculation approved by the Department of Real Estate, whichever is greater for a period of not less than one year.

     N.    Owner-Occupancy Deed Restrictions. A minimum of twenty percent of all the units within the project will be required to have a deed restriction which restricts occupancy of the unit to the owner. This deed restriction shall remain on these units in perpetuity. Evidence of adherence to this requirement shall be provided by the developer to the community development department prior to the close of sales for the units. (Ord. 859 § C, 2008)

 

17.740.070 Tenant provisions.
     A.    Notice of Intention. As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1(a) beginning at least sixty days before the filing of a tentative map, the subdivider shall give notice of intention to convert to each tenant and prospective new tenant, as provided in Government Code Sections 66452.8 and 66452.9. Evidence of receipt by each tenant and prospective tenant shall be submitted with the tentative map. The form of the notice shall be as approved by the community development department and shall contain not less than the following:

     1.     The information required by Government Code Section 66452.8 or 66452.9;

     2.     Name and address of current owner;

     3.     Name and address of the proposed subdivider;

     4.     Approximate date on which the tentative map is proposed to be filed;

     5.     Approximate date on which the final map or parcel map is to be filed;

     6.     Approximate date on which the unit is to be vacated by non-purchasing tenants;

     7.     Tenant’s right of notification to vacate without penalty;

     8.     Relocation information;

     9.     Statement of no rent increases;

     10.   Provision for special cases, for example, senior citizens and very-low, low and moderate income tenants;

     11.   Return of security deposit;

     12.   Remodeling provisions; and

     13.   Other information as deemed necessary by the community development department.

     B.     Tenant’s Right to Purchase.

     1.     As provided in Government Code Sections 66427.1(d) and 66459, a present tenant of a unit shall be given a nontransferable right of first refusal to purchase the unit occupied or any other available unit at a price no greater than the price offered to the general public. The tenant shall have a period of not less than ninety days from the date the tenant receives the notice to enter into a purchase agreement and provide proof of financing.

     2.     No application for conversion shall be approved unless there are a number of tenants who have expressed an interest in purchasing their rental unit. This intent shall be evidenced by the submittal in writing by no less than twenty-five percent of the tenants. Evidence of the number of tenants intending to purchase shall be submitted in writing to the city.

     3.     The actual offer of sale may not be extended by the subdivider to the tenant until the recordation of the final map or parcel map, and until the issuance of the State Department of Real Estate’s Final Subdivision Public Report.

     C.     Senior Citizens and Disabled Tenants.

     1.     A tenant household in residence at the time a tentative map application is deemed complete by the community development department, in which the head of the household or spouse is age sixty-two or older or is determined to be disabled as defined within The Americans With Disabilities Act, is considered a senior citizen or disabled tenant and shall be offered a three-year lease at the time the final map is approved.

     2.     The annual rent increase for a senior citizen or disabled tenant with a three-year lease may not exceed the annual change in the Consumer Price Index - Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers for the San Francisco area as calculated from April to April. The starting rent shall be the rent at the time of tentative map application.

     D.    Very-Low, Low and Moderate Income Tenants.

     1.     A tenant household in residence at the time a tentative map application is deemed complete by the community development department, which meets the income limits of the HUD Section 8 program, is considered a very-low, low or moderate income household and shall be offered, at a minimum, a two-year lease beginning at the time the final map is approved.

     2.     The annual rent increase for a very-low, low or moderate income tenant under this subsection shall not exceed the annual change in the Consumer Price Index - Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers for the San Francisco area as calculated from April to April. Starting rent shall be the rent at the time of tentative map application.

     E.     Tenant Relocation Assistance Plan.

     1.     Relocation Assistance Plan. The subdivider shall submit a tenant relocation assistance plan with the tentative map application. The plan shall include the information consistent with the provisions required under this subsection.

     2.     Vacation of Units.

     a.     Each non-purchasing tenant, not in default under the rental agreement or lease, shall have not less than one hundred eighty days from the date of receipt of notification from the subdivider of the intent to convert, or from the filing date of the final subdivision map or parcel map, whichever date is later, to find substitute housing and to relocate.

     b.     A non-purchasing tenant who: (i) is disabled, or (ii) has minor children in school, or (iii) is age sixty-two or older (whether publicly subsidized or not) and does not accept a special two- or three-year lease, living in any unit at the time a tentative map application is deemed complete by the community development department, shall be given at least one hundred eighty days (or until the end of the school year for tenants with minor children in school, whichever is longer) after approval of the final map in which to find suitable housing and relocate.

     3.     Other Available Rentals. The subdivider shall provide each tenant not wishing to purchase a unit or not accepting a special two- or three-year lease with up-to-date information of available apartments of comparable size and price, and located within a fifteen-mile radius of the apartment to be converted.

     4.     No Increase in Rents. A tenant’s rent shall not be increased during the period between the filing of the tentative map and the tenant’s relocation or acceptance of a special two- or three-year lease, or the acceptance of a purchase agreement, or the denial or withdrawal of the map.

     5.     Deposits. Each security, cleaning, or other deposit made as a condition of tenancy shall be returned to the tenant before termination of tenancy, unless it is shown that damage has occurred to the unit beyond the scope of repairs ore remodeling contemplated in the conversion process, or unless the landlord is otherwise entitled to the deposit.

     F.     Public policy—Lease Provisions and Evictions.

     1.     It is against the public policy embodied in this chapter to attempt to subvert its provisions by coercing the waiver of any rights or privileges created or protected herein. Any provision of a lease or rental agreement which purports to waive a tenant’s rights under this chapter or which requires prior consent to the conversion shall be null, void and unenforceable. Such acts shall be grounds for denial of the tentative map application.

     2.     It is against the public policy embodied in this chapter to evict or threaten to evict or otherwise harass any tenant because of the tenant’s refusal to consent to conversion, the tenant’s opposition to such conversion or the anticipated refusal or opposition of the tenant. Such acts shall be grounds for denial of the tentative map application.

     G.    Remodeling. No remodeling planned as part of conversion shall be performed in a unit still occupied by a non-purchasing tenant, without written permission. In the event a unit is occupied by a tenant obtaining a special two- or three-year lease, remodeling may occur only after the end of such lease period.

     H.    Notice of Public Report. As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1(a), each tenant shall receive ten days’ written notice that an application for a public report will be or has been submitted to the Department of Real Estate, and that such report will be available on request. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirement for service by mail.

     I.      Notice of Final Map Approval. As provided in Government Code 66427.1(b), each tenant shall receive written notification within ten days of approval of a final map for the proposed conversion. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail. (Ord. 859 § C, 2008)

 

17.740.080 Effect of proposed conversion on the city’s very-low, low and moderate income housing supply.
     In reviewing an application for conversion of an existing development to condominium, the planning commission shall consider the following:

     A.    Whether or not the amount and impact of the displacement of tenants, if the conversion if approved, would be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the community.

     B.     Whether or not the existing apartment complex is serving very-low, low and moderate income households. Standard definitions of very-low, low and moderate income rents used by the federal and state governments should be used in the evaluation. Along with other factors, the city should consider:

     1.     The number of families on current waiting lists for assisted rental housing programs that operate in Brentwood, such as the Section 8, Section 23 and Section 236 programs; and

     2.     The probable income range of tenants living in existing apartments, based on the assumption that households may ordinarily be expected to pay between one-quarter and one-third of their income for housing. That income range will be compared with existing income limits for the Section 8 program to determine whether potential displaced tenants can be categorized as very-low, low or moderate income.

     C.     The vacancy rate and turnover rate in multiple-family rental housing in the community, and the extent to which the proposed conversion will create hardships. A conversion may be denied based upon a lack of reasonable alternative housing opportunities.

     D.    The need and demand for lower-cost home ownership opportunities which are increased by the conversion of apartments to condominiums.

     E.     The current and historical vacancy rate in the project. In evaluation of the current vacancy level under this subsection, the increase in rental rates for each unit over the preceding five years and the average monthly vacancy rate for the project over the preceding two years shall be considered. If the planning commission determines that vacancies in the project have been increased or encouraged for the purpose of preparing the project for conversion, it may disapprove the tentative map.

     F.     Whether or not the conversion will be detrimental to the retention of very-low, low and moderate housing stock or will reduce or significantly alter the opportunity within the City for the housing of young and elderly citizens. (Ord. 859 § C, 2008)

 

17.740.090 Limitation.
     In order to reduce the effect of conversions on the city’s housing supply and to minimize the displacement of tenants, the number of conversions shall be limited to no more than five percent of the city’s potentially convertible rental stock in any one calendar year except as otherwise provided in this section. Conversion applications will be processed in the order that completed applications are submitted. A proposed project that is larger than the permitted number of units in a given year, if approved, will be considered to have used the permitted number of conversions for as many future years as necessary.

     The potentially convertible rental stock will be defined as follows: the number of multi-family rental units as determined by the state Department of Finance plus any new rental units constructed since the latest state calculation, minus any units which have received tentative map approval to convert since the latest state calculation.

     Once the yearly limit has been reached, a project may be approved for conversion only if the planning commission makes one or more of the following findings:

     A.    The developer will provide for a significant increase in housing for very-low, low and moderate income households or senior citizen households over and above the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     The developer will provide for the construction of new rental housing.

     C.     The developer will donate an acceptable site or an acceptable amount of funds to the city for construction of new rental or senior citizen housing.

     D.    The need and demand for low cost home ownership to be provided for by the project will outweigh the detriment caused by further reduction of the rental stock. (Ord. 859 § C, 2008)

 

17.740.100 Findings.
     The planning commission may not approve an application for a residential condominium conversion unless it finds in the approving resolution that the proposed conversion meets all of the following:

     A.    Conforms to the requirements of this chapter;

     B.     Is consistent with the Brentwood general plan and current zoning regulations;

     C.     For a project of five units or more, it will not cause the total amount of rental units for the current housing stock in the city to drop below fifteen percent according to the most recent census information or as shown in the city’s general plan housing element housing tenure statistics whichever is most current;

     D.    The overall design and physical condition of the condominium conversion achieves a high degree of appearance, quality and safety;

     E.     The conversion project is appropriate as a condominium conversion project due to its age, condition, including any proposed renovations, location or any other matters affecting its continuing viability as an ownership project;

     F.     The developer has complied with the tenant provisions public policy requirements and has not evicted or coerced any tenant resulting in a violation of Section 17.740.070 of this chapter;

     G.    The proposed condominium conversion project will not negatively impact very-low or low-income, elderly or disabled households;

     H.    The proposed project will not convert during the current calendar year more than five percent of the potentially convertible rental units in the city except as otherwise provided in this chapter; and

     I.      Vacancies in the project have not been intentionally increased for the purpose of preparing the project for conversion; and

     J.      Satisfies the requirements of Government Code Section 66427.1 regarding notice to tenants. (Ord. 859 § C, 2008)

 

Chapter 17.750 MOTELS
17.750.010 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “motel regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to protect public health, safety and welfare through the prevention of adverse impacts often associated with motels, including, but not  limited to, crime, loitering and blight. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020)

 

17.750.020 Applicability of provisions.
     The motel regulations shall apply citywide. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020)

 

17.750.030 Motels prohibited.
     Motels shall be prohibited in all zoning districts in the city. (Ord. 1013 § 2, 2020)

 

Chapter 17.760 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
17.760.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of Chapter 17.760 shall be known as the “reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities” chapter of this title.

     B.     Purpose. This chapter provides a procedure to request reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking equal access to housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (the Acts) in the application of zoning laws, building regulations, and other land use regulations, policies and procedures. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.760.002 Applicability.
     A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, their representative or any entity, when the application of a zoning law, building regulation, or other land use regulation, policy or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. A person with a disability is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment or anyone who has a record of such impairment. This chapter is intended to apply to those persons who are defined as disabled under the Acts.

     A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards and practices for the siting, development, improvement, and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in the manner prescribed by Section 17.760.003 (Application requirements). (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.760.003 Application requirements.
     A.    Application. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on an application form provided by the community development director, or in the form of a letter, to the director and shall contain the following information:

     1.     The applicant’s name, address and telephone number.

     2.     Address of the property for which the request is being made.

     3.     The current actual use of the property.

     4.     The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the Acts.

     5.     The municipal code provision, zoning ordinance provision, or other regulation or policy from which reasonable accommodation is being requested.

     6.     Why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual.

     B.     Review with Other Land Use Applications. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires some other discretionary approval (including, but not limited to, use permit, plan check review, general plan amendment, zone change, etc.), then the applicant shall file the information required by subsection A together for concurrent review with the application for discretionary approval. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.760.004 Review authority.
     A.    Community Development Director. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the director, or designee if no approval is sought other than the request for reasonable accommodation.

 

     B.     Other Review Authority. Requests for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent review with another discretionary land use application shall be reviewed by the authority reviewing the discretionary land use application. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.760.005 Review procedure.
     A.    Director Review. The community development director, or designee, shall make a written determination within thirty calendar days and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with Section 17.760.006 (Findings and decision).

     B.     Other Reviewing Authority. The written determination on whether to grant or deny the request for reasonable accommodation shall be made by the authority responsible for reviewing the discretionary land use application in compliance with the applicable review procedure for the discretionary review. The written determination to grant or deny the request for reasonable accommodation shall be made in accordance with Section 17.760.006 (Findings and decision).

     C.     Additional Information. If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may request further information from the applicant consistent with the Acts, specifying in detail the information that is required. In the event that a request for additional information is made, the thirty-day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant responds to the request. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.760.006 Findings and decision.
     A.    Findings. The written decision to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation will be consistent with the Acts and shall be based on consideration of the following factors:

     1.     Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request, will be used by an individual with a disability protected under the Acts. Zero to one bedroom: one on-site parking space.

     2.     Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability under the Acts. Two to three bedrooms: two on-site parking spaces.

     3.     Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city. Four and more bedrooms: two and one-half on-site parking spaces.

     4.     Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including, but not limited to, land use and zoning.

     5.     Potential impact on surrounding uses.

     6.     Physical attributes of the property and structures.

     7.     Alternative reasonable accommodations which may provide an equivalent level of benefit.

     B.     Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required by subsection A. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.760.007 Appeal of determination.
     A.    Appeals of the Decision of the Director. An applicant or any party with interest may appeal any determination of the director to the planning commission if appropriate notice is given to the community development department office within ten calendar days of the director’s decision. The city shall charge a fee for costs involved in the appeal. The planning commission shall hear and determine any appeal within thirty days of such notice.

     B.     Appeals of Decision of the Planning Commission or Other Reviewer. An applicant or any party with interest may appeal any determination of the planning commission or other reviewer to the city council if appropriate notice is given to the community development department office within ten calendar days of the planning commission’s decision. The city shall charge a fee for costs involved in the appeal. The city council shall hear and determine any appeal within thirty days of such notice. The decision of the city council shall be deemed final. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.770 EMERGENCY SHELTERS
17.770.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “emergency shelter regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The regulations in this title are intended to facilitate the establishment of emergency shelters and provide objective procedures and standards. An emergency shelter that meets the standards set forth in this title and is identified as a permitted use within a zone shall be approved ministerially and without discretionary review or a public hearing. These regulations also apply to any emergency shelter processed through the conditional use permit or temporary use permit processes. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.770.002 Applicability of provisions.
     The emergency shelter use regulations shall apply to all zoning districts citywide that allow emergency shelters as either permitted or conditionally permitted, or as a temporary use through the temporary use permit process. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.770.003 Standards for emergency shelters.
     A.    Occupancy. The maximum number of beds or persons permitted to be served nightly by an emergency shelter, or any combination of emergency shelters in the city, shall not exceed the number of unsheltered homeless as determined by the general plan housing element in accordance with state law.

     B.     Length of Stay. Occupancy for an individual in an emergency shelter is limited to no more than six months. The operator of the emergency shelter shall maintain adequate documentation to demonstrate compliance with this provision.

     C.     Location. No emergency shelter shall be located within three hundred feet of another emergency or homeless shelter or similar type facility. The distance between emergency shelters shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall or the closest location of any outdoor common facilities of one emergency shelter to the closest exterior wall or the closest location of any outdoor common facilities of another emergency shelter.

     D.    Management Plan. Prior to the establishment of the use and development, the operator of the emergency shelter must submit to the community development department a written management plan, approved by the city manager. As a minimum, the management plan shall include and address the following:

     1.     Procedures for staff training to meet the needs of the shelter residents, and have processes to address the following topics: client intake, confidentiality, health and safety training, mental health, and substance abuse treatment and referrals;

     2.     Operational rules and standards of conduct for residents, including policies prohibiting the use or possession of controlled substances by residents, rules concerning the use or possession of alcohol, curfew, prohibition of loitering, and any other provisions necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses;

     3.     Policies and procedures for eviction from the facility for violation of rules and standards of conduct;

     4.     A detailed safety and security plan to protect shelter residents and surrounding residents and uses;

     5.     A process for resident screening and identification;

     6.     A process for identification and registration with the chief of police of clients required to register as convicted sex offenders;

     7.     Provisions for on-site or partnerships with off-site organizations to provide job training, counseling, and treatment programs for the residents;

     8.     Services to assist residents with obtaining permanent shelter and income;

     9.     Policies regarding pet care and boarding during residents’ stay at the facility;

     10.   If applicable, timing and placement of outdoor activities;

     11.   Location within the facility for temporary storage of residents’ personal belongings;

     12.   Provisions for continuous on-site supervision during hours of operation. Specifically, there shall be a minimum of one staff person per eight clients during daytime hours, seven a.m. to ten p.m., and a minimum of two staff people at the facility during nighttime hours, ten p.m. to seven a.m.;

     13.   If applicable, procedures for ensuring safety and security of women and children within the facility;

     14.   Each emergency shelter must provide refuse containers or an enclosure that is consistent with city standards as set forth in the city’s Standard Plans and Specifications;

     15.   The exterior of the building must be kept in a good state of repair and the exterior finish and landscaping must be kept clean and well maintained. Each site shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner, free of weeds, loose trash, debris and other litter, including, but not limited to, shopping carts;

     16.   Organized outdoor activities on the site may only be conducted between the hours of eight a.m. and ten p.m.;

     17.   Noise shall be limited so as not to create an adverse impact on surrounding uses. No loudspeakers or amplified sound shall be placed within, or project outside of, the emergency shelter;

     18.   Employees, partners, directors, officers, managers and similar persons shall be screened prior to occupancy to confirm that they have no history of a previously failed emergency shelter (or similar facility) due to the fault of the operator, and have not been convicted of any of the following offenses within the prior five years:

     a.     A crime requiring registration under Penal Code Section 290,

     b.     A violation of Penal Code Section 311.2 or 311.4 through 311.7,

     c.     A violation of Penal Code Sections 313.1 through 313.5,

     d.     A violation of Penal Code Section 647(a), (b), or (d),

     e.     A violation of Penal Code Section 315, 316, or 318,

     f.      A felony crime involving the use of force or violence on another, or

     g.     The maintenance of a nuisance in connection with the same or similar business operation.

     The management of the emergency shelter shall effectuate a background investigation on all employees to the satisfaction of the chief of police.

     E.     Common Facilities and Services. An emergency shelter may include the following facilities and services as ancillary to the emergency shelter use:

     1.     Commercial kitchen facilities;

     2.     Dining area;

     3.     Laundry room;

     4.     Recreation or meeting room;

     5.     Outdoor recreational spaces; provided, that the space is located within a building interior courtyard or is enclosed by a building, solid fence, or wall or some combination thereof to secure the space and ensure that it is not accessible to the general public;

     6.     Support services (counseling, job training, and other social and medical services);

     7.     Animal boarding and related veterinary services for current residents of the facility only;

     8.     Child care facilities for current residents of the facility only.

     F.     Client Intake Areas. An enclosed intake area shall be provided within the emergency shelter building. The intake area shall be a minimum of one hundred square feet in size, located entirely within the building. The intake hours shall be posted clearly on the doors to the emergency shelter. Clients shall be allowed to wait in an interior or exterior waiting area that shall not exceed one hundred square feet. Clients shall not loiter nor form a queue outside of the exterior waiting area.

     G.    Parking. Each emergency shelter shall have a minimum of two off-street parking spaces plus one additional off-street parking space for each ten beds, or fraction thereof.

     H.    Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be located along all pedestrian pathways, parking lots, entrances and exits, common outdoor areas and at the front of the building. All lighting shall be maintained in good operating condition and shall be fully-shielded.

     I.      On-Site Security. Security measures shall be reviewed and approved by the chief of police prior to commencement of operations on the site and shall be sufficient to protect clients and neighbors. On-site security shall be provided during the hours when the emergency shelter is in operation and at all times when clients are present on-site. In the event that five or more calls for police services have been received over a thirty-day period by the police department, the facility shall be required to provide additional on-site security staff to the satisfaction of the chief of police and the community development director.

     J.      City, County and State Requirements. An emergency shelter shall obtain and maintain in good standing all required licenses, permits, and approvals from the city, county and state agencies or departments and demonstrate compliance with applicable building and fire codes. An emergency shelter shall comply with all county and state health and safety requirements for food, medical and other supportive services provided on-site. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.770.004 Development regulations for emergency shelters.
     Except as otherwise set forth in this chapter, all new construction shall comply with the commercial and industrial land use regulations for the underlying district in which the emergency shelter will be located. If no such regulations exist, the developer shall file an application with and obtain approval from the city of a rezone to establish development standards for the emergency shelter prior to any building permit issuance. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

17.770.005 Design review of emergency shelters.
     Construction of a new structure or exterior modification of an existing structure for an emergency shelter shall be subject to a ministerial design review process. The zoning administrator will review the design and site plan to ensure compliance with the design and site development review criteria established under Chapter 17.820. (Ord. 943 § 6, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.780 MARIJUANA FACILITIES AND CULTIVATION
17.780.010 Purpose.
     The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prohibit marijuana cultivation facilities, medical marijuana facilities, non-medical marijuana facilities, and marijuana deliveries, as defined below, within the city limits. It is recognized that it is a federal violation under the Controlled Substances Act to possess or distribute marijuana even if for medical purposes. Additionally, there is evidence of an increased incidence of crime-related secondary impacts in locations associated with marijuana facilities and in connection with marijuana deliveries, which is contrary to policies that are intended to promote and maintain the public’s health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 993 § 2, 2017)

 

17.780.020 Definitions.
     The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this chapter:

     “Commercial cannabis activity” shall have the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(k).

     “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana.

     “Establish” or “operate” a marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana dispensary, or non-medical marijuana facility means and includes any of the following:

     1.     The opening or commencement of the operation of a marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana facility, or non-medical marijuana facility;

     2.     The conversion of an existing business, facility, use, establishment, or location to a marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana facility, or non-medical marijuana facility;

     3.     The addition of a marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana facility, or non-medical marijuana facility to any other existing business, facility, use, establishment or location.

     “Marijuana” shall have the meaning set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11018 as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and as subsequently amended.

     “Medical marijuana” is marijuana used for medical purposes where that medical use is deemed appropriate and has been recommended by a physician who has determined that the person’s health would benefit from the use of marijuana in the treatment of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (“AIDS”), anorexia, arthritis, cancer, chronic pain, glaucoma, migraine, spasticity, or any other serious medical condition for which marijuana is deemed to provide relief as defined in subsection (h) of Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7.

     “Medical marijuana facility” means any business, facility, use, establishment, property, or location, whether fixed or mobile, where medical marijuana is sold, made available, delivered and/or distributed by or to three or more people. A “medical marijuana facility” includes any business, facility, use, establishment, property, or location, whether fixed or mobile, where a commercial cannabis activity, as defined by Business and Professions Code Section 26001(k), takes place. A “medical marijuana facility” does not include the following uses, as long as the location of such uses are otherwise regulated by this code or applicable law and as long as any use of marijuana complies strictly with applicable law including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq.:

     1.     A clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code;

     2.     A health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code;

     3.     A residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code;

     4.     A residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code;

     5.     A residential hospice, or a home health agency, licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code.

     “Non-medical marijuana facility” means any building, facility, use, establishment, property, or location where any person or entity establishes, commences, engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits another person or entity to establish, commence, engage in, conduct, or carry on, any activity that requires a state license or nonprofit license under Business and Professions Code Section 26000 et seq., including, but not limited to, marijuana cultivation, marijuana distribution, marijuana transportation, marijuana storage, manufacturing of marijuana products, marijuana processing, the sale of any marijuana or marijuana products, and the operation of a marijuana microbusiness. (Ord. 993 § 2, 2017)

 

17.780.030 Medical marijuana facilities prohibited.
     Medical marijuana facilities are prohibited in all zoning districts in the city and shall not be established or operated anywhere in the city. The city shall not issue, approve or grant any permit, license or other entitlement for the establishment or operation of a medical marijuana facility. No person may be the lessor of property where a medical marijuana facility is located. No person may participate as an employee, contractor, agent, volunteer, or in any manner or capacity in any medical marijuana facility in the city. (Ord. 993 § 2, 2017)

 

17.780.040 Marijuana cultivation prohibited.
     No person or entity may cultivate marijuana at any location in the city, except that a person may cultivate marijuana plants inside his or her private residence, or inside an accessory structure to his or her private residence located upon the grounds of that private residence that is fully enclosed and secured against unauthorized entry, provided that the owner of the property provides written consent expressly allowing the marijuana cultivation to occur, the person conducting the marijuana cultivation complies with all applicable Building Code requirements set forth in Title 8 of the Municipal Code, there is no use of gas products (including, but not limited to, CO2, butane, propane, and natural gas) on the property for purposes of marijuana cultivation, and the marijuana cultivation complies with Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2(a)(3). Not more than six living plants may be planted, cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private residence, or upon the grounds of that private residence, at one time. (Ord. 993 § 2, 2017)

 

17.780.050 Non-medical marijuana facilities prohibited.
     Non-medical marijuana facilities are prohibited in all zoning districts in the city and shall not be established or operated anywhere in the city. The city shall not issue, approve or grant any permit, license or other entitlement for the establishment or operation of a non-medical marijuana facility. No person may be the lessor of property where a non-medical marijuana facility is located. No person may participate as an employee, contractor, agent, volunteer, or in any manner or capacity in any non-medical marijuana facility in the city. (Ord. 993 § 2, 2017)

 

17.780.060 Marijuana delivery and transport prohibited.
     A.    Origination or acceptance of deliveries of marijuana for any purpose is prohibited in all zoning districts in the city.

     B.     No person and/or entity may deliver or transport marijuana, including medical marijuana, from any fixed or mobile location, either inside or outside the city, to any person in the city.

     C.     As an exception to subsections A and B above, a person may deliver or transport medical marijuana to a qualified patient or person with an identification card, as those terms are defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, for whom he or she is the primary caregiver within the meaning of Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7(d). (Ord. 993 § 2, 2017)

 

17.780.070 State and federal law prohibitions and restrictions.
     A.    The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit all marijuana activities for which a state license is required. Accordingly, the city shall not issue any permit, license or other entitlement for any commercial cannabis activity for which a state license is required.

     B.     Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to permit or authorize any use or activity which is otherwise prohibited by any state or federal law. (Ord. 993 § 2, 2017)

 

17.780.080 Enforcement.
     The city may enforce this chapter in any manner permitted by law. The violation of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. In addition, violators may be punished pursuant to Title 1 of this code. These remedies are deemed to be cumulative and in addition to all other remedies under this code and state and federal law. (Ord. 993 § 2, 2017)

 

Chapter 17.790 WIRELESS FACILITIES FOR FACILITIES COVERED UNDER SECTION 6409(a) OF THE MIDDLE CLASS TAX RELIEF ACT OF 2012
17.790.010 Purpose.
     A.    The purpose of this chapter is to adopt reasonable regulations and procedures, consistent with and subject to federal and California state law, for compliance with Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, Pub. L. 112-96, codified in Title 47 of the United States Code Section 1455(a), and related Federal Communications Commission regulations codified in Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations Section 1.40001 et seq.

     1.     Section 6409(a) generally requires that state and local governments “may not deny, and shall approve” requests to collocate, remove or replace transmission equipment at an existing tower or base station. FCC regulations interpret the statute and create procedural rules for local review, which generally preempt subjective land-use regulations, limit application content requirements and provide the applicant with a “deemed granted” remedy when the local government fails to approve or deny the request within sixty days after submittal (accounting for any tolling periods). Moreover, whereas Section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. 104-104, codified in Title 47 of the United States Code Section 332, applies to only “personal wireless service facilities” (e.g., cellular telephone towers and equipment), Section 6409(a) applies to all “wireless” facilities licensed or authorized by the FCC (e.g., wi-fi, satellite, or microwave backhaul).

     2.     The city council finds that the partial overlap between wireless deployments covered under Section 6409(a) and other wireless deployments, combined with the different substantive and procedural rules applicable to such deployments, creates a potential for confusion that harms the public interest in both efficient wireless facilities deployment and deliberately planned community development in accordance with local values. The city council further finds that a separate permit application and review process specifically designed for compliance with Section 6409(a) contained in a chapter devoted to Section 6409(a) will best prevent such confusion.

     3.     Accordingly, the city of Brentwood adopts this chapter to reasonably regulate requests submitted for approval under Section 6409(a) to collocate, remove or replace transmission equipment at an existing wireless tower or base station, in a manner that complies with federal law and protects and promotes the public health, safety and welfare.

     B.     This chapter does not intend to, and shall not be interpreted or applied to: (1) prohibit or effectively prohibit personal wireless services; (2) unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services; (3) regulate the installation. operation, collocation, modification or removal of wireless facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such emissions comply with all applicable FCC regulations; (4) prohibit or effectively prohibit any collocation or modification that the city may not deny under California or federal law; or (5) allow the city to preempt any applicable California or federal law. (Ord. 972 § 2, 2016)

 

17.790.020 Definitions.
     Definitions in this section may contain quotations and/or citations to Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations Section 1.40001 et seq. In the event that any referenced section is amended, creating a conflict between the quoted definition and the amended language of the referenced section, the definition in the referenced section, as amended, shall control.

     “Base station” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(1), as may be amended, which defines that term as follows:

     1.     A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables [FCC]-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in [47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(9)] or any equipment associated with a tower.

     a.     The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

     b.     The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small-cell networks).

     c.     The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under this section, supports or houses equipment described in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support.

     d.     The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under this section, does not support or house equipment described in paragraphs (a) and(b) of this section.

     Note: As an illustration and not a limitation, the FCC’s definition refers to any structure that actually supports wireless equipment even though it was not originally intended for that purpose. Examples include, but are not limited to, wireless facilities mounted on buildings, utility poles and transmission towers, light standards or traffic signals. A structure without wireless equipment replaced with a new structure designed to bear the additional weight from wireless equipment constitutes a base station.

     “City” means the city of Brentwood, California.

     “City council” means the city council of the city of Brentwood, California.

     “Code” means the city of Brentwood Municipal Code, as may be amended.

     “Collocation” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(2), as may be amended, which defines that term as “[t]he mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.” As an illustration and not a limitation, the FCC’s definition effectively means “to add” and does not necessarily refer to more than one wireless facility installed at a single site.

     “Director” means the director of community development of the city of Brentwood, California, or designee.

     “Distributed antenna system” or “DAS” means a network of one or more antennas and related fiber optic nodes typically mounted to or located at streetlight poles, utility poles, sporting venues, arenas or convention centers which provide access and signal transfer for wireless service providers. A distributed antenna system also includes the equipment location, sometimes called a “hub” or “hotel” where the DAS network is interconnected with one or more wireless service provider’s facilities to provide the signal transfer services.

     “Eligible facilities request” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(3), as may be amended, which defines that term as “[a]ny request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving: (i) [c]ollocation of new transmission equipment; (ii) [r]emoval of transmission equipment; or (iii) [r]eplacement of transmission equipment.”

     “Eligible support structure” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(4), as may be amended, which defines that term as “[a]ny tower or base station as defined in this section, provided that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under this section.”

     “Existing” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(4), as may be amended, which provides that “[a] constructed tower or base station is existing for purposes of [the FCC’s Section 6409(a) regulations] if it has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, provided that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition.”

     “FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration or its duly appointed successor agency.

     “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission or its duly appointed successor agency.

     “RF” means “radio frequency” or electromagnetic waves between thirty kHz and three hundred GHz in the electromagnetic spectrum range.

     “Section 6409(a)” means Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-96. 126 Stat. 156, codified as 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a), as may be amended.

     “Site” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(6), as may be amended, which provides that “[f]or towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other eligible support structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.”

     “Substantial change” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(7), as may be amended, which defines that term differently based on the particular facility type and location. For clarity, the definition in this chapter organizes the FCC’s criteria and thresholds for a substantial change according to the facility type and location.

     A.    For towers outside the public rights-of-way, a substantial change occurs when:

     1.     The proposed collocation or modification increases the overall height more than ten percent or the height of one additional antenna array not to exceed twenty feet (whichever is greater); or

     2.     The proposed collocation or modification increases the width more than twenty feet from the edge of the wireless tower or the width of the wireless tower at the level. of the appurtenance (whichever is greater); or

     3.     The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of more than the standard number of equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four; or

     4.     The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation outside the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the wireless tower, including any access or utility easements currently related to the site.

     B.     For towers in the public rights-of-way and for all base stations, a substantial change occurs when:

     1.     The proposed collocation or modification increases the overall height more than ten percent or ten feet (whichever is greater); or

     2.     The proposed collocation or modification increases the width more than six feet from the edge of the wireless tower or base station; or

     3.     The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground when there are no existing ground-mounted equipment cabinets; or

     4.     The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of any new ground­ mounted equipment cabinets that are ten percent larger in height or volume than any existing ground-mounted equipment cabinets; or

     5.     The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation outside the area in proximity to the structure and other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.

     C.     In addition, for all towers and base stations wherever located, a substantial change occurs when:

     1.     The proposed collocation or modification would defeat the existing concealment elements of the support structure as determined by the director; or

     2.     The proposed collocation or modification violates a prior condition of approval, provided however that the collocation need not comply with any prior condition of approval related to height, width, equipment cabinets or excavation that is inconsistent with the thresholds for a substantial change described in this section.

     Note: The thresholds for a substantial change outlined above are disjunctive. The failure to meet any one or more of the applicable thresholds means that a substantial change would occur. The thresholds for height increases are cumulative limits. For sites with horizontally separated deployments, the cumulative limit is measured from the originally­ permitted support structure without regard to any increases in size due to wireless equipment not included in the original design. For sites with vertically separated deployments, the cumulative limit is measured from the permitted site dimensions as they existed on February 22, 2012, the date that Congress passed Section 6409(a).

     “Tower” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(9), as may be amended, which defines that term as “[a]ny structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any [FCC]-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site.” Examples include, but are not limited to, monopoles, mono-trees and lattice towers.

     “Transmission equipment” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(8), as may be amended, which defines that term as “[e]quipment that facilitates transmission for any [FCC]-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.”

     “Wireless” means any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service transmitted over frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum. (Ord. 972 § 2, 2016)

 

17.790.030 Applicability.
     This chapter applies to all permit applications for a collocation or modification to an existing wireless tower or base station submitted for approval pursuant to Section 6409(a). However, the applicant may alternatively elect to seek either a conditional wireless facilities permit or an administrative wireless facilities permit under code Chapter 17.795. (Ord. 972 § 2, 2016)

 

17.790.040 Section 6409(a) collocation/ modification permit
     Any request to collocate, replace or remove transmission equipment at an existing wireless tower or base station submitted for approval under Section 6409(a) shall require a Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit subject to the director’s approval, conditional approval or denial under the standards and procedures contained in this chapter. (Ord. 972 § 2, 2016)

 

17.790.050 Other regulatory approvals required.
     No collocation or modification approved under any Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit may occur unless the applicant also obtains all other permits or regulatory approvals from other city departments and state or federal agencies. An applicant must obtain a Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit before it may apply for permits or other regulatory approvals from other city departments. Furthermore, any Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit granted under this chapter shall remain subject to the lawful conditions and/or requirements associated with such other permits or regulatory approvals from other city departments and state or federal agencies. (Ord. 972 § 2, 2016)

 

17.790.060 Permit applications—Submittal and review procedures.
     A.    Permit Application Required. The director may not grant any Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit unless the applicant has submitted a complete application.

     B.     Permit Application Content. This section governs minimum requirements for permit application content and procedures for additions and/or modifications to Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit applications. The city council directs and authorizes the director to develop and publish application forms, checklists, informational handouts and other related materials that describe required materials and information for a complete application in any publicly stated form. Without further authorization from the city council, the director may, from time to time, update and alter the permit application forms, checklists, informational handouts and other related materials as the director deems necessary or appropriate to respond to regulatory, technological or other changes. The materials required under this subsection are minimum requirements for any Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit application the director may develop.

     1.     Application Fee Deposit. The applicable permit application fee established by city council resolution. In the event that the city council has not established an application fee specific to wireless permit applications, the established fee for a conditional use permit shall be required.

     2.     Prior Regulatory Approvals. Evidence that the applicant holds all current licenses and registrations from the FCC and any other applicable regulatory bodies where such license(s) or registration(s) are necessary to provide wireless services utilizing the proposed wireless facility. For any prior local regulatory approval(s) associated with the wireless facility, the applicant must submit copies of all such approvals with any corresponding conditions of approval. Alternatively, a written justification that sets forth reasons why prior regulatory approvals were not required for the wireless facility at the time it was constructed or modified.

     3.     Site Development Plans. A fully dimensioned site plan and elevation drawings prepared and sealed by a California-licensed engineer showing any existing wireless facilities with all existing transmission equipment and other improvements, the proposed facility with all proposed transmission equipment and other improvements and the legal boundaries of the leased or owned area surrounding the proposed facility and any associated access or utility easements.

     4.     Equipment Specifications. Specifications that show the height, width, depth and weight for all proposed equipment. For example, dimensioned drawings or the manufacturer’s technical specifications would satisfy this requirement.

     5.     Photographs and Photo Simulations. Photographs and photo simulations that show the proposed facility in context of the site from reasonable line-of-sight locations from public streets or other adjacent viewpoints, together with a map that shows the photo location of each view angle. At least one photo simulation must clearly show the impact on the concealment elements of the support structure, if any, from the proposed modification.

     6.     RF Exposure Compliance Report. An RF exposure compliance report prepared and certified by an RF engineer acceptable to the city that certifies that the proposed facility, as well as any collocated facilities, will comply with applicable federal RF exposure standards and exposure limits. The RF report must include the actual frequency and power levels (in watts ERP) for all existing and proposed antennas at the site and exhibits that show the location and orientation of all transmitting antennas and the boundaries of areas with RF exposures in excess of the uncontrolled/general population limit (as that term is defined by the FCC) and also the boundaries of areas with RF exposures in excess of the controlled/occupational limit (as that term is defined by the FCC). Each such boundary shall be clearly marked and identified for every transmitting antenna at the project site.

     7.     Section 6409(a) Justification Analysis. A written statement that explains in plain factual detail whether and why Section 6409(a) and the related FCC regulations at 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001 et seq., require approval for the specific project. A complete written narrative analysis will state the applicable standard and all the facts that allow the city to conclude the standard has been met-bare conclusions not factually supported do not constitute a complete written analysis. As part of the this written statement the applicant must also include: (a) whether and why the support structure qualifies as an existing tower or existing base station; and (b) whether and why the proposed collocation or modification does not cause a substantial change in height, width, excavation, equipment cabinets, concealment or permit compliance.

     8.     Noise Study. A noise study prepared and certified by an engineer for the proposed facility and all associated equipment including all environmental control units, sump pumps, temporary backup power generators, and permanent backup power generators demonstrating compliance with the city’s noise regulations. The noise study must also include an analysis of the manufacturers’ specifications for all noise-emitting equipment and a depiction of the proposed equipment relative to all adjacent property lines. In lieu of a noise study, the applicant may submit evidence from the equipment manufacturer that the ambient noise emitted from all the proposed equipment will not, both individually and cumulatively, exceed the applicable limits.

     C.     Pre-Application Meeting Appointment. Prior to application submittal, applicants must schedule and attend a pre-application meeting with design review staff for all Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit applications. Such pre-application meeting is intended to streamline the application review through discussions including, but not limited to, the appropriate project classification, including whether the project qualifies for a Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit; any latent issues in connection with the existing tower or base station; potential concealment issues (if applicable); coordination with other city departments responsible for application review; and application completeness issues. Applicants must submit a written request (mail or email) for an appointment. City staff shall endeavor to provide applicants with an appointment within approximately five working days after receipt of a written request.

     D.    Application Submittal Appointment. All applications for a Section 6409(a) collocation/
modification permit must be submitted to the city at a pre-scheduled appointment. Applicants may submit one application per appointment but may schedule successive appointments for multiple applications whenever feasible as determined by the city. Applicants must submit a written request (mail or email) for an appointment. City staff shall endeavor to provide applicants with an appointment within approximately five working days after receipt of a written request.

     E.     Application Resubmittal Appointment. All application resubmittals must be tendered to the city at a pre-scheduled appointment. Applicants may resubmit one application per appointment but may schedule successive appointments for multiple applications whenever feasible for the city. Applicants must submit a written request (mail or email) for an appointment. City staff shall endeavor to provide applicants with an appointment within approximately five working days after receipt of a written request.

     F.     Applications Deemed Withdrawn. To promote efficient review and timely decisions, an application will be automatically deemed withdrawn when an applicant fails to tender a substantive response within ninety days after the city deems the application incomplete in a written notice to the applicant. The director may in the director’s discretion grant a written extension for up to an additional thirty days upon a written request for an extension received prior to the ninetieth day. The director may grant further written extensions only for good cause, which includes circumstances outside the applicant’s reasonable control. (Ord. 972 § 2, 2016)

 

17.790.070 Notice.
     A.    Manner of Notice. Within fifteen days after an applicant submits an application for a Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit, written notice of the application shall be sent by First Class United States mail to:

     1.     The applicant or its duly authorized agent;

     2.     The property owner or its duly authorized agent;

     3.     All real property owners within three hundred feet from the subject site as shown on the latest equalized assessment rolls;

     4.     Any person who has filed a written request with either the city clerk or the city council; and

     5.     Any city department that will be expected to review the application.

     B.     Notice Content. The notice required under this section shall include all the following information:

     1.     A general explanation of the proposed collocation or modification;

     2.     The following statement: “This notice is for information purposes only; no public hearing will be held for this application. Federal law may require approval for this application. Further, Federal Communications Commission regulations may deem this application granted by the operation of law unless the city approves or denies the application, or the city and applicant reach a mutual tolling agreement”; and

     3.     A general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property that is the subject of the application. (Ord. 972 § 2, 2016)

 

17.790.080 Approvals—Denials without prejudice.
     Federal regulations dictate the criteria for approval or denial of approval permit application submitted under Section 6409(a). The findings for approval and criteria for denial without prejudice are derived from, and shall be interpreted and applied in a manner consistent with, such federal regulations.

     A.    Findings for Approval. The director may approve or conditionally approve an application for a Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit only when the director finds all of the following:

     1.     The application involves the collocation, removal or replacement of transmission equipment on an existing wireless tower or base station; and

     2.     The proposed changes would not cause a substantial change.

     B.     Criteria for a Denial Without Prejudice. Notwithstanding subsection A, the director shall not approve an application for a Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit when the director finds that the proposed collocation or modification:

     1.     Violates any legally enforceable standard or permit condition reasonably related to public health and safety; or

     2.     Involves a structure constructed or modified without all approvals required at the time of the construction or modification; or

     3.     Involves the replacement of the entire support structure; or

     4.     Does not qualify for mandatory approval under Section 6409(a) for any lawful reason.

     C.     All Section 6409(a) Permit Denials Are Without Prejudice. Any “denial” of a Section 6409(a) permit application shall be limited to only the applicant request for approval pursuant to Section 6409(a) and shall be without prejudice to the applicant, the real property owner or the project. Subject to the application and submittal requirements in this chapter, the applicant may immediately resubmit a permit application for either a conditional use permit, land use permit or Section 6409(a) permit as appropriate.

     D.    Conditional Approvals. Subject to any applicable limitations in federal or state law, nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the city’s authority to conditionally approve an application for a Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 972 § 2, 2016)

 

17.790.090 Standard conditions of approval.
     Any Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit approved or deemed-granted by the operation of federal law shall be automatically subject to the conditions of approval described in this section.

     A.    Permit Duration. The city’s grant or grant by operation of law of a Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit constitutes a federally-mandated modification to the underlying permit or approval for the subject tower or base station. The city’s grant or grant by operation of law of a Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit will not extend the permit term for any conditional use permit, land use permit or other underlying regulatory approval and its term shall be coterminous with the underlying permit or other regulatory approval for the subject tower or base station.

     B.     Accelerated Permit Terms Due to Invalidation. In the event that any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any portion of Section 6409(a) or any FCC rule that interprets Section 6409(a) such that federal law would not mandate approval for any Section 6409(a) collocation/
modification permit(s), such permit(s) shall automatically expire one year from the effective date of the judicial order, unless the decision would not authorize accelerated termination of previously approved Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permits. A permittee shall not be required to remove its improvements approved under the invalidated Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit when it has submitted an application for either a conditional wireless facilities permit or an administrative wireless facilities permit for those improvements before the one-year period ends. The director may extend the expiration date on the accelerated permit upon a written request from the permittee that shows good cause for an extension.

     C.     No Waiver of Standing. The city’s grant or grant by operation of law of a Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit does not waive, and shall not be construed to waive, any standing by the city to challenge Section 6409(a), any FCC rules that interpret Section 6409(a) or any Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit.

     D.    Compliance with All Applicable Laws. The permittee shall at all times maintain compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations, ordinance or other rules.

     E.     Inspections; Emergencies. The city or its designee may enter onto the facility area to inspect the facility upon reasonable notice to the permittee. The permittee shall cooperate with all inspections. The city reserves the right to enter or direct its designee the facility and support, repair, disable or remove any elements of the facility in emergencies or when the facility threatens imminent harm to persons or property.

     F.     Contact Information for Responsible Parties. The permittee shall at all times maintain accurate contact information for all parties responsible for the facility, which shall include a phone number, street mailing address and email address for at least one natural person. All such contact information for responsible parties shall be provided to the director upon permittee’s receipt of the director’s written request.

     G.    Indemnities. The permittee and, if applicable, the non-government owner of the private property upon which the tower/and or base station is installed shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers, officials and employees: (1) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs and expenses and from any and all claims, demands, law suits, writs of mandamus and other actions or proceedings brought against the city or its agents, officers, officials or employees to challenge, attack, seek to modify, set aside, void or annul the city’s approval of the permit; and (2) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs and expenses and any and all claims, demands, law suits or causes of action and other actions or proceedings of any kind or form, whether for personal injury, death or property damage, arising out of or in connection with the activities or performance of the permittee or, if applicable, the private property owner or any of each one’s agents, employees, licensees, contractors, subcontractors or independent contractors. The permittee shall be responsible for costs of determining the source of the interference, all costs associated with eliminating the interference, and all costs arising from third party claims against the city attributable to the interference. In the event the city becomes aware of any such actions or claims the city shall promptly notify the permittee and the private property owner and shall reasonably cooperate in the defense. It is expressly agreed that the city shall have the right to approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, the legal counsel providing the city’s defense, and the property owner and/or permittee (as applicable) shall reimburse city for any costs and expenses directly and necessarily incurred by the city in the course of the defense.

     H.    Adverse Impacts on Adjacent Properties. The permittee shall undertake all reasonable efforts to avoid undue adverse impacts to adjacent properties and/or uses that may arise from the construction, operation, maintenance, modification and removal of the facility.

     I.      General Maintenance. The site and the facility, including, but not limited to, all landscaping, fencing and related transmission equipment, must be maintained in a neat and clean manner and in accordance with all approved plans and conditions of approval.

     J.      Graffiti Abatement. The permittee shall remove any graffiti on the wireless facility at the permittee’s sole expense subject to the provisions of Chapter 9.90. (Ord. 972 § 2, 2016)

 

17.790.100 Notice of decision—Appeals.
     A.    Notice of the Decision. Within five working days after final decision by the approval authority, notice of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application and to all other persons entitled to receive notice pursuant to Section 17.790.070. The city shall provide the reasons for any denial either in the written decision or in some other written record available at the same time as the denial.

     B.     Appeal. Subject to the applicable federal timeframe for permit application review (accounting for any tolling periods), any aggrieved party may appeal an action of the director as provided in Chapter 17.880 of this code. The planning commission shall serve as the hearing body for all appeals of all actions of the director taken pursuant to this chapter, subject to further appeal to the city council. The applicable hearing body shall limit its review to whether the project should be approved or denied in accordance with the provisions in Section 17.790.080. (Ord. 972 § 2, 2016)

 

17.790.110 Independent consultant review.
     A.    Authorization. The city council authorizes the director to, in his or her discretion, select and retain an independent consultant with expertise in telecommunications satisfactory to the director in connection with any permit application.

     B.     Scope. Subject to the provisions of subsection C, the director may require the applicant to provide, at applicant’s sole cost, independent consultant review on any issue that involves specialized or expert knowledge in connection with the permit application. Such issues may include, but are not limited to:

     1.     Permit application completeness or accuracy;

     2.     Planned compliance with applicable RF exposure standards;

     3.     Whether and where a significant gap exists or may exist, and whether such a gap relates to service coverage or service capacity;

     4.     Whether technically feasible and potentially available alternative locations and designs exist;

     5.     The applicability, reliability and sufficiency of analyses or methodologies used by the applicant to reach conclusions about any issue within this scope; and

     6.     Any other issue that requires expert or specialized knowledge identified by the director.

     C.     Deposit. The applicant must pay for the cost of any review required under subsection B and for the technical consultant’s testimony in any hearing as requested by the director and must provide a reasonable advance deposit of the estimated cost of such review with the city prior to the commencement of any work by the technical consultant. The applicant must provide an additional advance deposit to cover the consultant’s testimony and expenses at any meeting where that testimony is requested by the director. Where the advance deposit(s) are insufficient to pay for the cost of such review and/or testimony, the director shall invoice the applicant who shall pay the invoice in full within ten calendar days after receipt of the invoice. No permit shall issue to an applicant where that applicant has not timely paid a required fee, provided any required deposit or paid any invoice as required in this code. (Ord. 972 § 2, 2016)

 

17.790.120 Compliance obligations.
     An applicant or permittee will not be relieved of its obligation to comply with every applicable provision in this code, this chapter, any permit, any permit condition or any applicable law or regulation by reason of any failure by the city to timely notice, prompt or enforce compliance by the applicant or permittee. (Ord. 972 § 2, 2016)

 

17.790.130 Conflicts with prior ordinances.
     If the provisions in this chapter conflict in whole or in part with any other city regulation or ordinance adopted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the provisions in this chapter will control. (Ord. 972 § 2, 2016)

 

17.790.140 Severability.
     In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction holds any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this chapter unconstitutional, preempted, or otherwise invalid, the invalid portion shall be severed from this chapter and shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city hereby declares that it would have adopted each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this chapter irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases in this chapter might be declared unconstitutional, preempted or otherwise invalid. (Ord. 972 § 2, 2016)

 

Chapter 17.795 WIRELESS FACILITIES FOR FACILITIES NOT COVERED UNDER SECTION 6409(a) OF THE MIDDLE CLASS TAX RELIEF ACT OF 2012
17.795.010 Purpose.
     A.    The purpose of this chapter is to reasonably regulate, to the extent permitted by California and federal law, the installation, operation, collocation, modification and removal of wireless facilities in the city of Brentwood in a manner that protects and promotes public health, safety and welfare, and balances the benefits that flow from robust wireless services with the unique and historic character, aesthetics and local values of the city.

     B.     This chapter does not intend to, and shall not be interpreted or applied to: (1) prohibit or effectively prohibit personal wireless services; (2) unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services; (3) regulate the installation, operation, collocation, modification or removal of wireless facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of RF emissions to the extent that such emissions comply with all applicable FCC regulations; (4) prohibit or effectively prohibit any collocation or modification that the city may not deny under California or federal law; or (5) allow the city to preempt any applicable California or federal law. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.020 Definitions.
     “Camouflaged” means a wireless facility to which the applicant applies some concealment techniques in order to blend the equipment into the surrounding area or to appear to be an object that is congruent with its environment, but the equipment or the concealment technique is readily apparent to the observer.

     Examples include, but are not limited to, (1) façade or rooftop mounted pop-out screen boxes; (2) antennas mounted within a radome above a streetlight; or (3) faux-trees either as the only tree in the vicinity or inconsistent with other tree species in the vicinity.

     “City” means the city of Brentwood, California.

     “City council” means the city council of the city of Brentwood, California.

     “Code” means the city of Brentwood Municipal Code, as may be amended.

     “Collocation” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(2), as may be amended, which defines that term as “[t]he mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.” As an illustration and not a limitation, the FCC’s definition effectively means “to add” and does not necessarily refer to more than one wireless facility installed at a single site.

     “CPCN” means a certificate of public convenience and necessity granted by the CPUC or its duly appointed successor agency pursuant to California Public Utilities Code Section 1001 et seq., as may be amended.

     “CPUC” means the California Public Utilities Commission established in the California Constitution, Article XII, Section 5, or it’s duly appointed successor agency.

     “Director” means the director of community development of the city of Brentwood, California, or designee.

     “Director of public works” means the director of public works or city engineer of the city of Brentwood, California, or respective designee.

     “Distributed antenna system” or “DAS” means a network of one or more antennas and related fiber optic nodes typically mounted to or located at streetlight poles, utility poles, sporting venues, arenas or convention centers which provide access and signal transfer for wireless service providers. A distributed antenna system also includes the equipment location, sometimes called a “hub” or “hotel” where the DAS network is interconnected with one or more wireless service provider’s facilities to provide the signal transfer services.

     “FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration or its duly appointed successor agency.

     “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission or its duly appointed successor agency.

     “OTARD” means antennas covered by the FCC’s Over-the-Air Reception Devices rule in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.4000 et seq., as may be amended.

     “Personal wireless services” means the same as provided in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C)(i), as may be amended, which defines the term as “commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services.”

     “Personal wireless service facilities” means the same as provided in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C)(ii), as may be amended, which defines the term as “facilities for the provision of personal wireless services.”

     “Public rights-of-way” means land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage or process of law, is reserved and dedicated to the general public for street, highway, alley, public utility or pedestrian walkway purposes, whether or not the land has been improved or accepted for maintenance by the city. Public right-of-way includes, but is not limited to, street, roadway, planter strip and sidewalk.

     “Radome” means a weatherproofed enclosure (typically constructed from fiberglass or plastic material) that protects and conceals an antenna or antennas contained therein.

     “RF” means “radio frequency” or electromagnetic waves between thirty kHz and three hundred GHz in the electromagnetic spectrum range.

     “Section 6409(a)” means Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-96, 126 Stat. 156, codified as 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a), as may be amended.

     “Small wireless facility” or “small wireless facilities” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6002(l), as may be amended or superseded.

     “Stealth facility” means a wireless facility with concealment techniques that completely screen all associated equipment from public view and are so integrated into the surrounding natural or manmade environment that the observer does not recognize the structure as a wireless facility.

     Examples include, but are not limited to: (1) wireless equipment placed completely within existing architectural features such that the installation causes no visible change to the underlying structure; (2) new architectural features that match the underlying building in architectural style, physical proportion and construction-materials quality; (3) flush-to­grade underground equipment vaults with flush-to-grade entry hatches, with wireless equipment placed completely within.

     “Unconcealed” means a wireless facility that is not a stealth facility and has no or effectively no camouflage techniques applied such that the wireless equipment is plainly obvious to the observer.

     “Wireless” means any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service transmitted over frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum.

     “Wireless facility” or “wireless facilities” means an installation used to transmit and/or receive signals over the air from facility to facility or from facility to user equipment for any wireless service and includes, but is not limited to, personal wireless services facilities. (Ord. 1009 § 1, 2019; Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.030 Applicability.
     A.    Applicable Facilities. This chapter applies to applications submitted after the effective date of this chapter for: (1) new facilities; and (2) collocations or modifications to existing facilities not submitted for approval pursuant to Section 6409(a).

     B.     Nonconforming Facilities. Any existing facility within the city’s jurisdictional boundaries that does not conform to the requirements in this chapter is deemed a nonconforming facility as defined in Section 17.610.003(D). All nonconforming facilities are subject to the provisions in Chapter 17.610, to the extent permitted under federal and state law.

     C.     Exempted Facilities. Notwithstanding subsection A, this chapter shall not apply to: (1) facilities owned and operated by the city for the city’s use; (2) amateur radio facilities; (3) OTARD antenna facilities; (4) facilities or equipment owned and operated by CPUC-regulated electric companies for use in connection with electrical power generation, transmission and distribution facilities subject to CPUC General Order 131-D; (5) applications to collocate, replace or remove transmission equipment at an existing wireless tower or base station without a substantial change in physical dimensions and submitted for approval under Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012; and (6) all small wireless facilities, which shall be subject to a permit as specified in city council policy no. 110-6, which is adopted and may be amended by city council resolution. All small wireless facilities shall comply with city council policy no. 110-6. If city council policy no. 110-6 is repealed, an application for a small wireless facility shall be processed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1009 § 2, 2019; Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.040 Required permits.
     All proposed facilities and collocations or modifications to facilities governed under this chapter shall be subject to either a conditional wireless facilities permit or an administrative wireless facilities permit from the city, unless exempted from this chapter under Section 17.795.030(C). Collocations or modifications submitted for approval pursuant to Section 6409(a) are governed under this chapter. This section delineates the required permit based on the proposed project.

     A.    Conditional Wireless Facilities Permit. A conditional wireless facilities permit is required for any new facilities and collocations or modifications to existing facilities as follows:

     1.     All unconcealed facilities;

     2.     All facilities in discouraged locations, as defined in Section 17.795.090(B);

     3.     All camouflaged (non-stealth) facilities in preferred locations, as defined in Section 17.795.090(A); and

     4.     All other facilities that do not meet the criteria for either an administrative wireless facilities permit under Section 17.795.040(B) or a Section 6409(a) collocation/modification permit under Chapter 17.790.

     B.     Administrative Wireless Facilities Permit. An administrative wireless facilities permit is required for any new facilities and collocations or modifications to existing facilities as follows:

     1.     All stealth facilities in preferred location without the need for an exception pursuant to Section 17.795.160(A); and

     2.     All camouflaged or stealth facilities in the public rights-of-way.

     C.     Accessory Wireless Use Permit. The city council authorizes the director to develop and, from time to time, amend standards and other regulations for the classification of certain wireless facilities as an accessory use subject to an administrative zoning clearance rather than a conditional wireless facilities permit or an administrative wireless facilities permit; provided, however, that any such accessory use regulations shall be subject to the following:

     1.     All standards and regulations for accessory wireless use permits, and any amendments or modifications, must be approved by a resolution of the planning commission at a noticed public hearing.

     2.     A wireless facility that meets all the design and location criteria set forth in the standards and regulations approved by the planning commission will be presumed to meet all the required findings of approval applicable to wireless facilities governed under this chapter.

     3.     No non-stealth wireless facility proposed within two hundred feet from any dwelling used or approved for a residential use may be classified as an accessory use unless the proposed facility meets all of the following criteria:

     a.     The proposed wireless facility is located in the public right-of-way;

     b.     All non-antenna equipment associated with the proposed wireless facility is placed underground;

     c.     No individual antenna on the proposed wireless facility exceeds three cubic feet in volume;

     d.     The cumulative antenna volume on any single pole does not exceed nine cubic feet; and

     e.     The proposed wireless facility is located a minimum of two hundred feet from any other wireless facility located along the same side of an arterial or collector street; and

     f.      The proposed wireless facility is located a minimum of two hundred feet from any intersection along any arterial street or collector street, unless the city in its proprietary capacity has granted a license or other access agreement for a wireless telecommunication facility to use a city-owned, non-decorative traffic signal pole at such an intersection, in which case no more than two city-owned, non-decorative traffic signal poles at any such intersection shall be permitted to be used to accommodate wireless telecommunication facilities.

     4.     The standards and regulations for accessory wireless use permits must require the applicant to submit a written application with (at a minimum) project plans, photo simulations and an independent RF compliance evaluation as required in Section 17.795.080(B)(2), (3) and (4).

     5.     All decisions on applications for an accessory wireless use permit must be in writing and contain the reasons for the approval or denial.

     6.     All approved or deemed-approved accessory wireless use permits shall be subject to all the standard conditions of approval contained in Section 17.795.100, and any other conditions imposed by other city departments.

     7.     Noticing requirements and appeals provisions for an accessory wireless use permit shall be identical to those applicable to an administrative wireless facilities permit. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.050 Other regulatory approvals.
     In addition to any conditional wireless facilities permit or administrative wireless facilities permit that may be required, the applicant must obtain all other required prior permits or other approvals from other city departments, or state or federal agencies. Any permit granted under this chapter is subject to the conditions and/or requirements of other required prior permits or other approvals from other city departments, state or federal agencies. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.060 Criteria for a conditional wireless facilities permit.
     The planning commission may approve or conditionally approve an application for a conditional wireless facilities permit only when it finds the proposal meets all the following requirements:

     A.    Public Hearing Notice. Public hearing notice has been duly given in accordance with Section 17.800.009.

 

     B.     Deemed-Approval Notice. No more than thirty days before the applicable timeframe for review expires (ninety days for collocations and one hundred fifty days for all other applications), the applicant must provide written notice to all persons entitled to notice in accordance with Section 17.800.009, as modified in this section.

     1.     The notice must contain the following statement: “California Government Code Section 65964.1 may deem the application approved in thirty days unless the city approves or disapproves the application, or the city and applicant reach a mutual tolling agreement.”

     2.     In addition to all persons entitled to notice in accordance with Section 17.800.009, the applicant must deliver written notice to the community development department, which contains the same statement required in subsection (B)(1), above, and a mailing list for public notices sent out under this subsection B. The applicant may tender such notice in person or certified United States mail.

     C.     Standard Conditional Use Permit Criteria. The proposed wireless facility conforms to all the criteria for a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 17.830.005, which may include conformance with the criteria for design and site development review in accordance with Chapter 17.820 when applicable.

     D.    Chapter 17.795 Compliance. The proposed wireless facility conforms to all the applicable criteria set out in this chapter, unless the applicant demonstrates that its proposal qualifies for the exception contained in Section 17.795.160(A).

     E.     Least Intrusive Means. The applicant provided factual evidence and a meaningful comparative analysis to show that all alternative locations and designs identified in the application review process (either by the applicant, city staff or the planning commission) were technically infeasible or not potentially available. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.070 Criteria for an administrative wireless facilities permit.
     The director may approve or conditionally approve an application for an administrative wireless facilities permit only when the director finds the proposal meets all the following requirements:

     A.    Deemed-Approval Notice. No more than thirty days before the applicable timeframe for review expires (ninety days for collocations and one hundred fifty days for all other applications), the applicant must provide written notice to the community development department and all persons entitled to notice in accordance with Section 17.800.009, if any, as modified in this section.

     1.     The notice must contain the following statement: “California Government Code Section 65964.1 may deem the application approved in thirty days unless the city approves or disapproves the application, or the city and applicant reach a mutual tolling agreement.”

     2.     In addition to all persons entitled to notice in accordance with Section 17.800.009, the applicant must deliver written notice to the community development department, which contains the same statement required in subsection (A)(1), above, and a mailing list for public notices sent out under this subsection A. The applicant may tender such notice in person or certified United States mail.

     B.     Standard Design Review Criteria. The proposed wireless facility conforms to all the criteria for design and site development review in accordance with Chapter 17.820.

     C.     Chapter 17.795 Compliance. The proposed wireless facility conforms to all the applicable criteria set out in this chapter without need for any exception pursuant to Section 17.795.160(A).

     D.    Least Intrusive Means. The applicant provided factual evidence and a meaningful comparative analysis to show that all alternative locations and designs identified in the application review process (either by the applicant, city staff or the director) were technically infeasible or not potentially available. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.080 Permit applications—Submittal and review procedures.
     All applications for a conditional wireless facilities permit or an administrative wireless facilities permit shall be subject to the provisions in this section. Applications for collocations or modifications submitted for approval pursuant to Section 6409(a) are governed under Chapter 17.790.

     A.    Permit Application Required. The city may not grant any applicant a conditional wireless facilities permit or an administrative wireless facilities permit unless the applicant has submitted a complete application.

     B.     Permit Application Content. This section governs the content of a complete permit application. The city council authorizes the director to develop and publish permit application forms, checklists, informational handouts and other related materials. Without further authorization from the city council, the director may, from time to time, update and alter the permit application forms, checklists, informational handouts and other related materials as the director deems necessary or appropriate to respond to regulatory, technological or other changes. The materials required under this subsection B are minimum requirements for any application the director may develop.

     1.     Application Fee Deposit. The applicable permit application fee established by city council resolution. In the event that the city council has not established an application fee specific to wireless permit applications, the established fee for a conditional use permit shall be required.

     2.     Site Development Plans. A fully dimensioned site plan and elevation drawings prepared and sealed by a California-licensed engineer showing any existing wireless facilities with all existing transmission equipment and other improvements, the proposed facility with all proposed transmission equipment and other improvements and the legal boundaries of the leased or owned area surrounding the proposed facility and any associated access or utility easements.

     3.     Photographs and Photo Simulations. Photographs and photo simulations that show the proposed facility in context of the site from reasonable line-of-sight locations from public streets or other adjacent viewpoints, together with a map that shows the photo location of each view angle.

     4.     RF Exposure Compliance Report. An RF exposure compliance report prepared and certified by an RF engineer acceptable to the city that certifies that the proposed facility, as well as any collocated facilities, will comply with applicable federal RF exposure standards and exposure limits. The RF report must include the actual frequency and power levels (in watts ERP) for all existing and proposed antennas at the site and exhibits that show the location and orientation of all transmitting antennas and the boundaries of areas with RF exposures in excess of the uncontrolled/general population limit (as that term is defined by the FCC) and also limit (as that term is defined by the FCC). Each such boundary shall be clearly marked and identified for every transmitting antenna at the project site.

     5.     Statement of Purpose. A written statement that includes: (a) a description of the technical objectives to be achieved; (b) an annotated topographical map that identifies the targeted service area to be benefitted; (c) the estimated number of potentially affected users in the targeted service area; and (d) full-color signal propagation maps with objective units of signal strength measurement that show the applicant’s current service coverage levels from all adjacent sites without the proposed site, predicted service coverage levels from all adjacent sites with the proposed site, and predicted service coverage levels from the proposed site without all adjacent sites.

     6.     Alternative Sites Analysis. The applicant must provide a list of all existing structures considered as alternatives to the proposed location, together with a general description of the site design considered at each location. The applicant must also provide a written explanation for why the alternatives considered were unacceptable or infeasible, unavailable or not as consistent with the development standards in this chapter as the proposed location. This explanation must include a meaningful comparative analysis and such technical information and other factual justification as are necessary to document the reasons why each alternative is unacceptable, infeasible, unavailable or not as consistent with the development standards in this chapter as the proposed location. If an existing facility is listed among the alternatives, the applicant must specifically address why the modification of such wireless communication facility is not a viable option. An alternative sites analysis for a facility proposed to be located within the public right-of-way may exclude potential alternatives outside the public right-of-way.

     7.     Noise Study. A noise study prepared and certified by an engineer for the proposed facility and all associated equipment including all environmental control units, sump pumps, temporary backup power generators, and permanent backup power generators demonstrating compliance with the city’s noise regulations. The noise study must also include an analysis of the manufacturers’ specifications for all noise­ emitting equipment and a depiction of the proposed equipment relative to all adjacent property lines. In lieu of a noise study, the applicant may submit evidence from the equipment manufacturer that the ambient noise emitted from all the proposed equipment will not, both individually and cumulatively, exceed the applicable limits.

     C.     Pre-Application Meeting Appointment. Prior to application submittal, applicants must schedule and attend a pre-application meeting with design review staff for all proposed facilities on poles, vacant properties or in residential zones. Such pre-application meeting is intended to streamline the application review through discussions including, but not limited to, the appropriate project classification, including whether the project may qualify for a Section 6409(a) collocation/
modification permit; potential concealment issues (if applicable); coordination with other city departments responsible for application review; and application completeness issues. For all other projects, pre-application meetings are strongly encouraged but not required. Design review staff will endeavor to provide applicants with an appointment within approximately five business days after receipt of a written or email request. For any applicant that schedules, attends and fully participates in a pre-application meeting, the director may grant a written exemption from a specific application requirement or requirements when the applicant shows that the information requested is duplicative of information unnecessary for the city’s review of a particular project. Any such written waiver shall be limited to the project discussed at the pre-application meeting and shall not extend to any other projects.

     D.    Application Submittal Appointment. All applications must be submitted to the city at a pre-scheduled appointment. Applicants may submit one application per appointment but may schedule successive appointments for multiple applications whenever feasible as determined by the city. City staff will endeavor to provide applicants with an appointment within five business days after a request.

     E.     Application Resubmittal Appointment. All resubmittals of applications must be submitted to the city at a pre-scheduled appointment. Applicants may resubmit one application per appointment but may schedule successive appointments for multiple applications whenever feasible for the city. City staff will endeavor to provide applicants with an appointment within five business days after receipt of a written or email request.

     F.     Deemed-Withdrawn Applications. To promote efficient review and timely decisions, an application will be automatically deemed withdrawn when an applicant fails to tender a substantive response within ninety days after the city deems the application incomplete in a written notice to the applicant. The director may, in the director’s sole discretion, grant a written extension for up to an additional thirty days upon a written request for an extension received prior to the ninetieth day. The director may grant further written extensions only for good cause, which includes circumstances outside the applicant’s reasonable control. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.090 Development standards.
     A.    Preferred Locations. The city prefers wireless facilities in the locations listed below. Applicants should propose new facilities in these locations to the extent feasible. The list orders locations from most preferred to least preferred:

     1.     City-owned, non-residentially zoned.

     2.     Industrial.

     3.     Commercial.

     4.     Institutional (e.g., schools and churches).

     B.     Discouraged Locations. The city discourages wireless facilities in the locations listed below. Applicants should avoid proposals in these locations to the extent feasible, and applications in discouraged locations must be for stealth facilities. The list orders locations from most discouraged to least discouraged:

     1.     Residential or mixed-use.

     2.     Agricultural.

     3.     Parks and open space.

     C.     General Design Standards and Guidelines. All proposed wireless facilities and modifications subject to either a conditional wireless facilities permit or an administrative wireless facilities permit must conform to the design standards and guidelines in this section.

     1.     Concealment. Subject to the review and approval of the director, new wireless facilities and substantial changes to existing wireless facilities must incorporate concealment measures sufficient to render the facility either camouflaged or stealth, as appropriate for the proposed location and design.

     2.     Height. A wireless facility must not exceed the applicable height limit for structures in the applicable zone.

     3.     Setbacks. A wireless facility may not encroach into any applicable setback for structures in the applicable zone.

     4.     Collocation. Applicants must design their facilities to accommodate future collocated facilities to the extent feasible.

     5.     Fences. Any fences proposed in connection with a wireless facility must blend with the natural and/or man-made surroundings in the director’s reasonable discretion. The director may require additional landscape features to screen fences. The director may not approve barbed wire, razor ribbon, electrified fences or any similar measures to secure a wireless facility, except when the applicant demonstrates that the need for such measures significantly outweighs the potential danger to the public.

     6.     Backup or Standby Power Sources or Generators. The director may not approve any fossil fuel-powered backup power sources or generators unless the applicant demonstrates that it cannot feasibly achieve its power needs with batteries, natural gas powered generators, fuel cells, solar or other similarly non-polluting, low noise­level means.

     7.     Lights. Unless otherwise required pursuant to FAA or FCC regulations, applicants may install only timed or motion-sensitive light controllers and lights, and must install such lights so as to avoid illumination impacts to adjacent properties to the maximum extent feasible. The director may, in his or her discretion, exempt an applicant from the foregoing requirement when the applicant demonstrates a substantial public safety need. All aircraft warning lighting must use lighting enclosures that avoid illumination impacts to properties in the city to the maximum extent feasible.

     8.     Noise. A wireless facility and all equipment associated with a wireless facility must be compliant with, and will be subject to, the provisions in Section 9.32.020 et seq.

     9.     Parking. A wireless facility may not cause any net loss in parking.

     10.   Signage. No signs, banners, flags or any other advertising media may be affixed to a wireless facility unless required for compliance with applicable federal, state or city permit regulation or permit condition. Small site identification and radio frequency signage are permitted.

     D.    Freestanding Wireless Facilities. In addition to the generally applicable standards and guidelines provided in subsection C, all proposed freestanding wireless facilities or modifications to freestanding wireless facilities must conform to the standards and guidelines in this subsection D.

     1.     Tower-Mounted Equipment. All tower-mounted equipment must be mounted as close to the vertical support structure as possible to reduce its visual profile. Applicants should mount non-antenna, tower-mounted equipment (including, but not limited to, remote radio units/heads, surge suppressors, and utility demarcation boxes) directly behind the antennas to the maximum extent feasible.

     2.     Ground-Mounted Equipment. Applicants must conceal ground-mounted equipment within opaque fences or other opaque enclosures. The director may require, as a condition of approval, design and/or landscape features in addition to other concealment when necessary to blend the equipment or enclosure into the surrounding environment.

     3.     New Faux-Trees. The director may approve a new freestanding wireless facility camouflaged as a faux-tree only when it blends with mature natural trees in proximity to the proposed wireless facility. The director may require the applicant to plant new trees to adequately conceal the proposed faux-tree wireless facility.

     4.     Fall Zone. All freestanding towers must be set back from all adjacent property lines by a distance equal to one hundred ten percent of the overall tower height above ground level.

     E.     Building-Mounted Wireless Facilities. In addition to the generally applicable standards and guidelines provided in subsection C, all proposed building-mounted wireless facilities or modifications to building-mounted wireless facilities must conform to the standards and guidelines in this subsection E.

     1.     Façade-Mounted Equipment. Applicants must conceal all façade-mounted transmission equipment behind screen walls as flush to the façade as practicable. The director may not approve any “pop-out” screen boxes unless such design is architecturally consistent with the original support structure. The director may not approve any exposed façade-mounted antennas, which includes exposed antennas painted to match the façade.

     2.     Rooftop-Mounted Equipment. All equipment mounted on rooftops must be screened from public view with concealment that matches the underlying structure in proportion, quality, architectural style and finish. The director may approve unscreened rooftop equipment only when it expressly includes a condition of approval that such equipment is effectively concealed due to its low height and setback from the roofline.

     3.     Ground-Mounted Equipment. Outdoor ground-mounted equipment associated with building-mounted wireless facilities must be avoided whenever feasible. In locations visible or accessible to the public, applicants must conceal outdoor ground-mounted equipment with opaque fences or landscape features that mimic the adjacent structure(s) (including, but not limited to, dumpster corrals and other accessory structures).

     F.     Wireless Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way. In addition to the generally applicable standards and guidelines provided in subsections A through D above, all proposed wireless facilities in the rights-of-way or modifications to such wireless facilities must conform to the standards and guidelines in this subsection F.

     1.     Locational Criteria. For the purpose of this chapter, a location in the public right-of­ way will be deemed to be the same rank order as the nearest district that abuts that location and subject to the height limitation for that nearest abutting district. In addition to the locational preferences set out in subsection A above, the city prefers wireless facilities placed on the rights-of-way structures listed below. The list orders locations from most preferred to least preferred.

     a.     Existing city-owned structures.

     b.     Other existing structures.

     c.     New structures.

     2.     Undergrounded Equipment. To conceal the non-antenna equipment, applicants shall install all non-antenna equipment underground to the greatest extent feasible. Additional expense to install and maintain an underground equipment enclosure does not exempt an applicant from this requirement. The approval authority may waive undergrounding requirements if unusual topographic, soil or other unusual problems (other than additional expense) make such underground installations unreasonable or impractical in accordance with the following:

     a.     If the requirement to underground is waived, the approval authority may require the recordation of an improvement agreement, requiring the applicant, equipment owner and any subsequent equipment owner of the subject facility to join an underground utility assessment district, reimbursement district or similar improvement district, when such a district is formed, and to guarantee participation in such district by posting an improvement bond and recording a lien against the subject facility.

     b.     The applicant and/or equipment owner may submit information supporting a request for such waivers.

     c.     No waiver shall be granted in any undergrounding district previously established.

     3.     Ground-Mounted Equipment. Applicants must install ground-mounted equipment that cannot be placed underground in a location that does not unreasonably obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

     4.     Pole-Mounted Equipment. All pole-mounted equipment must be installed as close to the pole as technically and legally feasible to minimize impacts to the visual profile. Antennas must be screened within a radome or other similar concealment technique. All required or permitted signage in the rights-of-way must face toward the street or otherwise placed to minimize visibility from adjacent sidewalks and structures. All conduits, conduit attachments, cables, wires and other connectors must be placed within the pole when possible or otherwise concealed from public view to the extent feasible.

     5.     Non-Reflective Finishes. All above-ground or pole-mounted equipment in the rights-of-way must not be finished with reflective materials unless approved by the director of public works. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.100 Standard conditions of approval.
     All applications for a conditional wireless facilities permit or an administrative wireless facilities permit shall be subject to the standard conditions of approval provided in this section. The planning commission or director may add, remove or modify any conditions of approval as necessary or appropriate to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare.

     A.    Permit Duration. The permit will automatically expire ten years from the issuance date, except when California Government Code Section 65964(b), as may be amended, authorizes the city to issue a permit with a shorter term.

     B.     Compliance with All Applicable Laws. The permittee shall at all times maintain compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws. regulations, ordinance or other rules.

     C.     Inspections; Emergencies. The city or its designee may enter onto the facility area to inspect the facility upon reasonable notice to the permittee. The permittee shall cooperate with all inspections. The city reserves the right to enter or direct its designee the facility and support, repair, disable or remove any elements of the facility in emergencies or when the facility threatens imminent harm to persons or property.

     D.    Contact Information for Responsible Parties. The permittee shall at all times maintain accurate contact information for all parties responsible for the facility, which shall include a phone number, street mailing address and email address for at least one natural person. All such contact information for responsible parties shall be provided to the director within one business day of permittee’s receipt of the director’s written request.

     E.     Indemnities. The permittee and, if applicable, the non-government owner of the private property upon which the tower/and or base station is installed shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers, officials and employees: (1) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs and expenses and from any and all claims, demands, law suits, writs of mandamus and other actions or proceedings brought against the city or its agents, officers, officials or employees to challenge, attack, seek to modify, set aside, void or annul the city’s approval of the permit; and (2) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs and expenses and any and all claims, demands, law suits or causes of action and other actions or proceedings of any kind or form, whether for personal injury, death or property damage, arising out of or in connection with the activities or performance of the permittee or, if applicable, the private property owner or any of each one’s agents, employees, licensees, contractors, subcontractors or independent contractors. The permittee shall be responsible for costs of determining the source of the interference, all costs associated with eliminating the interference, and all costs arising from third party claims against the city attributable to the interference. In the event the city becomes aware of any such actions or claims the city shall promptly notify the permittee and the private property owner and shall reasonably cooperate in the defense. It is expressly agreed that the city shall have the right to approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, the legal counsel providing the city’s defense, and the property owner and/or permittee (as applicable) shall reimburse the city for any costs and expenses directly and necessarily incurred by the city in the course of the defense.

     F.     Adverse Impacts on Adjacent Properties. The permittee shall undertake all reasonable efforts to avoid undue adverse impacts to adjacent properties and/or uses that may arise from the construction, operation, maintenance, modification and removal of the facility.

     G.    General Maintenance. The site and the facility, including, but not limited to, all landscaping, fencing and related transmission equipment, must be maintained in a neat and clean manner and in accordance with all approved plans and conditions of approval.

     H.    Graffiti Abatement. The permittee shall remove any graffiti on the wireless facility at permittee sole expense subject to the provisions of Chapter 9.90. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.110 Notice of decision—Appeals.
     A.    Notice of the Decision. Within five working days after final decision by the approval authority, notice of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application and to all other persons who have filed a written request for notice of the reasons for any denial either in the written decision or in some other written record available at the same time as the denial.

     B.     Conditional Wireless Facilities Permits. Any person or entity may appeal a final decision by the planning commission in accordance with Chapter 17.880. The appeal must state in plain terms the grounds for reversal and the facts that support those grounds. The appellant must pay a fee established by a resolution of the city council at the time the appeal is filed. The city council shall review the decision of the planning commission solely on the specific issues raised by the appellant(s). The city council shall review the decision of the planning commission de novo.

     C.     Administrative Wireless Facilities Permits. Any person or entity may appeal a final decision by the director in accordance with Chapter 17.880. The appeal must state in plain terms the grounds for reversal and the facts that support those grounds. The appellant must pay a fee established by a resolution of the city council at the time the appeal is filed. The planning commission shall review the decision of the director solely on the specific issues raised by the appellant(s). The planning commission shall review the decision of the director de novo. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.120 Permit renewal.
     Any application to renew a permit granted under this chapter must be tendered to the city between three hundred sixty-five days and one hundred eighty days prior to the expiration of the current permit, and shall be accompanied by all required application materials, fees and deposits for a new application as then in effect. The city shall review an application for permit renewal in accordance with the standards for new facilities then as then in effect. The director may, but is not obligated to, grant a written temporary extension on the permit term to allow sufficient time to review a timely submitted permit renewal application. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.130 Permit revocation.
     A.    Grounds for Revocation. A permit granted under this chapter may be revoked for noncompliance with any enforceable permit, permit condition or law provision applicable to the facility.

     B.     Revocation Procedures.

     1.     When the director finds reason to believe that grounds for permit revocation exist, the director shall send written notice by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, to the permittee at the permittee’s last known address that states the nature of the noncompliance as grounds for permit revocation. The permittee shall have a reasonable time from the date of the notice to cure the noncompliance or show that no noncompliance ever occurred.

     2.     If after notice and opportunity to show that no noncompliance ever occurred or to cure the noncompliance, the permittee fails to cure the noncompliance, the city council shall conduct a noticed public hearing to determine whether to revoke the permit for the uncured noncompliance. The permittee shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard and may speak and submit written materials to the city council. After the noticed public hearing, the city council may revoke or suspend the permit when it finds that the permittee had notice of the noncompliance and an enforceable permit, permit condition or law applicable to the facility. Written notice of the city council’s determination and the reasons therefor shall be dispatched by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, to the permittee’s last known address. Upon revocation, the city council may take any legally permissible action or combination of actions necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.140 Decommissioned or abandoned wireless facilities.
     A.    Decommissioned Wireless Facilities. Any permittee that intends to decommission a wireless facility must send thirty days’ prior written notice by United States certified mail to the director. The permit will automatically expire thirty days after the director receives such notice of intent to decommission, unless the permittee rescinds its notice within the thirty-day period.

     B.     Procedures for Abandoned Facilities.

     1.     To promote the public health, safety and welfare, the director may declare a facility abandoned when:

     a.     The permittee notifies the director that it abandoned the use of a facility for a continuous period of ninety days; or

     b.     The permittee fails to respond within thirty days to a written notice sent by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, from the director that states the basis for the director’s belief that the facility has been abandoned for a continuous period of ninety days; or

     c.     The permit expires and the permittee has failed to file a timely application for renewal.

     2.     After the director declares a facility abandoned, the permittee shall have ninety days from the date of the declaration (or longer time as the director may approve in writing as reasonably necessary) to:

     a.     Reactivate the use of the abandoned facility subject to the provisions of this chapter and all conditions of approval;

     b.     Transfer its rights to use the facility, subject to the provisions of this chapter and all conditions of approval, to another person or entity that immediately commences use of the abandoned facility; or

     c.     Remove the facility and all improvements installed solely in connection with the facility, and restore the site to a condition compliant with all applicable codes consistent with the then-existing surrounding area.

     3.     If the permittee fails to act as required in subsection (B)(2) within the prescribed time period, the city council may deem the facility abandoned and revoke the underlying permit(s) at a noticed public meeting in the same manner as provided in Section 17.795.130(B)(2). Further, the city council may take any legally permissible action or combination of actions reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare from the abandoned wireless facility. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.150 Wireless facilities removal or relocation.
     A.    Removal by Permittee. The permittee or property owner must completely remove the wireless facility and all related improvements within ninety days after the: (1) permit expires; (2) city council properly revokes a permit pursuant to Section 17.795.130(B); (3) permittee decommissions the wireless facility, or (4) city council properly deems the wireless facility abandoned pursuant to Section 17.795.140(B). In addition and within the ninety-day period, the permittee or property owner must restore the former wireless facility site area to a condition compliant with all applicable codes and consistent with the then-existing surrounding area.

     B.     Removal by City. The city may, but is not obligated to, remove an abandoned wireless facility, restore the site to a condition compliant with all applicable codes and consistent with the then-existing surrounding area, and repair any and all damages that occurred in connection with such removal and restoration work. The city may, but shall not be obligated to, store the removed wireless facility or any part thereof, and may use, sell or otherwise dispose of it in any manner the city deems appropriate in its sole discretion. The last-known permittee or its successor-in-interest and, if on private property, the real property owner shall be jointly liable for all costs incurred by the city in connection with its removal, restoration, repair and storage, and shall promptly reimburse the city upon receipt of a written demand, including any interest on the balance owing at the maximum lawful rate. The city may, but shall not be obligated to, use any financial security required in connection with the granting of the facility permit to recover its costs and interest. A lien may be placed on all abandoned personal property and the real property on which the abandoned wireless facility is located for all costs incurred in connection with any removal, repair, restoration and storage performed by the city. The city clerk shall cause such a lien to be recorded with the county of Contra Costa clerk-recorder’s office.

     C.     Relocation Procedures for Facilities in the Rights-of-Way. After reasonable written notice to the permittee, the director of public works may require a permittee, at the permittee’s sole expense and in accordance with the standards in this chapter applicable to such wireless facility, to relocate or reconfigure a wireless facility in the public rights-of-way as the director of public works deems necessary to maintain or reconfigure the rights-of-way for other public projects or take any actions necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare. The provisions in this section are intended to include circumstances in which a wireless facility is installed on a pole scheduled for undergrounding. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.160 Limited exemptions—Variances.
     A.    Limited Exemption for Personal Wireless Service Facilities. The city council recognizes that federal law prohibits a permit denial when it would effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services and the applicant proposes the least intrusive means to provide such services. The city council finds that, due to wide variation among wireless facilities, technical service objectives and changed circumstances over time, a limited exemption for proposals in which strict compliance with this chapter would effectively prohibit personal wireless services serves the public interest. The city council further finds that circumstances in which an effective prohibition may occur are extremely difficult to discern, and that specified findings to guide the analysis promotes clarity and the city’s legitimate interest in well-planned wireless facilities deployment.

     Therefore, in the event that any applicant asserts that strict compliance with any provision in this chapter, as applied to a specific proposed personal wireless services facility, would effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services, the planning commission may grant a limited, one-time exemption from strict compliance subject to the provisions in this subsection A.

     1.     Required Findings. The planning commission shall not grant any exemption unless the applicant demonstrates with clear and convincing evidence all the following:

     a.     The proposed wireless facility qualifies as a “personal wireless services facility” as defined in United States Code, Title 47, Section 332(c)(7)(C)(ii);

     b.     The applicant has provided the city with a clearly defined technical service objective and a clearly defined potential site search area;

     c.     The applicant has provided the city with a meaningful comparative analysis that includes the factual reasons why any alternative location(s) or design(s) suggested by the city or otherwise identified in the administrative record, including but not limited to potential alternatives identified at any public meeting or hearing, are not technically feasible or potentially available; and

     d.     The applicant has provided the city with a meaningful comparative analysis that includes the factual reasons why the proposed location and design deviation is the least noncompliant location and design necessary to reasonably achieve the applicant’s reasonable technical service objectives.

     2.     Scope of Exemption. The planning commission shall limit its exemption to the extent to which the applicant demonstrates such exemption is necessary to reasonably achieve its reasonable technical service objectives. The planning commission may adopt conditions of approval as reasonably necessary to promote the purposes in this chapter and protect the public health, safety and welfare.

     B.     Variances. All other requests to relax or waive any provision under this chapter for any non-personal wireless services facility are subject to the variance procedures under Chapter 17.860. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.170 Independent consultant review.
     A.    Authorization. The city council authorizes the director to, in his or her discretion, select and retain an independent consultant with expertise in telecommunications satisfactory to the director in connection with any permit application.

     B.     Scope. The director may request independent consultant review on any issue that involves specialized or expert knowledge in connection with the permit application. Such issues may include, but are not limited to:

     1.     Permit application completeness or accuracy;

     2.     Planned compliance with applicable RF exposure standards;

     3.     Whether and where a significant gap exists or may exist, and whether such a gap relates to service coverage or service capacity;

     4.     Whether technically feasible and potentially available alternative locations and designs exist;

     5.     The applicability, reliability and sufficiency of analyses or methodologies used by the applicant to reach conclusions about any issue within this scope; and

     6.     Any other issue that requires expert or specialized knowledge identified by the director.

     C.     Deposit. The applicant must pay for the cost of such review and for the technical consultant’s testimony in any hearing as requested by the director and must provide a reasonable advance deposit of the estimated cost of such review with the city prior to the commencement of any work by the technical consultant. The applicant must provide an additional advance deposit to cover the consultant’s testimony and expenses at any meeting where that testimony is requested by the director. Where the advance deposit(s) are insufficient to pay for the cost of such review and/or testimony, the director shall invoice the applicant who shall pay the invoice in full within ten calendar days after receipt of the invoice. No permit shall issue to an applicant where that applicant has not timely paid a required fee, provided any required deposit or paid any invoice as required in this code. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.180 Compliance obligations.
     An applicant or permittee will not be relieved of its obligation to comply with every applicable provision in this code, this chapter, any permit, any permit condition or any applicable law or regulation by reason of any failure by the city to timely notice, prompt or enforce compliance by the applicant or permittee. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.190 Conflicts with prior ordinances.
     If the provisions in this chapter conflict in whole or in part with any other city regulation or ordinance adopted prior to the effective date of this chapter, the provisions in this chapter will control. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

 

17.795.200 Severability.
     In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction holds any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this chapter unconstitutional, preempted, or otherwise invalid, the invalid portion shall be severed from this chapter and shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city hereby declares that it would have adopted each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this chapter irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases in this chapter might be declared unconstitutional, preempted or otherwise invalid. (Ord. 971 § 2, 2016)

Article XI. Administrative Procedure and Permits Regulations
Chapter 17.800 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND PERMITS
17.800.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this article shall be known as the “administrative procedure and permits regulations” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to provide administrative and legislative procedures for the review of plans, the processing and review of applications for consideration and relief under this title, for appeal procedure with respect to zoning administrator and commission determinations and interpretations, and ordinance amendment procedures. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.800.003 Zoning administrator—Appointment, authority and duties.
     A.    The office of zoning administrator for the city of Brentwood is established, and the city planning director is designated and appointed as zoning administrator.

     B.     The zoning administrator shall have all powers and authority and shall perform all functions authorized by Government Code Section 65900 et seq., as now existing or hereafter amended or added to and as authorized by the zoning ordinance and delegated by resolution of the planning commission or city council.

     C.     It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to administer this title and the rules of the planning commission. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.800.005 Permits—General.
     Application for any permit, variance, appeal, zoning ordinance amendment or other entitlement provided by this title shall be prepared and submitted by the applicant, shall be processed by the city and shall be reviewed by the appropriate body or person pursuant to this chapter and the more specific provisions set forth in subsequent chapters for the specific entitlement. (Ord. 408,, 1987)

 

17.800.006 Application.
     Any application for a permit, variance, appeal, zoning ordinance amendment or other entitlement to be considered by the city, shall be made on a form prescribed by the city and signed by the applicant and the owner of the affected property or authorized agent and shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed by a separate city ordinance. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.800.007 Supporting information.
     Applications to be considered by the city shall be accompanied by the following supporting information as may be applicable:

     A.    A legal description of the property (required);

     B.     A location map showing the project site and the general vicinity of the site (required);

     C.     A completed environmental information form as prescribed by the city in its CEQA Guidelines (required);

     D.    Site plans, elevation plans, floor plans and other maps and data as may be necessary to describe the existing conditions on and surrounding the property and the proposed plans for the future development of the property. The planning commission shall by resolution, maintain a listing of the minimum documentation necessary for submittal in support of each type of application;

     E.     Such other information specified in this title for the particular entitlement requested. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.800.008 Fee refund procedure.
     The zoning administrator may refund an application fee in whole upon a determination that the application was erroneously required or filed. He may refund the fee pro rata, based on the cost of processing the application, if the application is withdrawn prior to a decision thereon. The zoning administrator’s determination shall be subject to appeal pursuant to the administrative appeal procedure of this title. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.800.009 Public hearing notice.
     Whenever the provisions of this title state that a public hearing shall be held, the public hearing notice shall be given as follows:

     A.    Through mailing of a public hearing notice to the following:

     1.     The applicant and/or property owner/s or their duly authorized agent,

     2.     The owners of all property within three hundred feet of the subject site as shown on the latest equalized assessment rolls,

     3.     Any person who has filed a written request with either the city clerk or the city council,

     4.     Each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools or other essential facilities or services to the property which is the subject of the application, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected;

     B.     Publication once in one newspaper of general circulation in the city;

     C.     At the time of project submittal and before an application may be deemed complete (pursuant to the State Permit Streamlining Act) by city staff, the project applicant shall erect on-site a sign(s) that identifies their proposed project. The following standards shall be adhered to:

     1.     The sign shall be four feet by eight feet, unless another size is determined appropriate by the community development department director,

     2.     The sign(s) shall be erected adjacent to each public right-of-way street frontage that the project site abuts, but shall not create sight distance problems along the adjacent rights-of-way,

     3.     The actual text on the sign shall include a description of the nature of the action being considered, the appropriate City Hall phone number to call for questions on the proposed project, and be readable from the adjacent right-of-way,

     4.     The project applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the sign(s) in a satisfactory condition, and for adding a hearing date when that has been determined by the city,

     5.     The project applicant shall remove all sign(s) at the start of project construction or when project approvals have expired, whichever comes first;

     D.    Alternative or additional notice may also be given pursuant to Section 65091 of the Government Code;

     E.     All mailing or publication shall be accomplished at least ten days prior to the public hearing;

     F.     The failure of any person to receive notice required by this section, shall not affect the authority of the city to act on a matter before it, provided proper notice has been found to be given. (Ord. 665 §§ 1, 2, 2001; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.800.010 Review procedure.
     Upon submittal to the city, applications shall be processed in accordance with the following:

     A.    Preliminary Review. Within thirty days following initial submittal of an application the following actions shall be taken by the zoning administrator or other responsible administrative officer:

     1.     A determination shall be made as to whether the application is in order and complete pursuant to city requirements, CEQA and local CEQA Guidelines.

     2.     If the application is determined to be not in order or complete the applicant shall be notified of the deficiencies in the application and/or specific data necessary to make it complete.

     3.     At such time as the application is determined to be complete it shall be so certified on the application form.

     B.     Initial Study. Following certification that an application is complete the city shall review the proposal conducting any studies necessary for its proper consideration and causing the preparation of reports for the reviewing body including any prerequisite environmental documents.

     C.     Final Review and Action. The filing date of an application shall be the date the application is certified to be complete after which the following actions shall be taken.

     1.     If the matter is one requiring a public hearing, a public hearing date shall be set and advertised pursuant to Section 17.800.009.

     2.     If the matter is one allowing zoning administrator or other administrative officer action, the matter shall be reviewed and action shall be taken.

     3.     If the matter is one requiring planning commission action or recommendation to the city council, the matter will be forwarded to the planning commission for their review and action or recommendation.

     4.     If the matter is one requiring city council action the matter will be forwarded to the city council for their review and action. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.800.011 Effective date of action.
     Except in the case of a zoning ordinance amendment and development agreements and in the absence of any appeal, action on any permit or other entitlement shall become effective fourteen days after the date of decision. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.800.012 Amendment.
     Requests for modification of a project or any request for modification of the conditions of approval or extension of time shall be subject to the same procedure and regulations as those applicable to the original application; provided, however, that any application for a time extension must be filed prior to the expiration date of the permit, variance or other entitlement. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.800.013 Procedures and permits enumerated.
     The following permits or other procedures or entitlements may be used to accomplish the purposes of this title:

     A.    Chapter 17.810, Development Agreements;

     B.     Chapter 17.820, Design and Site Development Review;

     C.     Chapter 17.830, Conditional Use Permit;

     D.    Chapter 17.840, Home Occupation Permit;

     E.     Chapter 17.850, Temporary Use Permit;

     F.     Chapter 17.860, Variance;

     G.    Chapter 17.870, Zoning Ordinance Amendment;

     H.    Chapter 17.880, Appeal;

     I.      Chapter 17.890, Enforcement and Penalties. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.805 PHASED DEVELOPMENT PLAN
17.805.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this title shall be known as the “phased development plan.”

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to regulate residential development in an orderly manner to ensure that necessary public facilities and services are available when development occurs; to bring facilities and services up to appropriate standards when development occurs; and to ensure that new development pays its fair share of adding facilities and service. (Ord. 423 § 2, 1988)

 

17.805.002 Definitions.
     Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning established by this section unless from the context it is apparent that another meaning is intended.

     A.    “Building permit” means the final city approval before construction may begin.

     B.     “Capital improvements financing program” (CIFP) means a program adopted by the City Council to finance and construct the capital improvements required to serve a certain level of development permitted and planned within the city. A CIFP may also be used to finance the operation and maintenance of capital improvements and may utilize any of the public or private financing techniques available under California law or combination thereof.

     C.     “City manager” also includes the city manager’s designee.

     D.    “Developer” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or other business entity, who proposes to engage in development.

     E.     “Development allotment” or “allotment” means the city approval which must be obtained by a developer before a building permit can be issued. An “allotment” is an entitlement to apply for a building permit when issued pursuant to the provisions of this phased development plan.

     F.     “Residential development” means the whole of any development project containing residential uses not expressly exempted from this phased development plan. Development exempted by this chapter shall not be considered residential development except as otherwise provided herein.

     G.    “Uniform Development Agreement (UDA)” is a development agreement under authority of Government Code Section 65864 et seq., with substantially the same uniform terms and conditions used for a single capital improvements financing program.

     This chapter shall be interpreted and administered by the city manager.

     Any development agreements entered into by the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter. Any commitments to allow development pursuant to a development agreement shall be conditioned upon compliance with this chapter and any numerical development allotment limits set by resolution of the city council as part of a CIFP. (Ord. 423 § 2, 1988)

 

17.805.003 Capital improvements financing program.
     A.    From time to time, the city council may adopt a capital improvements financing program (CIFP) for a certain level of development permitted and planned within the city. Whenever the council adopts a CIFP, it shall also determine the total number of residential development allotments available as part of the CIFP. The development allotments may run with the land for the period designated in the implementing resolution.

     B.     At such time as the city council approves a CIFP, the council shall by resolution establish the number of units to be permitted annually, the anticipated time frame for development to occur, and the identified properties, if any, to be included within the proposed CIFP. The phasing and timing of development allotments in any individual CIFP shall take into consideration such factors as the number and type of residential projects, the current availability of necessary improvements, the fair share housing needs, regional housing market conditions, the ability of the individual properties to finance new infrastructure, and other factors affecting the ability of the city to absorb new growth.

     C.     If as part of any CIFP there is additional capacity for residential development beyond that anticipated by the initial resolution, the city council may amend the initial resolution to incorporate the additional development.

     D.    At the request of any owner of a legal or equitable interest of real property who applies for inclusion within a proposed CIFP, the city council may enter into a uniform development agreement (UDA) with the owner. The UDA, if enacted by the council, shall incorporate the annual development entitlement, if any, for the property which is the subject of the agreement, as established by the development phasing schedule for the CIFP. Said request shall be made no later than twenty days after the city council has adopted a resolution of intent to form a CIFP or has committed the city to implement any other public financing mechanism. If the city council adopts an enacting ordinance for a UDA, it may condition the UDA upon the property owner’s vote to include his or her property within an assessment district, payment of the required development fees, or upon a similar irrevocable commitment to an approved financing mechanism.

     E.     Modification of Phasing Plan. The city council may, after notice and public hearing, change any part of this development phasing plan by amendment in accordance with Chapter 17.870 of this title, provided the amendment is consistent with the then existing general plan and any applicable specific plans. (Ord. 423 § 2, 1988)

 

17.805.004 Development allotment.
     A.    Unless exempted by the provisions of this chapter, no building permit for new residential development shall be issued unless a development allotment pursuant to this chapter for the project has been granted. Prior to obtaining a building permit, the developer of proposed residential projects not exempted from the development allotment requirement shall apply for a development allotment as set forth below.

     All new development, whether exempted from the development allotment requirement or covered by it, must meet all other applicable laws and policies in effect at the time the application is deemed complete, including an assurance that adequate water, sewer, drainage and roadway capacity, educational facilities and other public services as determined by the city council, are available.

     B.     Exemptions to Development Allotment Requirement.

     1.     The following type of development projects are exempt from the allotment requirement, so long as they participate in a capital improvements financing program.

     a.     Development projects of ten or fewer dwelling units in the redevelopment project area;

     b.     Residential development projects for four or fewer units by any single developer in one year;

     c.     Residential development projects consisting of subdivisions where the final map has been approved by the city prior to January 12, 1988;

     d.     Housing which contributes to the city of Brentwood’s share of regional fair share housing needs and which is determined by the city council as necessary to implement the housing element of its general plan;

     e.     Senior citizen housing.

     2.     The granting of an exemption shall be subject to approval by the city. The planning commission shall consider the request for exemption concurrently with an application for tentative subdivision, design review or conditional use permit, whichever occurs first. If planning commission approval for the residential project is not required by ordinance, then the city manager shall consider the exemption.

     3.     The number of dwelling units which can be granted an exemption and are limited to those available in CIFP 88-1 or a subsequent capital improvement financing program.

     4.     Senior citizen housing will be granted an exemption only when there is a written agreement between the applicant and the city which restricts use to senior housing. For purposes of development allocation, two senior housing units shall be equal to one dwelling unit.

     5.     In the granting of exemptions, senior housing and residential projects within the redevelopment project area shall be given a priority over other types of exempt projects.

     C.     Exclusions. The following types of projects are excluded from the requirements of this chapter:

     1.     Projects which received an allocation for water/sewer allocations prior to November 9, 1988;

     2.     Commercial, industrial and agricultural uses, and the commercial and industrial components within a planned employment center. (Ord. 456 §§ 2(A), (B), 3(A), 1989; Ord. 423 § 2, 1988)

 

17.805.005 Eligibility.
     A.    No development allotment or exemption for new residential development shall be issued unless the city manager makes each of the following findings for a particular project:

     1.     The project has reasonable assurance of a sufficient quantity of water to provide the proposed development with a safe, potable water supply at the time of application.

     2.     The project will not create a demand for sewage collection, treatment, transmission or disposal capacity greater than that available to Brentwood at the time of application; or if these facilities require expansion, the development project will bear its fair share of the cost of the expanded facilities and the facilities will be available prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any dwelling unit in the project.

     3.     The project will not create a demand for water storage or transmission capacity greater than that available to Brentwood at the time of application; or if the water storage or transmission capacity needs expansion, the project will bear its fair share of the cost of the expanded facilities and such expansion will be completed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any dwelling unit in the project.

     4.     The project will not create a demand for water treatment capacity greater than that available to Brentwood at the time of application; or if the water treatment capacity needs expansion, the project will bear its fair share of the cost of the expanded facilities and such expansion will be completed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any dwelling unit in the project.

     5.     The project will not create a demand for circulation improvements greater than that available at the time of application; or if additional circulation improvements are needed, the project will bear its fair share of costs for the necessary roadway and thoroughfare facilities.

     6.     The project will not create a demand for other public services, as determined to be necessary by the city council, greater than those services available to Brentwood at the time of application; or if these other public services need expansion, the project will bear its fair share of the cost of the expanded facilities, and the necessary facilities will be available prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any dwelling unit in the project.

     7.     The project will not create a demand for educational facilities, as determined to be necessary by the city council, greater than those facilities available to Brentwood at the time of application; or if these educational facilities need expansion, the project will bear its fair share of the cost of the expanded facilities, and the necessary facilities will be available prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any dwelling unit in the project.

     B.     1. “Fair share of costs” may be met by payment of development fees, participation in an assessment district or in a capital improvements financing program (CIFP) as defined in this chapter, a combination of these financing mechanisms, or by any other fair and equitable method of bearing a fair share of the capital costs of improvements. The city manager will determine whether the “fair share of costs” has been met.

     2.     “Reasonable assurance” means that a program and schedule to provide the necessary services exist which can practically be complied with as determined by the city manager in accordance with the criteria established in this section. (Ord. 456 §§ 2 (C), 3(B), 1989; Ord. 423 § 2, 1988)

 

17.805.006 Administration of plan.
     A.    Applications.

     1.     Any application for a development allotment shall be made in the form specified by the city manager and shall include all the information requested.

     2.     The application shall be accompanied by the application processing fee if set by the city council.

     3.     The date the application shall be deemed filed is the date the application is submitted and determined to be complete by the city manager in accordance with the criteria established in subdivision 1 of this subsection.

     4.     All complete applications filed before the date set by the city council for acting on an CIFP will be considered in the process of granting allotments. Any allotments remaining after the initial grant of allotments may be granted at a later time as part of the same CIFP.

     B.     Other Approvals. The granting of a development allotment pursuant to the procedures and provisions of this phasing plan shall not exempt nor affect the developer’s obligation to obtain all required zoning, environmental, subdivision and other approvals as are required by statute or ordinance as a prerequisite to the application for building permits.

     C.     Vested Rights. With the exception of any rights granted in a development agreement, no rights to complete development will vest upon granting of a development allotment. The right to build a development project will not vest until a building permit has been issued for each dwelling unit, the foundation has been inspected and approved by the county building department, and substantial work has been done and substantial expenses incurred in reliance upon the building permit unless otherwise provided by a development agreement.

     D.    Appeals. The actions of the city manager pursuant to this chapter are appealable to the city council using the city’s procedures for appeal of administrative officials’ decisions in Title 17 of this code.

     E.     Judicial Review. Any legal action challenging any decision or action pursuant to this chapter must be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction within thirty days immediately following the action being challenged. (Ord. 423 § 2, 1988)

 

Chapter 17.810 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
17.810.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “development agreement procedures” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to allow the city and an applicant to enter into an agreement that will assure the city that a proposed project will proceed to its completion in compliance with the plans submitted by the applicant and to guarantee the applicant that the project can proceed to its completion in accordance with the rules and regulations in effect at the time of project approval. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.810.002 Applicability of provisions.
     A.    This procedure shall be permitted at any time a qualified applicant wishes to enter into such an agreement for development of a property with which the applicant has a legal or equitable interest.

     B.     Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to require that the city council enter into a development agreement, or that any person be required to enter into a development agreement as a condition of obtaining a permit, approval or other land use grant or entitlement from the city. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.810.003 Application.
     A development agreement application shall be prepared and submitted pursuant to Chapter 17.800. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.810.004 Additional supporting information.
     Applications to be considered by the city shall be accompanied by such information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to describe the proposed project and assist in the preparation of the proposed agreement. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.810.005 Qualification of applicant.
     A qualified applicant is a person or entity having legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of the proposed development agreement. The zoning administrator may require an applicant to submit proof of his or her (its) interest in the real property and of the authority of an agent to act for the applicant. The zoning administrator may obtain the opinion of the city attorney as to the sufficiency of the applicant’s interest in the real property to enter into the agreement. The city attorney or zoning administrator may require an applicant or agent to submit a title report or other evidence to verify the applicant’s legal or equitable interests in the subject property. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.810.006 Other parties.
     In addition to the city and the developer, any federal, state or local government agency or body may be included as a party to any development agreement. Any such additional party shall be made a party to the development agreement pursuant to the provisions of the Joint Exercise of Powers Act (“Government Code Subsection 6500 et seq.) providing for joint powers agreements, or provisions of other applicable federal, state or local law, in order to create a legally binding agreement between such parties. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.810.007 Procedure.
     A.    A development agreement application shall be processed pursuant to Section 17.800.010.

     B.     An application shall not be found to be complete until a draft development agreement has been approved by the city attorney. Such draft agreement shall be prepared by the city staff in negotiation with the applicant. The draft agreement shall contain all of the required elements set forth in Section 17.810.009 and may include other provisions permitted by law.

     C.     Following a determination that an application is complete, including an initial study, the application shall be reviewed by the planning commission which shall hold a public hearing.

     D.    The public hearing on a development agreement shall be held concurrently with applications, if any, for any other entitlement being requested and shall be processed, to the maximum extent possible, jointly to avoid duplication of hearings and petition of information.

     E.     In considering a development agreement the planning commission shall determine whether the proposed agreement conforms to the findings set forth in Section 17.810.008 and to any applicable regulations or specified criteria set forth in any provisions elsewhere in this title.

     F.     Following consideration the planning commission shall submit a recommendation to the city council in the form of a draft agreement, its findings on the proposed agreement and any related staff reports and other documents.

     G.    Following receipt of the planning commission recommendation, the application shall be reviewed by the city council which shall hold a public hearing.

     H.    Following consideration the city council may disapprove the application for a development agreement or may adopt by ordinance the proposed or a modified development agreement. The city council may refer the application back to the planning commission for consideration and recommendation if a modified agreement is being considered or in the event the city council considered matters not considered by the planning commission in its review of the application.

     I.      The planning commission may hold a public hearing on the referred application prior to making a recommendation to the city council.

     J.      Within ten days after the effective date of an ordinance approving a development agreement or any modification or cancellation thereof, the development agreement or any modification or cancellation thereof, shall be executed by all parties thereto and recorded with the Contra Costa County recorder.

     K.    The city clerk shall be the official custodian of the agreement file. Such file shall include an executed copy of the agreement and the originals of all exhibits, reports of periodic review, amendments and cancellations to the agreement. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.810.008 Development agreement findings.
     The city council shall approve a development agreement only when the following findings can be made and are included as part of such agreement:

     A.    The development agreement is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the community development plan and applicable specific plans;

     B.     The development agreement will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of persons residing in the immediate area nor be detrimental or injurious to property or persons in the general neighborhood or to the general welfare of the residents of the city as a whole;

     C.     The development agreement will not adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property values;

     D.    The development agreement will facilitate the implementation of any applicable specific plan; and

     E.     The development agreement is consistent with the provisions of Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.810.009 Development agreement contents.
     The city attorney shall approve the form of each development agreement. The proposed agreement shall contain all the elements specified in subsections A through D of this section and may include any other provisions permitted by law including those specified in subsections E through G of this section:

     A.    The duration of the development agreement;

     B.     The permitted uses of the property;

     C.     The density or intensity of use, the maximum height and size of proposed buildings;

     D.    Provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes;

     E.     Conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions; provided, that such conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions shall not prevent development of the land for the uses and to the density or intensity of development or within the time periods set forth in the agreement;

     F.     Conditions that construction shall be commenced within a specified time and that the project or any phase thereof be completed within a specified time;

     G.    Terms and conditions relating to applicant’s financing of necessary public facilities and subsequent reimbursement over time. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.810.010 Effect of action.
     A.    No action, inaction or recommendation regarding a proposed development agreement shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect or omission (“error”) as to any matter pertaining to petition, application, notice, finding, record, hearing, report, recommendation or any matters of procedure whatever unless after an examination of the entire case, including the evidence, the court is of the opinion that the error complained of was prejudicial and that by reason of the error the complaining party sustained and suffered substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. There is not a presumption that error is prejudicial or that injury was done if error is shown.

     B.     Unless modified or amended or cancelled or terminated pursuant to this chapter a development agreement shall be enforceable by any party thereto notwithstanding any change in the community development plan or any applicable specific plan, zoning, subdivision, building regulation or other ordinance or resolution adopted by the city of Brentwood.

     C.     Except that otherwise set forth in an agreement, the rules, regulations and official policies governing permitted uses of the land, governing density and governing design, improvement and construction standards and specifications applicable to development of the property which is subject to a development agreement shall be those rules, regulations and official policies in force at the time of the execution of the agreement.

     D.    A development agreement shall not prevent the city in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from applying new rules, regulations and policies which do not conflict with those rules, regulations and policies applicable to the property as set forth herein. As used in this subsection the term “do not conflict with” means does not prevent development of the land for the uses and to the density or intensity of development and within the time periods set forth in the agreement.

     E.     A development agreement shall not prevent the city from denying or conditionally approving any subsequent project application on the basis of such existing or new rules, regulations and policies.

     F.     In the event that state or federal laws or regulations, enacted after a development agreement has been entered into, prevent or preclude compliance with one or more provisions of the development agreement, such provisions of the agreement shall be modified or suspended as may be necessary to comply with such state or federal laws or regulations. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.810.011 Procedure for amendment or cancellation—Mutual consent.
     A.    Either party may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of any development agreement. Any amendment or cancellation may only be by mutual consent of the parties.

     B.     Except as otherwise provided in this section, the procedure for proposing and adopting an amendment to or the canceling in whole or in part of a development agreement shall be the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement in the first instance. However, if the city initiates a proposed amendment to, or a cancellation in whole or in part of, an agreement the city shall first give written notice to the party executing the agreement of its intention to initiate such proceedings. Such notice shall be given not less than thirty days in advance of public notice of the hearing to consider an amendment or cancellation.

     C.     Any amendment to a development agreement which does not relate to the duration of the agreement, permitted uses of the property, density or intensity of use, timing of development, height or size of proposed buildings, provisions for reservation or dedication of land, or to any conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements relating to subsequent discretionary actions related to design, improvement or construction standards and specifications, or to any other condition or covenant relating to the use of the property, shall not require a noticed public hearing before the parties may execute such amendment. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.810.012 Annual review.
     A.    The city council shall review a development agreement annually and may refer the matter to the planning commission for its report and recommendation.

     B.     The zoning administrator shall be responsible for setting a date for initiating a review of a development agreement, which shall be held not sooner that thirty days and not more than sixty days from the anniversary date of the agreement, and shall give notice of the hearing to the applicant at least thirty days prior to the hearing.

     C.     The zoning administrator shall submit to the reviewing body a report on the progress of the development that will allow the reviewing body to determine whether, upon the basis of substantial evidence, the property owner has, for the period under review, substantially complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement.

     D.    When, in the opinion of the reviewing body it is warranted, a public hearing may be held.

     E.     If the city council finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the property owner has substantially complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, no further action is required.

     F.     If the city council determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the property owner has not substantially complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the city council, on its own motion, may initiate proceedings to modify or terminate the agreement. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.810.013 Procedure for modification or termination—City initiated.
     A.    If in the course of annual review, the city council determines that modification of the agreement is appropriate or that the agreement should be terminated, the city council shall give notice to the other party of its intention to hold a public hearing to consider modification or termination. This hearing shall be held not less than two weeks from the date the other party receives this notice. Such notice shall provide:

     1.     The time and place of the public hearing;

     2.     A statement as to whether the city council proposes to terminate or to modify the agreement, and if the latter is proposed, the proposed modification; and

     3.     Such other information which the city council considers appropriate to inform the other party of the nature of the proceedings.

     B.     At the conclusion of the hearing to consider modification or termination, the city council may refer the matter to the planning commission for a report and recommendation. Upon receipt of any such report or recommendation, the city council will take final action on the proposed modification or termination. If the city council elects to modify the agreement, it shall modify the agreement only in a manner reasonably related to the lack of substantial compliance with the terms and conditions of the agreement by the property owner. The decision of the city council shall be final and any court action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul any decision of the determination by the city council shall be commenced within thirty days thereafter. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.820 DESIGN AND SITE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
17.820.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “design and site development review procedure” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to allow design and site development review of all developments, signs, buildings, structures and other facilities constructed or modified in any zone where design and site development review is required in order thereby to foster a good design character through consideration of aesthetic and functional relationships to surrounding development, and in order to further enhance the city’s appearance, and the livability and usefulness of properties.

     The purpose of the architectural review committee is to recognize the interdependence of land values and aesthetics, and to provide a method by which the city may implement this interdependence to its benefit, and to the benefit of its individual citizens. It is also the purpose of the committee to preserve and enhance the beauty and environmental amenities of the city by:

     1.     Stimulating creative design;

     2.     Encouraging the innovative use of materials, methods and techniques;

     3.     Preserving balance and harmony;

     4.     Integrating the functions, appearance, and locations of buildings and improvements, including parking, so as to best achieve a balance between private prerogatives and preferences and the public interest and welfare. (Ord. 663 § 1, 2001; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.820.002 Applicability of provisions.
     This procedure shall apply to all proposals for which design and site development review is required by provisions of this title except that approval of a conditional use permit shall satisfy the requirement for design and site development review provided the criteria set forth herein was part of the conditional use permit consideration and so specified as a condition of approval. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.820.003 Exemptions.
     Design and site development review shall not be required in the case of minor additions to, and remodeling of, existing structures which do not involve a change in the site design and provided that the zoning administrator has approved a “certificate of compatibility” certifying that the proposed addition or remodeling complies with the design criteria set forth in Section 17.820.007. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.820.004 Application.
     A.    Design and site development review applications shall be prepared and submitted pursuant to Chapter 17.800.

     B.     The supporting information specified as required in Section 17.800.007 shall include, more specifically, the following information:

     1.     Parcel dimensions in distances;

     2.     Existing and proposed buildings and structures: their location, size, height and use;

     3.     Dimensions of yards and open spaces;

     4.     Fences and walls: their location, height and materials;

     5.     Parking spaces: their location, number, dimensions and internal circulation;

     6.     Access: vehicular, pedestrian and service access, points of ingress and egress, curb cutting, internal circulation, design and improvements;

     7.     Street dedications and improvements: existing and proposed;

     8.     Signing: size, type, illumination, location;

     9.     Lighting: location, type, illumination;

     10.   Loading spaces, if applicable: location, number, dimensions and internal circulation;

     11.   Storage areas: location, method of screening;

     12.   Perspective drawing or environmental rendering clearly establishing the scale, design character, interrelationship and appearance of buildings, facilities, rights-of-way, open spaces and signs;

     13.   Landscaping: location type and container sizes of all plant materials, as well as appropriate irrigation facilities;

     14.   Other information that the planning commission may determine as necessary and establish through the adoption of a resolution. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.820.005 Architectural review committee structure and design guidelines.
     An architectural review committee is hereby established, consisting of the members of the Brentwood planning commission, as appointed by the city council. The architectural review committee shall have the authority to review, conditionally approve and disapprove architectural plans, drawings and sketches.

     The committee shall establish, and the city council shall adopt, design guidelines which shall be applied by the committee, the community development director, and on appeal, the city council, in reviewing applications for development. Said guidelines are to be set forth in pictorial and/or narrative form and may illustrate undesirable as well as desirable examples of design. A document containing the guidelines shall be available for public reference in the community development department. The committee may periodically review these guidelines and may make appropriate amendments subject, in all cases, to city council approval. (Ord. 663 § 1, 2001; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.820.006 Review process.
     A.    The architectural review committee shall review and act on architectural plans concurrently with any other land use permit or entitlement application submitted to the city, such as a conditional use permit or tentative parcel or tract map.

     B.     The architectural review committee may delegate specific types of projects to the community development director for review and action. (Ord. 663 § 1, 2001; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.820.007 Design and site review criteria.
     The architectural review committee, community development director, and on appeal the city council, in consideration of all applications for design and site development review shall determine whether the proposed project conforms to the following criteria:

     A.    The proposed development shall create a well-composed urban design, harmoniously related to other facilities in the immediate area and to the total setting as seen from key vantage points in the community;

     B.     Elements of design which have significant relationship to the exterior appearance of structures and facilities shall be given special consideration; these elements include but are not limited to height, arrangement on the site, texture, lighting, material, color, signs, landscaping, size, bulk and scale, and appurtenances;

     C.     The proposed development shall be of a quality and character appropriate to, and serving to protect the value of, private and public investments in the immediate area;

     D.    Where the proposed development is located in an area for which a specific plan, planned development, neighborhood plan or precise plan has been adopted by the city council, the design of the development shall conform in all significant respects with such plans;

     E.     The proposed development shall conform with all requirements for landscaping, screening, parking, usable open space and off-street loading as set forth in this title;

     F.     The site development criteria set forth in Section 17.820.008;

     G.    “The City of Brentwood Design Guidelines” Draft, dated February 1, 2001, and any other applicable specific design criteria or standards set out in this title or other city ordinance;

     H.    All applicable regulations of the zoning ordinance and other city ordinances, policies or resolutions. (Ord. 663 § 1, 2001; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.820.008 Site development review criteria.
     The following criteria shall be applied in considering all applications for design and site development review approval:

     A.    The siting and internal arrangement of all structures and other facilities on the site, including the land uses, internal circulation, off-street parking and loading facilities, lighting, signing and access to and from public rights-of-way, shall be conducive to an orderly, attractive, efficient and harmonious development.

     B.     The proposed development shall not have adverse environmental effects on adjacent developments, existing or potential, by reason of conflicts in land use, topography or traffic. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.820.009 Performance standards.
     If, in the opinion of the planning commission or zoning administrator, the proposed use may cause the emission of dangerous or objectionable noise, odors, lights, dust, smoke or vibrations, the board may refer the application for investigation and report to one or more expert consultants qualified to advise as to whether a proposed use will conform to general acceptable or applicable performance standards. Such consultant or consultants shall report in writing and a copy of such report shall be furnished to the applicant. The applicant shall be required to pay the fee for the service of such consultant(s) (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.820.010 Conditional approval.
     It is the express intent of this procedure that whenever the planning commission or zoning administrator finds that compliance with these design review criteria or site development criteria requires higher standards of development and performance than otherwise required by the applicable zone regulations, such reasonable higher standards as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this procedure shall be established as a condition of design and site development review approval. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.820.011 Termination of permit.
     Unless a different termination date is prescribed, all design and site development review permits shall terminate one year from the effective date of their granting, unless actual construction or alteration under valid permits has begun within such period. However, such period of time may be extended by the planning commission upon application filed at any time before such period has expired. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.820.012 Appeal.
     Action of the planning commission or zoning administrator may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.880. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.830 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
17.830.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “conditional use permit procedure” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to prescribe the procedure for the accommodation of uses with special operating characteristics, site or design requirements or potential adverse effects on surrounding properties, by means of review and, where necessary, the imposition of special conditions of approval. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.830.002 Applicability of provisions.
     The conditional use permit procedure shall apply to all proposed projects for which a conditional use permit is required by the zoning regulations. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.830.003 Application.
     A conditional use permit application shall be prepared and submitted pursuant to Chapter 17.800. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.830.004 Procedure.
     A.    A conditional use permit application shall be processed pursuant to Section 17.800.010.

     B.     Following a determination that an application is complete and an initial study has been made, the application shall be reviewed by the planning commission, which shall hold a public hearing.

     C.     In considering a conditional use permit application the planning commission shall determine whether the proposed use conforms to the general criteria for conditional use permits set forth in Section 17.830.005 and to any applicable specific criteria set forth in any provision elsewhere in this title that requires a use permit and to any applicable regulations of the zoning ordinance.

     D.    Following consideration, the planning commission shall deny or approve or conditionally approve an application requiring such changes or imposing such reasonable conditions of approval as are in its judgment necessary to carry out the general purposes of the zoning regulations. However, when a conditional use permit is combined with an application requiring legislative action (such as a zoning amendment, general plan amendment, or development agreement), the planning commission’s action will be advisory to the city council, which becomes the decision maker. (Ord. 977 § 4, 2016; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.830.005 Conditional use permit criteria.
     A conditional use permit may be granted only if the proposal conforms to all of the following general criteria, as well as to all other applicable specific criteria:

     A.    The location, size, design and operating characteristics of the proposed development must be compatible with and must not adversely affect the livability of appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding neighborhood. Consideration shall be given, but shall not be limited to:

     1.     Harmony in scale, bulk, coverage and density;

     2.     The availability of public facilities and utilities;

     3.     The harmful effect, if any, upon desirable neighborhood character or the planned specialization of retail, commercial or community service areas;

     4.     Generation of traffic and the capacity of surrounding streets;

     5.     Any other relevant impact of the development;

 

     6.     The criteria set forth in Chapter 17.820 for design and site development review if applicable.

     B.     The location, design, landscaping and screening, and overall site planning of the proposed development will provide an attractive, useful and convenient living, working, shopping or community-service area. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.830.006 Termination of permit.
     Unless a different termination date is prescribed, all conditional use permits shall terminate one year from the effective date of their granting, unless actual construction or alteration under valid permits, or actual commencement of the authorized activities, in cases where a permit is not required, has begun within such period. However, such period of time may be extended by the planning commission upon application filed at any time before such period has expired. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.830.007 Appeal.
     Action of the planning commission may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.880. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.835 SIGN PERMIT
17.835.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “sign permit procedure” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe the procedure for the approval of signs, by means of review and, where necessary, the imposition of special conditions of approval. (Ord. 891 § 4, 2011)

 

17.835.002 Applicability of provisions.
     The sign permit procedure shall apply to all proposed projects for which a sign permit is required by the zoning and sign regulations. (Ord. 891 § 4, 2011)

 

17.835.003 Application.
     A sign permit application shall be prepared and submitted pursuant to Chapter 17.800. (Ord. 891 § 4, 2011)

 

17.835.004 Procedure.
     A.    A sign permit application shall be processed pursuant to Section 17.800.010.

     B.     Following a determination that an application is complete and environmental review has been conducted, the application shall be reviewed by the director, or if the application is subject to planning commission review, at a duly noticed public hearing of the commission.

     C.     In considering a sign permit application the director or planning commission shall determine whether the proposed use conforms to the general criteria for sign permits set forth in this chapter and to any applicable specific criteria set forth in any provision elsewhere in this title that requires a sign permit and to any applicable regulations of the zoning ordinance.

     D.    Following consideration, the director or planning commission shall deny or approve or conditionally approve an application requiring such changes as are necessary to ensure compliance with all laws, rules, regulations and policies. (Ord. 891 § 4, 2011)

 

17.835.005 Sign permit criteria.
     A sign permit will be granted if the application conforms to all applicable laws, rules, regulations and policies. If the application does not comply with all applicable laws, rules, regulations and policies, then it will be denied in a written decision which specifies all points of noncompliance. The decision on a sign permit application shall be rendered within forty-five calendar days of the date the application is complete, all applicable fees are paid and applicable environmental review is complete, unless otherwise agreed by the applicant. (Ord. 891 § 4, 2011)

 

17.835.006 Termination of permit.
     Unless a different termination date is prescribed, all sign permits shall terminate one year from the effective date of their granting, unless actual construction or alteration under valid permits, or actual commencement of the authorized activities, in cases where a permit is not required, has begun within such period. However, such period of time may be extended by the planning commission upon application filed at any time before such period has expired. (Ord. 891 § 4, 2011)

 

17.835.007 Appeal.
     Action of the director or planning commission may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.880. During the appeal, the status quo shall be maintained. (Ord. 891 § 4, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.840 HOME OCCUPATION USE PERMIT
17.840.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “home occupation use permit procedure” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to prescribe a procedure to permit and control the conduct of certain small home-based businesses and other activities as accessory uses in the home. (Ord. 925 § 6, 2014)

 

17.840.002 Applicability of provisions.
     This procedure shall be required whenever a business license is required using a home as the “location of business in Brentwood” or in the absence of a location, using a home as a “mailing address” and in any case where a commercial or commercial-like activity or an activity not customarily conducted in the home, is being conducted in a home. (Ord. 925 § 6, 2014)

 

17.840.003 Home occupation defined.
     A home occupation is a commercial or other activity conducted in a home by the resident thereof which activity is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the home as a residence and which exhibits no external evidence of the activity and will not change the residential character of the dwelling. (Ord. 925 § 6, 2014)

 

17.840.004 Application.
     A.    A home occupation use permit application shall be prepared and submitted pursuant to Chapter 17.800.

     B.     The supporting information specified in Section 17.800.007 shall be limited to a description of the business or commercial activity including the method by which the activity will be conducted, that portion of the home in which the activity will be conducted, and a description of any equipment or materials to be utilized in the home. (Ord. 925 § 6, 2014)

 

17.840.005 Procedure.
     A.    Application for a home occupation use permit shall be processed pursuant to Section 17.800.010.

     B.     Following a determination that an application is complete the community development director shall deny, approve or conditionally approve the application. (Ord. 925 § 6, 2014)

 

17.840.006 Conditions of approval.
     A.    The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit or a legal accessory building located on the property and comprise no more than twenty percent of the living space on the property at the time of application submittal. If conducted within a garage or other accessory building, the doors shall be closed at all times.

     B.     Home occupations shall be provided with a single station smoke detector and a minimum five-pound fire extinguisher Type 2-A: 10-B: C.

     C.     Such other conditions of approval which pertain to the proposed use as may be deemed by the community development director to be necessary to assure the use can be conducted as a home occupation in a manner which does not adversely impact public health and safety.

     D.    In the event of a failure to comply with these regulations, the community development director may, after notice and an administrative hearing, revoke the home occupation use permit.

     E.     A business license shall be required for a home occupation and a time limit which for the initial approval shall not exceed one year and for subsequent renewals shall not exceed three years. (Ord. 925 § 6, 2014)

 

17.840.007 Uses prohibited.
     The following uses shall be expressly prohibited as home occupations:

     A.    Medical, dental, chiropractic, massage or similar offices or clinics;

     B.     Barber or beauty shops;

     C.     Pet grooming or boarding;

     D.    Business offices or retail uses where a client typically goes to the office or retail establishment to conduct business, except as otherwise permitted in Sections 17.840.090 and 17.840.010;

     E.     T.V., radio or appliance repair at the location of the home occupation;

     F.     Cabinet shop, furniture manufacture, upholstery repair or similar uses requiring the use of electric saws, joiners, air compressors and similar tools;

     G.    Automotive repair, maintenance or other automotive services (except for the home occupant’s personal vehicle);

     H.    Any use involving storage of hazardous chemicals or supplies not normally found at a private residence;

     I.      Bicycle, lawn mower or small engine repair or maintenance;

     J.      Welding, use of paint sprayers, compressors, etc.;

     K.    Other uses which the community development director determines to be inappropriate or incompatible within a residential neighborhood. (Ord. 925 § 6, 2014)

 

17.840.008 Activities prohibited.
     The following activities shall be prohibited in conjunction with any home occupation:

     A.    The employment within the home of any person, other than an inhabitant of the home, except as provided in Section 17.840.010;

     B.     The use of more than one room or the equivalent of twenty percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit, whichever is greater. If the home occupation is conducted within a garage or accessory building, the doors shall be closed at all times;

     C.     The use of equipment powered by motors of more than a total of one horsepower capacity or the equivalent thereof;

     D.    The display of any trade in stock;

     E.     The generation of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in excess of that associated with the residential use, except as provided in Sections 17.840.009 and 17.840.010;

     F.     Creation of any radio or television interference or creation of any noise greater than the noise performance standards established in Section 17.200.004;

     G.    The emission of odor or gaseous, liquid or solid waste;

     H.    The display of signs or advertising devices identifying the home occupation or any outside display or window display of materials or products;

     I.      Any commercial retail sales on the premises, except as provided in Section 17.840.010;

     J.      The storage or use of commercial vehicles for delivery to or from the premises, other than one vehicle not to exceed one-ton capacity, owned by the occupant of the home;

     K.    Any external alteration of the appearance of the dwelling unit in which the home occupation is conducted;

     L.     The use of yard space or any activity outside the main or accessory building which is not normally associated with a residents use. (Ord. 925 § 6, 2014)

 

17.840.009 Exception for teaching, counseling, or instructional activities.
     For the purposes of this section, tutoring, counseling, language, music instruction, or similar home occupation undertaken entirely within the home and deemed appropriate by the community development director shall not constitute a significant and sustained traffic increase affecting the residential character of the neighborhood.

     A.    Only one vehicle and two students are allowed at a time with a maximum of twelve students per day.

     B.     Hours of operation are limited to seven a.m. to eight p.m., Monday through Friday, and eight a.m. to eight p.m. on Saturday and Sunday, unless limited further by conditions placed upon the hours of operation as allowed in subsection C.

     C.     A notice must be sent to adjoining property owners prior to approval of the business. If there are any concerns, the approval may be conditioned to mitigate them, or the application could be referred to the planning commission for review and approval.

     D.    The Brentwood Noise Ordinance (Chapter 9.32) must, without exception, be fully complied with.

     E.     Any non-prohibited activity or use proposed under this exception that cannot meet all of the requirements listed above will be referred to the planning commission for review and approval. (Ord. 925 § 6, 2014)

 

17.840.010 Exception for cottage food operations.
     For the purposes of this section a cottage food operation means an enterprise within the registered or permitted (by the Contra Costa County environment health department) area of a private home or apartment, or other multifamily housing unit (i.e., condominiums or townhomes), where the individual, who proposes to conduct the cottage food operation in his or her private residence and is the owner of the cottage food operation, prepares and/or packages cottage food products that are not potentially hazardous foods for direct or indirect sale to consumers as permitted by the Contra Costa County environmental health division in accordance with the California Health and Safety Code. Cottage food operations are allowed as a home occupation subject to the California Health and Safety Code and this chapter with the following exceptions and performance standards:

     A.    On-Site Customers. Only one vehicle and two customers are allowed at a time on the site with a maximum of twelve customers per day for direct sales. Such direct sales to customers shall be limited to the hours of eight a.m. to six p.m. Monday through Saturday. Direct sales on Sunday, as well as outdoor sales, are prohibited.

     B.     On-Site Dining. On-site dining is prohibited.

     C.     Employees. Only one full-time equivalent employee, not including the operator’s family or household members, shall be on the premises of the cottage food operation at any time.

     D.    Parking and Loading Requirements. For single-family homes, parking spaces for the cottage food operator and any employee shall be accommodated on the property site. For apartments and multifamily developments, the cottage food operator’s designated space(s) shall be available for the use, including parking spaces for the applicant’s own vehicles and any employee. On-site parking in an apartment complex or other multi-family residence requires approval from the property owner, landlord, homeowners association or property manager.

     On-street parking spaces may be used for persons picking-up and/or delivering materials for the operation and third party retailers coming to the property if proposed.

     Loading of food products into vehicles may occur anytime within an enclosed garage when the garage door is shut. Hours for loading vehicles outside of a garage are limited from eight a.m. to six p.m. Monday through Saturday with no Sunday hours. Vehicles shall not idle when being loaded.

     E.     Solid waste collection is limited to the city’s regular cart service. No commercial trash collection shall occur on the site.

     F.     There shall be no discharge of grease associated with the cottage food operation into the city’s solid waste or storm drain system. (Ord. 925 § 6, 2014)

 

17.840.011 Authority and effect.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude the enforcement of other applicable county, state and federal laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, Americans with Disabilities Act requirements and building code requirements. (Ord. 925 § 6, 2014)

 

17.840.012 Appeal.
     Action of the community development director may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.880. (Ord. 925 § 6, 2014)

 

Chapter 17.850 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
17.850.001 Purpose.
     This chapter establishes procedures and standards for the granting of temporary use permits for short-term activities on private property. Compliance with applicable standards ensures that the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the short-term activity would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed activity. (Ord. 948 § 2, 2015)

 

17.850.002 Applicability of provisions.
     This chapter shall apply to those uses for which a temporary use permit is required by the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 948 § 2, 2015)

 

17.850.003 Temporary use defined.
     A temporary use is defined as “a short-term activity established for a fixed period of time on private property, with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the permitted time period that does not meet the normal development or use standards of the applicable zone.” This definition does not include “special events,” as those are defined and regulated in accordance with Title 7. (Ord. 948 § 2, 2015)

 

17.850.004 Temporary use permit required.
     A temporary use shall not be conducted, established, or operated in any manner without the approval and maintenance of a valid temporary use permit in compliance with this chapter, unless otherwise exempt under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 948 § 2, 2015)

 

17.850.005 Review authority.
     A.    Temporary use permits shall be reviewed and approved or denied administratively by the community development director, in compliance with this chapter.

     B.     The community development director may refer any permit to the planning commission.

     C.     The decision of the community development director or planning commission regarding a temporary use permit shall be final, subject to appeal in compliance with Chapter 17.880 (Appeal).

     D.    No public hearing is required before the community development director’s decision on a temporary use permit. A public hearing shall, however, be required for any permit that is referred by the community development director to the planning commission. (Ord. 948 § 2, 2015)

 

17.850.006 Exempt temporary uses.
     The following temporary uses are allowed without the necessity of obtaining a temporary use permit:

     A.    Construction Yards—On-Site. On-site contractors’ construction yards, including one manufactured unit for temporary office use during normal business hours, for an approved construction project that is within the city. The construction yard shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction project, or the expiration of the building permit authorizing the construction project, whichever occurs first.

     B.     Emergency Facilities. Emergency public health and safety needs/land use activities, as determined by the city manager.

     C.     Events on Sites Approved for Public Assembly. An event on the site of, or within, a golf course, meeting hall/facility, school, theater, or other similar facility designed, and approved by the city for public assembly.

     D.    Fund-Raising Car Washes.

     1.     Car washes on property within a nonresidential zone, limited to a maximum of two days per month for each sponsoring organization.

     2.     Sponsorship shall be limited to educational, fraternal, religious, or service organizations directly engaged in civic or charitable efforts, or to tax exempt organizations in compliance with Section 501(c) of the Federal Revenue and Taxation Code.

     E.     Garage Sales. Garage sales, not to exceed three per year and two consecutive days. (Ord. 948 § 2, 2015)

 

17.850.007 Allowed temporary uses.
     The city, through the community development director, may grant a temporary use permit for the following temporary uses on nonresidential properties or on private properties approved with an institutional use, for the specified time limits, but in no event for more than twelve months, except model home complexes and construction yards, which may be approved for any length of time, provided the community development director finds that the use meets any conditions or requirements set forth herein and that the use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed activity. Other temporary uses that do not fall within the categories defined below shall instead comply with the planning permit requirements and development standards that otherwise apply to the property.

     A.    Agricultural Produce Sales. Retail sales of agricultural produce at produce stands or in a certified farmer’s market.

     B.     Construction Yards—Off-Site. Off-site offices, contractors’ construction, corporation, or storage yards for an approved construction project that is within the city. The yards shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction project, or the expiration of the building permit authorizing the construction project, whichever occurs first.

     C.     Events. Animal rides, art and craft exhibits, bike rodeos, car shows, carnivals, circuses, concerts, egg hunts, fairs, farmer’s markets, festivals, flea markets, food events, holiday events, runs, marathons, walk-a-thons, and bike-a-thons or similar activities, open air theaters but excluding drive-in theaters, outdoor entertainment/sporting events, parades, petting zoos, processions, rallies, religious revivals, rodeos, rummage sales, runs, secondhand sales, swap meets, and other similar special events for up to five consecutive days, or six two-day weekends, or twelve individual days, within a twelve-month period, allowed only on non-residentially zoned properties, or on private properties approved with an institutional use.

     D.    Location Filming. The temporary use of a specific site for the location filming of commercials, movies, videos, etc., for the time specified by the community development director, but not to exceed twelve months.

     E.     Model Homes. A model home or model home complex may be authorized before the completion of subdivision improvements in compliance with the following standards:

     1.     Provisions for suitable off-street parking with adequate ingress and egress to serve the model home complex.

     2.     Provision of suitable landscaping to enhance the model home complex.

     3.     When the builder submits an application for the final permits to build on the lots utilized for the model home complex, the parking lot and trap fences shall be removed and the driveway slabs shall be poured in front of each of the garages of all model homes. This will require the removal of all landscaping in front of the garages for the model homes.

     4.     The poured driveway slabs and on-street parking will temporarily serve as the required parking for the model home complex and the sales office may remain in the model until all models in the subdivision have been sold.

     5.     The sales office shall be converted back to residential use and/or removed before the issuance of the final building permit.

     6.     The review authority may require other conditions of approval deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood.

     F.     Outdoor Retail Sales within Nonresidential Zones.

     1.     Sales of merchandise customarily sold on the premises by an established business physically located and doing business at the same location as the temporary use. The sales of merchandise are limited to four events per calendar year per business conducting the sale, not exceeding four consecutive days per event.

     2.     Sales of merchandise not customarily sold on the premises, when the sales will be by an established business physically located and doing business in the city. The entity conducting the temporary sale shall dedicate all retail sales tax collected at the sale to accrue to the city. The sales are limited to four events per calendar year per business conducting the sale, not exceeding four consecutive days per event.

     G.    Pyrotechnics. Events proposing the use of pyrotechnics.

     H.    Seasonal Sales Lots. Seasonal sales lots (e.g., Halloween, Thanksgiving, Christmas, etc.) including temporary residence/security trailers on non-residentially zoned properties. However, a permit shall not be required when the sales are in conjunction with an established commercial business holding a valid city business license, or produce stands or farmer’s markets; provided, the activity shall be limited to forty-five days of operation per calendar year.

     I.      Temporary Occupancy During Construction.

     1.     Major Development Projects. Temporary structures on the subject property may be used during the construction phase of an approved major development project (e.g., residential projects with five or more dwelling units or any commercial or industrial project). The structures or property may be used as offices or for the storage of equipment and/or tools, provided the temporary structures and the project itself are located within the city.

     2.     Minor Development Projects. An existing dwelling unit or a temporary structure on the subject property may be used during the construction phase of an approved minor development project (e.g., residential projects with four or fewer dwelling units). The structure or property may be used as a temporary residence, an office, or for the storage of equipment and/or tools.

     3.     Appropriate Conditions. The temporary use permit shall contain reasonable and necessary conditions regarding the following matters:

     a.     Required permits for the provision of sewer, gas, electricity and water services.

     b.     Provisions for adequate ingress and egress.

     c.     Provisions for the work to be performed on-site.

     d.     Provisions for the storage of asphalt, concrete, and dirt at designated sites within the subject property; provided, the applicant furnishes a schedule, acceptable to the community development director, for the periodic disposal or recycling of these materials.

     e.     Provisions designed to minimize potential conflicts between the work to be performed on-site and the ordinary business and uses conducted within the city.

     f.      Length of Permit. The permit may be approved for up to twelve months following the issuance of the companion building permit, or upon completion of the subject development project, whichever occurs first.

     g.     Condition of Site Following Completion. All temporary structures and related improvements shall be completely removed from the subject site following expiration of the temporary use permit or upon completion of the development project, whichever occurs first.

     J.      Temporary Real Estate Sales and/or Rental Offices. A temporary real estate sales and/or rental office may be established within the area of an approved subdivision, solely for the first sale or rental of homes or units, provided a temporary use permit has been approved for the model home complex and construction of the model homes is being diligently pursued in compliance with subsection E of this section (Model homes). An application for a temporary real estate office may be approved for a maximum of twelve months from the date of approval.

     K.    Temporary Work Structures/Trailers. A temporary classroom, office, or similar structure, including a manufactured or mobile unit, may be approved for a maximum of twelve months from the date of approval, as an accessory use or as the first phase of a development project provided:

     1.     The use is authorized by a building permit for the mobile unit or trailer, and the building permit for the permanent structure;

     2.     The use is appropriate because:

     a.     The mobile unit or trailer will be in place for a maximum of twelve months during construction or remodeling of a permanent approved commercial type structure, or upon expiration of the building permit for the permanent structure, whichever occurs first, or

     b.     The applicant has demonstrated that the temporary work site is a short-term necessity for a maximum of twelve months, while a permanent work site is being obtained; and

     3.     The mobile unit or trailer is removed before final building inspection or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the permanent structure.

     L.     Similar Temporary Activities. A temporary activity that the community development director determines is similar to the other activities listed in this section, and compatible with the applicable zone and surrounding land uses. (Ord. 948 § 2, 2015)

 

17.850.008 Minor temporary use permit.
     Allowed temporary uses, as defined in Section 17.850.007, and occurring entirely upon private property not zoned for residential use or on private property with an approved institutional use and located within an existing development of sufficient size to provide adequate space, circulation and parking for the anticipated attendance, as determined by the community development director, may be permitted with a minor temporary use permit for any time period less than twelve months as approved by the community development director if the applicant can demonstrate that the following performance standards are met:

     A.    A minor temporary use permit application shall be completed and submitted to the community development director for approval prior to the start of the short-term activity.

     B.     Hours of operation are limited to seven a.m. to ten p.m. daily.

     C.     Adequate parking for the anticipated attendance shall be provided.

     D.    All trash generated by the use shall be picked up both on- and off-site at the end of each event.

     E.     The applicant shall obtain county health department approval and submit such documentation with the application for any food service beyond what is allowed for existing permitted businesses on-site.

     F.     No consumption or sales of alcohol shall be allowed as part of the event, other than as permitted within existing businesses licensed by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control located within the shopping center.

     G.    Any amplified sound used at the event or other noise generation activities shall be subject to Chapter 9.32 (Noise Regulations) of the Brentwood Municipal Code.

     H.    No additional lighting is allowed.

     I.      Adequate provision for safety and security measures shall be provided. The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring the safety and welfare of the attendees, as determined by the chief of police or designee. The police department may close the event due to failure to satisfy conditions of the permit.

     J.      Prior to the event, the applicant shall provide a statement to the city stating that the organizers of the event agree to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all liability or claims that may be brought against the city arising out of its approval of the minor temporary use permit, or arising out of the operation of the use or uses allowed under the permit, save and except that caused solely by the city’s active negligence.

     K.    The applicant shall adhere to all building and fire codes and obtain any necessary permits and inspections prior to the event.

     L.     The applicant shall make a good faith effort to work with city staff in addressing any concerns that arise relating to the placement or operation of the event. (Ord. 948 § 2, 2015)

 

17.850.009 Development standards.
     The community development director shall review temporary use permits based on conformance to the following standards and the type of temporary use, using the requirements of the applicable zone, and Chapter 17.820 (Design and Site Development Review) and the specific site zoning standards for guidance:

     A.    Provision for access, floor areas, landscaping, utilities, and other structure and property development improvements and features.

     B.     Measures for removal of the activity and site restoration, to ensure that no changes to the site would limit the range of possible future land uses otherwise allowed by this title.

     C.     Unless an alternative time period is specified in Section 17.850.007 (Allowed temporary uses), provision for a fixed period not to exceed twelve months for all temporary uses or structures. The community development director may grant time extensions, provided such time extension is clearly demonstrated as necessary, and regulate operating hours and days.

     D.    Provision for parking facilities, including vehicular ingress and egress.

     E.     Regulation of potential nuisance factors (e.g., dirt, dust, glare, light, noise, odors, smoke, and vibration).

     F.     Regulation of temporary structures and facilities, including buffer areas, height, location of equipment, placement, setbacks, and size.

     G.    Provision for sanitary facilities.

     H.    Provision for waste collection and disposal.

     I.      Provision for safety and security measures. The chief of police may close the event due to failure to satisfy conditions of the permit.

     J.      Regulation of signs. (Ord. 948 § 2, 2015)

 

17.850.010 Conditions of temporary use permit approval.
     Temporary use permits shall include the following conditions of approval:

     A.    Provision of a certificate of insurance acceptable to the city’s risk manager.

     B.     Submission of a performance bond or other surety devices, if necessary, to ensure that any temporary facilities or structures used will be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event and that the property will be restored to its former condition, to the satisfaction of the community development director.

     C.     Prior to the event, the applicant shall provide a statement to the city stating that the organizers of the event agree to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all liability or claims that may be brought against the city arising out of its approval of the minor temporary use permit, or arising out of the operation of the use or uses allowed under the permit, save and except that caused solely by the city’s active negligence.

     D.    Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be cleaned of debris, litter, or other evidence of the temporary activity on completion or removal of the activity, and shall thereafter be used in compliance with the provisions of this title.

     E.     Other conditions determined by the community development director to ensure the operation of the proposed temporary use in a compatible, efficient, harmonious, nuisance-free, orderly, and safe, manner. (Ord. 948 § 2, 2015)

 

17.850.011 Revocation.
     A temporary use permit or minor temporary use permit may be revoked or modified by the community development director when it is determined that any of the following occurs:

     A.    That circumstances have changed so that one or more of the provisions of this chapter are not being met or complied with.

     B.     That the temporary use permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud.

     C.     That one or more of the conditions of approval of the temporary use permit have not been met.

     D.    That the use is in violation of any statute, ordinance, policy, law or regulation. (Ord. 948 § 2, 2015)

 

Chapter 17.860 VARIANCE
17.860.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “variance procedure” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to establish a procedure through which a property owner may seek a relaxation or waiver of the zoning regulations of this title where there are extraordinary circumstances associated with a parcel of land such that the land or facilities cannot be used to the extent intended by the zoning. It shall be the purpose of this procedure to allow justice, while preserving to the greatest possible extent the purposes of the zoning regulations. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.860.002 Applicability of provisions.
     This procedure shall apply to all proposals to relax any of the regulations of the zoning regulations of the zoning ordinance, except a variance cannot be granted to permit a use not otherwise allowed in the zone. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.860.003 Application.
     A variance application shall be prepared and submitted pursuant to Chapter 17.800. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.860.004 Procedure.
     A.    A variance application shall be processed pursuant to Section 17.800.010.

     B.     Following a determination that an application is complete the application shall be reviewed by the planning commission which shall hold a public hearing or by the zoning administration pursuant to Section 17.860.007 if applicable.

     C.     In considering a variance application the planning commission shall determine whether the conditions surrounding the property and the proposed project justify their being able to make the findings prescribed by state law and set forth in Section 17.860.005.

     D.    Following consideration the planning commission or zoning administrator pursuant to Section 17.860.007 shall deny, approve or conditionally approve an application requiring such changes or imposing such reasonable conditions of approval as are in its judgment necessary to carry out the general purpose of the zoning regulations. However, when a variance is combined with an application requiring legislative action (such as a zoning amendment, general plan amendment, or development agreement), the planning commission’s action will be advisory to the city council, which becomes the decision maker. (Ord. 977 § 5, 2016; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.860.005 Required findings.
     A variance may be granted only upon determination that all of the following findings can be made:

     A.    That strict compliance with the specified regulation would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship inconsistent with the purposes of the zoning regulations, due to unique physical or topographic circumstances or conditions of design; or alternatively that strict compliance would preclude an effective design solution improving livability, operational efficiency or appearance.

     B.     That strict compliance with the regulation would deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by owners of similarly zoned property; or alternatively that strict compliance would preclude an effective design solution fulfilling the basic intent of the applicable regulations.

 

     C.     That if granted, the variance will not adversely affect the character, livability or appropriate development of abutting properties or the surrounding area, and will not be detrimental to the public welfare or contrary to adopted plans or development policy.

     D.    That the variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with limitations imposed on similarly zoned properties or inconsistent with the purposes of the zoning regulations. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.860.006 Termination of variance.
     Unless a different termination date is prescribed, variances shall terminate one year from the effective date of their granting, unless actual construction or alteration under valid permits, or actual commencement of the authorized activities in the case of a variance not involving construction or alteration, has begun within such period. However, such period of time may be extended by the planning commission upon application filed at any time before such period has expired. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.860.007 Alternative review procedure.
     The city council may by ordinance, empower the zoning administrator with full authority to review and act upon variance applications in the manner prescribed for the commission in this procedure; or may apportion specific kinds of variance applications to the zoning administrator, provided the ordinance establishes clear lines of separated responsibility over specific kinds of variances so that no overlap of administrative authority occurs between the zoning administrator and planning commission. Authority is granted to the zoning administrator to consider and take action on variances as follows:

     A.    Minor Variances.

     1.     The zoning administrator may, without conduct of a public hearing, grant variances as follows:

     a.     The reduction of any required front or rear yard in a residential zone in an amount not to exceed ten percent of the minimum required;

     b.     The reduction of any required yards in a nonresidential zone in an amount not to exceed ten percent of the minimum required;

     c.     The reduction of the total required side yard in a residential zone in an amount not to exceed ten percent of the minimum required;

     d.     The increase in the maximum allowable building height in an amount not to exceed ten percent of the maximum allowable.

     2.     Prior to any grant of variance the zoning administrator shall be required to make the findings set forth in Section 17.860.005 except, however, for purposes of this section an error in design of a development or misplacement of the development on the lot shall constitute hardship provided that, in the opinion of the zoning administration, conformance to the zoning ordinance will involve major financial hardship to the project. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.860.008 Appeal.
     Actions of the planning commission or zoning administrator may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.880. In addition the planning commission, by motion, may order that a specific application acted on by the zoning administrator, be presented to the planning commission for review and action. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.860.009 Off-street parking variance.
     The “parking variance” procedure set forth in Section 65906.5 of the state Planning and Zoning Law is not applicable. Similar provisions not requiring a variance are set forth in Section 17.620.019 (Off-street parking). (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.870 ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENT
17.870.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “rezoning and ordinance text, amendment procedure” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to prescribe the procedure by which changes may be made in the text of this title and in the application thereof to specific properties. (Ord. 753, 2003; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.870.002 Applicability of provisions.
     This procedure shall apply to all proposals to rezone property or to change the text of this title. (Ord. 753, 2003; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.870.003 Initiation.
     Amendment to the zoning ordinance text or a rezoning of property may be initiated through any of the following actions:

     A.    Private Party Initiation. The owner of any property, or authorized agent, may make application to rezone such property.

     B.     Planning Commission Initiation. The planning commission may, on its own motion, or shall, upon the direction of the city council, consider the rezoning of any property or a change in the text of this title.

     C.     City Council Initiation. The city council may on its own motion initiate action to consider the rezoning of any property or a change in the text of this title. Such action shall be taken only after receipt from the planning commission of a report on the proposed ordinance amendment. (Ord. 753, 2003; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.870.004 Private applications.
     A rezoning application shall be prepared and submitted pursuant to Chapter 17.800. In addition to the data required in Chapter 17.800, the applicant shall submit a statement as to how the proposed action coincides, or does not coincide, with the Brentwood general plan and other city plans applicable to the property, and such other information as may be required by the planning commission. (Ord. 753, 2003; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.870.005 Procedure.
     A.    Any application, or planning commission-initiated or city council-initiated zoning ordinance amendment shall be processed pursuant to Section

17.800.010.

     B.     Following receipt of an application for zoning ordinance amendment, the proposed zoning ordinance amendment shall be reviewed by the planning commission, which shall hold a public hearing.

     C.     Following receipt of a recommendation from the planning commission on a proposed zoning ordinance amendment, the proposed zoning ordinance amendment shall be reviewed by the city council, which shall hold a public hearing. (Ord. 753, 2003; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.870.006 Effect of action—Planning commission.
     The planning commission may take any one of the following actions on a proposed zoning ordinance amendment:

     A.    Private Party Initiation. Deny the application or recommend to the city council that the proposed or a modified ordinance amendment be made. In the case of denial, the decision of the commission shall become final unless appealed to the city council pursuant to Chapter 17.880.

     B.     Planning Commission Initiation. Table the matter or recommend to the city council that an ordinance amendment be made.

     C.     City Council Directed or Initiated. Recommend to the city council that no amendment, a modified amendment or the proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance be made. (Ord. 753, 2003; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.870.007 Effect of action—City council.
     A.    Following receipt of a recommendation from the planning commission on any proposed zoning ordinance amendment, the city council may either table, deny, approve or modify and approve the proposed zoning ordinance amendment.

     B.     If the city council decision is to modify the recommendation of the planning commission, it may elect to take one of the following actions:

     1.     Modify the planning commission’s recommendation in any manner the council deems necessary and approve the application with the modifications.

     2.     Refer the application back to the planning commission for further review and analysis.

     3.     Refer the application to city staff for further review and analysis.

     C.     Reapplication Restricted. Whenever a private-party application has been denied, no such application for the same or similar proposal affecting the same property, or any portion thereof, shall be filed within one year after the date of denial. (Ord. 753 § 1, 2003; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.870.008 Prescribed criteria.
     No rezoning of property or text amendment shall occur which is inconsistent with the city’s community development plan. In making a decision the planning commission and council shall consider the consistency of the proposed action to the community development plan and other applicable city plans, and shall consider whether the proposed action is inappropriate or otherwise contrary to the public interest. (Ord. 753, 2003; Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.870.009 Appeal.
     Action by the planning commission denying of a rezoning may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.880. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.880 APPEALS AND CALLS FOR REVIEW
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ords. 716 and 408.

 

17.880.010 Right to appeal—Call for review—Time limits.
     A.    Appeal. A decision of the community development director, zoning administrator, planning manager, or city engineer may be appealed to the planning commission. A decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. Any interested person may appeal a decision.

     B.     Call for Review. A decision of the community development director, zoning administrator, planning manager, city engineer, or other administrative official may be called up for review by a planning commissioner. A decision of the planning commission may be called up for review by a member of the city council. The planning commissioner or council member may call the matter for review for the good of the city, without stating specific reasons for the call. The act of calling the matter for review shall not, by itself, disqualify the planning commissioner or council member from participating as part of the decision-making body so long as that commissioner or council member is neutral and unbiased and has not previously announced to any member of the public or city staff a preferred outcome on the matter.

     C.     Time Limits. An appeal or call for review must be submitted within ten days of the adoption of the resolution of decision. (Ord. 977 § 6, 2016)

 

17.880.020 Initiation of appeal or call for review.
     A.    Filing Appeal or Call for Review. An appeal or call for review to the planning commission must be completed and filed with the community development director on a form provided by the city. An appeal or call for review to the city council must be completed and filed with the city clerk on a form provided by the city. An appeal must state specific reasons for the appeal and be accompanied by the appeal fee established by the city council.

     B.     Effect on Decisions. A decision that is appealed or called up for review in a timely manner does not become effective until the appeal or review is decided and any further appeal period has passed, or the appeal is withdrawn. Without a timely appeal, an appellant waives his or her rights to challenge the decision by administrative process, judicial process or any other legal proceeding. (Ord. 977 § 6, 2016)

 

17.880.030 Procedures for appeals and calls for review.
     A.    Hearing Date. The city will schedule an appeal or call for review for a hearing before the appellate body within forty-five days of the city’s receipt of the appeal or call, unless both applicant and appellant consent in writing to a later date.

     B.     Notice and Public Hearing. An appeal or review hearing will be a public hearing if the decision being appealed or reviewed requires a public hearing. The city will give notice of the public hearing in the manner required for the initial decision. The applicant need not post the property again for the appeal if the original posting notice under Section 17.800.009(C) advised interested persons to request further information from the city.

     C.     Plans and Materials. At an appeal or review hearing the appellate body will consider the application, plans, exhibits, and related project materials that were the subject of the original decision.

     D.    Withdrawal. The appellant may withdraw an appeal at any time before the beginning of the public hearing to consider the appeal by submitting a written request to either the community development director (for an appeal to the planning commission) or to the city clerk (for an appeal to the city council).

     E.     Hearing. At the hearing, the appellate body shall review the record of the decision and hear testimony of the appellant, the applicant, and any other interested party. The hearing is a de novo hearing. The appellate body must apply the standards and finding requirements appropriate to the type of application. The hearing body may impose conditions of approval, including authorizing a subordinate hearing body to hear a future amendment or time extension.

     F.     Decision and Notice. After the hearing, the appellate body will by appropriate resolution or ordinance affirm, modify, or reverse the original decision. When a decision is modified or reversed, the appellate body shall state the specific findings if required, or the reasons for modification or reversal.

     If the matter is heard by the planning commission, the zoning administrator will mail notice of the planning commission’s decision. If the matter is heard by the city council, the city clerk will mail notice of the city council’s decision. The notice must be mailed within seven calendar days after the date of the decision to the applicant, the appellant, and any other party requesting notice. (Ord. 977 § 6, 2016)

 

17.880.040 Effective date.
     A decision by the city council regarding an appeal or review becomes final on the date of the adopted written decision. A decision by the planning commission regarding an appeal or review becomes final ten days after the date the notice of decision is mailed, unless timely appealed to the city council. (Ord. 977 § 6, 2016)

 

Chapter 17.890 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
17.890.001 Title and purpose of provisions.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “enforcement provisions” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to assure that all provisions of this title are properly administered and complied with. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.890.002 Duty of zoning administrator.
     The zoning administrator shall have the primary responsibility in the enforcement of this title. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.890.003 Duty of other city officers.
     It is the duty of the building inspector and of all other officials of the city concerned with any of the matters regulated by this title, to enforce this title. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.890.004 Conformity of permits and licenses.
     Every department and every employee of the city authorized to issue permits or licenses affecting the use or occupancy of land or of a building or structure shall comply with the provisions of this title. Where any action of referral or any appeal is required by this title, no permit or license involved shall be issued unless and until such action has been taken and the time within which any further appeal could have been taken has expired. Any permit or license issued for a building, structure, use or occupancy contrary to the provisions of this title shall be void and of no effect. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.890.005 Inspection and right of entry.
     Whenever the city shall have cause to suspect a violation of any provision of the zoning regulations or whenever necessary to the investigation of an application for revocation of any zoning approval under any of the procedures described in the zoning regulations, the officials responsible for enforcement or administration of the zoning regulations or their duly authorized representatives may enter on any site or into any structure for the purpose of investigation, provided they do so in a reasonable manner. No secured building shall be entered without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof, nor shall the owner or occupant, after reasonable notice and opportunity to comply, refuse to permit such entry. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.890.006 Revocation.
     All permits or variances shall be subject to the plans and other conditions upon the basis of which they were granted. In the event of a violation of any of the provisions of the zoning regulations, or in the event of a failure to comply with any prescribed conditions of approval, the zoning administrator may submit to the planning commission a report and recommendation for revocation of the permit and the planning commission may revoke any permit or variance, after notice and hearing. In case of revocation of a permit, or variance the decision of the commission shall become final fourteen days after the date of the decision unless appealed to the council in accordance with Chapter 17.880. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

17.890.007 Penalties.
     Any person who knowingly violates or causes or permits another person to violate any provision of this title is guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars. A violator may be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which a violation of this title is committed, continued or permitted. (Ord. 408, 1987)

 

Chapter 17.900 STANDARDS FOR OUTDOOR DINING USES AND MERCHANDISE DISPLAYS IN THE DOWNTOWN (DT) ZONE
17.900.001 Purpose and intent.
     The purpose and intent of this chapter is to encourage new development in the downtown (DT) zone; to carefully consider the impacts of new commercial development on the viability on the downtown, to facilitate the expansion of existing businesses that will draw additional shoppers to downtown; to develop a design plan for the downtown to create a feeling of unity and destination so that buildings compliment each other; to establish development and operational standards for the review of outdoor dining uses and merchandise display in the downtown (DT) zone; and to encourage business organizations to sponsor retail events to bring shoppers to the downtown area on a regular basis. (Ord. 853 § 9, 2008)

 

17.900.002 Outdoor dining uses in the public right-of-way defined.
     “Outdoor dining uses in the public right-of-way” means eating or drinking establishments which serves ready-to-eat food and/or beverages, having outdoor dining areas in or on a public right-of-way. (Ord. 853 § 9, 2008)

 

17.900.003 Outdoor merchandise displays in and out of the public right-of-way defined.
     “Outdoor merchandise displays in and out of the public right-of-way” means retail commercial establishment displays of merchandise offered for sale, in the public right-of-way or that can otherwise be seen from ground level of a public right-of-way. (Ord. 853 § 9, 2008)

 

17.900.004 Applicability of outdoor dining uses and merchandise displays standards.
     Establishment of an outdoor dining use or merchandise display in the public right-of-way shall require design review approval and issuance of an outdoor dining/merchandise display permit by the director of community development or designee and shall be prepared and submitted pursuant to Chapter 17.800 of the Brentwood Municipal Code. The director of community development or designee shall follow the procedures of this chapter prior to issuing an outdoor dining/merchandise display permit and notices for outdoor dining uses serving alcoholic beverages shall be sent to all property owners and businesses within three hundred feet of the proposed site. The director of community development or designee may establish conditions of approval for the outdoor dining use or merchandise display permit as necessary to achieve the requirements of this chapter. Upon receipt of an application for outdoor dining permit serving alcoholic beverages, the director of community development or designee shall refer the application to the chief of police for his or her review and comment. Approval of the outdoor dining permit by the director of community development or designee shall also fulfill the requirements of Chapter 9.36 of the Brentwood Municipal Code. (Ord. 853 § 9, 2008)

 

17.900.005 Required standards.
     No outdoor dining use or merchandise display in the public right-of-way may be approved unless all of the following development and operational standards are met:

     A.    Outdoor dining use shall be permitted as allowed under the downtown core street alt. “B” flexible zone and as shown in the downtown specific plan, or on public sidewalks as long as all other applicable regulations are adhered to.

     B.     A four-foot unobstructed sidewalk clearance for pedestrians and wheelchairs shall be maintained at all times from a table, chair, bench, display, planter, or any other appurtenance used as part of a sidewalk dining area or sidewalk decorative display. No sidewalk dining area or sidewalk decorative display shall be located so as to block access to or from a building. A minimum unobstructed clear area shall be maintained which extends two feet to either side of both door jambs and eight feet perpendicularly from the door in a closed position. On a corner lot, no sidewalk dining area or sidewalk decorative display shall be located within the area bounded by the extensions of the corner building walls between the building and the curb.

     C.     Sidewalk decorative displays shall occupy no more than fifty square feet per business. All sidewalk decorative displays shall be removed daily after business hours. All sidewalk dining furniture, including planters or other approved barriers around a sidewalk dining area, may remain if unable to be easily moved. No portion of a sidewalk dining area or sidewalk decorative display shall be permanently attached to the sidewalk.

     D.    Any umbrella, heater, or similar feature used in a sidewalk dining area or sidewalk decorative display shall maintain a minimum height clearance of seven feet and be safely secured to the satisfaction of the director of public works/city engineer and chief building official or their designees.

     E.     Sidewalk dining areas and sidewalk decorative displays shall generally be located within the sidewalk area fronting the establishment. Such areas may be extended beyond the frontage with the approval of any affected business owner and the director of community development or designee.

     F.     Outdoor dining and merchandise display in the public right-of-way shall not be required to provide additional parking spaces for the outdoor area.

     G.    Any outdoor lighting associated with outdoor dining areas shall be subject to the approval of the director of community development or designee.

     H.    Sound amplification devices and/or musical instruments providing background music for listening pleasure, shall be allowed in the outdoor dining areas to the approval of the director of community development or designee.

     I.      The design and appearance of all proposed improvements or furniture, including, but not limited to, tables, chairs, benches, umbrellas, planters, and menu boards, to be placed in the sidewalk dining area shall present a coordinated theme and be compatible with the appearance and design of the principal building, as determined by the director of community development and chief building official or their designees. The use of plastic tables and chairs is prohibited. Sidewalk decorative displays shall be designed to enhance the appearance of a structure or site and shall present an attractive arrangement of merchandise sold within the store. Sidewalk dining and/or outdoor merchandise display may only occur during the hours of operation established for the individual businesses.

     J.      The permittee shall maintain the sidewalk dining area or sidewalk decorative display area, and the adjoining street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk in a neat, clean, and orderly condition at all times. This shall include all tables, chairs, benches, displays, or other appurtenances placed in the public right-of-way. Provisions shall be made for trash receptacles to serve the sidewalk dining area, subject to the approval of the director of public works/city engineer and director of community development or designees. The permittee, on a regular basis, shall clean the surface of the sidewalk by washing or buffing to remove any stains, marks, or discoloring to the satisfaction of the director of public works/city engineer or designee. In the event damage does occur to the adjoining street, curb, gutter, or sidewalk the permittee shall notify the city of the damages and shall be responsible for all repairs of said damages subject to the review and approval of the director of public works/city engineer and chief building official or designees.

     K.    Special Standards for Outdoor Dining Areas with Alcoholic Beverage Service.

     1.     Alcoholic beverages may only be served in sidewalk dining areas which are established in conjunction with an eating or drinking establishment.

     2.     The sidewalk dining area shall be physically separated from the rest of the sidewalk by a barrier no greater than three feet in height. The barrier shall be compatible with the appearance and design of the building and the rest of the sidewalk dining area and shall be subject to the approval of the chief of police, director of public works/city engineer and director of community development or designees. The barrier shall be portable and may consist of planters, removable bollards, or similar features which involve no alteration or damage to the sidewalk.

     3.     A sign shall be posted within the establishment, subject to the approval of the chief of police and director of community development or designees, stating that alcoholic beverages must be kept within the sidewalk dining area at all times.

     4.     The capacity of the sidewalk dining area shall be limited to the number of seats, as approved by the director of community development or designee.

     5.     No bar shall be allowed in the sidewalk dining area.

     6.     A license shall be obtained from the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) prior to the operation of a sidewalk dining area serving alcoholic beverages and shall be maintained continuously as long as alcoholic beverages are served in the sidewalk dining area. Loss of such license shall automatically constitute termination of the city permit to serve alcoholic beverages in the sidewalk dining area.

     L.     In addition to whatever signage may be permitted for the dining establishment use by the specific plan, and notwithstanding any provisions of the specific plan to the contrary, provided that the sign is attractively designed, maintain adequate pedestrian and vehicle sight clearance per subsection B of this section, does not block the visibility of display windows or signage of any adjacent business, is stored indoors after hours of operation, and is limited to no more than a thirty-six inch by eighteen inch area. Additional signage on umbrellas may also be permitted. Umbrella signage shall be limited to the business name only and shall consist of only one line of lettering not to exceed twelve inches in height. The director of community development or designee shall have design review authority for signs used in conjunction with outdoor dining uses and shall carry out such design review authority in conjunction with the overall review of the outdoor dining use.

     M.    No outdoor dining or merchandise display in the public right-of-way, including furnishings and signs, shall block visibility of display windows or signage of adjacent businesses, unless written consent of any affected business owner to block visibility is obtained by the applicant and provided to the director of community development or designee.

     N.    The permittee shall pay any applicable outdoor dining and merchandise display permit fee established by the city’s cost allocation plan. Applications for an outdoor dining or merchandise display permit in the public right-of-way shall be filed by the operator of the use, or by an agent, trustee or attorney for the operator. (Ord. 882 § 2, 2010; Ord. 853 § 9, 2008)

 

17.900.006 Indemnification and insurance.
     The permittee shall be required to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers and employees from and against all claims, losses, damage, injury and liability for damages arising from the permit tee’s use of the public right-of-way. The permittee shall provide to the city in a form and in amounts acceptable to the city attorney or designee, certificates of insurance evidencing the existence of a general liability policy covering the area subject to the permit. (Ord. 853 § 9, 2008)

 

17.900.007 Suspension of permit.
     The director of public works/city engineer or designee shall have the right to suspend or prohibit the operation of a sidewalk dining area or require removal of a sidewalk decorative display at any time because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the use of the sidewalk area. Such problems or conflicts may arise from, but are not limited to, scheduled festivals, parades, marches and similar special events; repairs to the street, sidewalk or other public facility; or from demonstrations or emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent possible, the city will give prior written notice of any time period during which the operation of the sidewalk dining area or sidewalk decorative display must be suspended. (Ord. 853 § 9, 2008)

 

17.900.008 Violation of conditions.
     A.    If any portion of a sidewalk dining area or sidewalk decorative display obstructs the public right-of-way beyond which is provided for in this chapter, the director of community development or designee shall immediately direct the permittee to move the obstruction. If the permittee fails to do so, the director of community development or designee is entitled to immediately move the obstruction.

     B.     If the sidewalk dining area or sidewalk decorative display is not maintained in a neat, clean, and orderly condition, or as conditioned by the director of community development, the director of community development or designee shall direct that the permittee or property owner correct the condition and/or remove the furniture, displays, and appurtenances. If the director of community development or designee finds that it is necessary to remove the furniture, displays, or appurtenances in the interest of the public health, safety, or general welfare and the permittee fails to remove them, the director of community development or designee may immediately remove them at the expense of the permittee or property owner.

     C.     A sidewalk dining/decorative display permit may be revoked by the director of community development or designee upon a determination that the permittee has not complied with the provisions of this chapter or the conditions of the design review approval. The director of community development or designee shall hold a hearing and, if not satisfied that the provisions or conditions are being complied with, shall revoke the permit or take such actions as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the regulation or condition.

     D.    The director of community development or designee shall suspend the service of alcoholic beverages in the sidewalk dining area and shall hold a hearing on the matter as provided in Section 17.900.010(C), if a sidewalk dining area serving alcoholic beverages is not operated as required in this chapter, or if the restaurant operator is not able to control patrons consuming alcoholic beverages to the extent that patrons demonstrate a pattern of behavior of loud, offensive, or abusive actions, the physical or verbal harassment of passers-by, or the removal of alcoholic beverages from the sidewalk dining area. (Ord. 853 § 9, 2008)

 

17.900.009 Procedure for outdoor merchandise displays not in the public right-of-way.
     Any business wanting to establish an outdoor merchandise display area that can otherwise be seen from ground level of a public right-of-way and is located on-site and outside of the public right-of-way outdoor merchandise display area, as described in this chapter, shall submit a design review application for the outdoor merchandise display area to the city, for review an approval, pursuant to Chapter 17.820 of the Brentwood Municipal Code, prior to establishing the outdoor merchandise display area on-site. The purpose of this is to foster an attractive design for the outdoor merchandise display area through consideration of aesthetic and functional relationships to surrounding business establishments and in order to further enhance the city’s appearance, and the livability and usefulness of the properties. The intent of this is to allow decorative outdoor display of merchandise and not outdoor storage of merchandise. (Ord. 853 § 9, 2008)

 

17.900.010 Appeal.
     Action of the community development director may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.880 of the Brentwood Municipal Code. (Ord. 853 § 9, 2008)

Title 18 CEQA PROCEDURES
Chapter 18.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 18.08 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 18.12 PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW
Chapter 18.16 INITIAL STUDY
Chapter 18.20 NEGATIVE DECLARATION
Chapter 18.24 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT
Chapter 18.28 LEAD AGENCY PRINCIPLE
Chapter 18.32 EXEMPTIONS TO CEQA

Chapter 18.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
18.04.010 Title.
     The provisions of Title 18 shall be known as “The Procedures for Implementing the California Environmental Quality Act of the City of Brentwood” and may be referred to herein by such title or as the “local CEQA guidelines,” “the CEQA ordinance,” “the CEQA regulations,” “this title” or similar references, including the substitution of the term “CEQA” with the term “EIR.” (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.04.020 Purpose.
     The purpose of these provisions shall be as follows:

     A.    To conform to Section 15022 of the CEQA guidelines which require each public agency to adopt procedures, objectives and criteria for administering the city’s responsibilities under CEQA;

     B.     To carry out the legislative policies as set forth in Chapter 1 of the California Environmental Quality Act and the purposes set forth in Section 15002 and the policies set forth in Section 15003 of the CEQA guidelines;

     C.     To provide a general overview for the public and other persons and organization of the general procedures to be used by the city in implementing CEQA;

     D.    To assist in relating the provisions of CEQA to local procedures in the processing of entitlements permitted under the zoning ordinance and other city ordinances and to adopt local procedures, criteria, and objectives consistent with CEQA. (Ord. 4040 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.04.030 Applicability.
     The provisions of Title 18 shall be applicable as a prerequisite to the approval by the city of any of the following projects:

     A.    Any private project;

     B.     Any public project to be undertaken by the city;

     C.     Any public project to be undertaken by any other public agency where the city has been determined to be the lead agency. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.04.040 CEQA administrator—Appointment—Duties.
     A.    Appointment. The planning director of the city of Brentwood is appointed to be the CEQA administrator.

     B.     Duties. The CEQA administrator shall be responsible for the administration of this title. He shall be responsible for the collection of environmental data with respect to any project and may make all determinations related to the projects as provided for herein. The CEQA administrator may prepare or contract for and direct the preparation of an EIR or negative declaration and may approve such documents where the CEQA administrator has authorization to approve a project pursuant to the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.04.050 Adoption of CEQA guidelines.
     The regulations contained in Chapter 3 of the Public Resources Code, Guidelines for Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act are adopted as the specific regulations of this title. In the event of a conflict between this title and the CEQA guidelines, said guidelines shall govern. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.04.060 Appeal.
     Appeal from any action or other determination by the CEQA administrator or other public body or city official shall be made in accordance with Chapter 17.880. (Ord. 716 § 2, 2002; Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.04.070 Fees.
     Fees, established by separate city ordinance, shall be required to make any application complete following a determination, after preliminary project review, that an environmental document must be prepared. In addition the project sponsor shall pay the contracted cost for the preparation of an EIR. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

Chapter 18.08 DEFINITIONS
18.08.010 Title and purpose.
     A.    Title. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “CEQA Definitions” of this title.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to promote understanding, consistency and precision in the interpretation of the CEQA regulations. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.08.020 Applicability.
     The meaning and construction of words and phrases as hereinafter set forth shall apply throughout this title except where the context of such words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning of construction. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.08.030 Definitions.
     The definitions set forth in Chapter 2.5 of CEQA and in Article 20 of CEQA guidelines are adopted. The following definitions are either reproduced from CEQA and its guidelines for convenience or are additional definitions applicable to this title.

     1.     “Applicant” means a person who proposes to carry out a project which needs a lease, permit, license, certificate, or other entitlement for use or financial assistance from the city or other public agency when that person applies for the governmental approval or assistance.

     2.     “Approval” means a decision by the city acting through any of its officials, commission or the council which commits the city to a definite course of action in regard to a project intended to be carried on by any person.

     a.     With private projects, approval occurs upon the earliest commitment to issue or the issuance by the city of a discretionary contract, grant, subsidy, loan, or other form of financial assistance, lease, permit, license, certificate, or other entitlement for use of the project.

     b.     With public projects, approval occurs upon the irrevocable commitment by the city or other public agency to carry out a project.

     3.     “Categorical exemption” means an exemption from CEQA for a class of projects based on a finding by the secretary for resources that the class of projects does not have a significant effect on the environment.

     4.     “CEQA” means the California Environmental Quality Act, California Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.

     5.     “CEQA administrator” means a city employee who is designated and charged with the responsibility of administering the provisions of this title.

     6.     “City” means the city of Brentwood acting by and through its various officers, departments and commissions.

     7.     “Commission” means the planning commission of the city.

     8.     “Council” means the city council of the city.

     9.     “Discretionary project” means a project which requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation when the city decides to approve or disapprove a particular activity, as distinguished from situations where the city merely has to determine whether there has been conformity with applicable statutes, ordinances, or regulations.

     10.   “Effects/impacts” means either or both of the following physical changes:

     a.     Direct or primary effects which are caused by the project and occur at the same time and place;

     b.     Indirect or secondary effects which are caused by the project and are later in time or farther removed in distance, but are still reasonably foreseeable. Indirect or secondary effects may include growth inducing effects and other effects related to induced changes in the pattern of land use, population density, or growth rate, and related effects on air and water and other natural systems, including ecosystems.

     11.   “Environment” means the physical conditions which exist within the area which will be affected by a proposed project including land, air, water, minerals, flora, fauna, ambient noise, and objects of historical or aesthetic significance. The area involved shall be the area in which significant effects would occur either directly or indirectly as a result of the project. The “environment” includes both natural and manmade conditions.

     12.   “Environmental document” means initial studies, negative declarations, draft and final EIRs, documents prepared as substitutes for EIRs and negative declarations under a program certified pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 21080.5, and documents prepared under the National Environmental Protection Act (NEPA) and used by a state or local agency in the place of an initial study, negative declaration, or an EIR.

     13.   “Environmental impact report/EIR” means a detailed statement prepared under CEQA describing and analyzing the significant environmental effects of a project and discussing ways to mitigate or avoid the effects. The term shall include “an administrative draft EIR,” “draft EIR” or “final EIR,” depending on the context.

     14.   “Guidelines/CEQA guidelines” means the guidelines for implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970 as adopted by the California Resources Agency and any amendments thereto.

     15.   “Initial study” means a preliminary analysis prepared by the city to determine whether an EIR or a negative declaration must be prepared or to identify the significant environmental effects to be analyzed in an EIR.

     16.   “Lead agency” means the public agency which has the principal responsibility for carrying out or approving a project. The lead agency will decide whether an EIR or negative declaration will be required for the project and will cause the document to be prepared.

     17.   “Local agency” means any public agency other than a state agency, board, or commission. Local agency includes but is not limited to cities, counties, charter cities and counties, districts, school districts, special districts, redevelopment agencies, local agency formation commissions, and any board, commission, or organizational subdivision of a local agency when so designated by order or resolution of the governing legislative body of the local agency.

     18.   “Ministerial” means a governmental decision involving little or no personal judgment by the public official as to the wisdom or manner of carrying out the project. The public official merely applies the law to the facts as presented but uses no special discretion or judgment in reaching a decision. A ministerial decision involves only the use of fixed standards or objective measurements, and the public official cannot use personal, subjective judgment in deciding whether or how the project should be carried out.

     19.   “Mitigation” means any of the following actions taken relative to an identified impact on the environment.

     a.     Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

     b.     Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation;

     c.     Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the impacted environment;

     d.     Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action.

     20.   “Negative declaration” means a written statement by the city briefly describing the reasons that a proposed project, not exempt from CEQA, will not have a significant effect on the environment and therefore does not require the preparation of an EIR.

     21.   “Notice of completion” means a brief notice filed with the state Office of Planning and Research (OPR) by the city as soon as it has completed a draft EIR and is prepared to send out copies for review.

     22.   “Notice of determination” means a brief notice to be filed by the city after it approves or determines to carry out a project which is subject to the requirements of CEQA.

     23.   “Notice of exemption” means a brief notice which may be filed by the city after it has decided to carry out or approve a project and has determined that the project is exempt from CEQA as being ministerial, categorically exempt, an emergency, or subject to another exemption from CEQA.

     24.   “Notice of preparation” means a brief notice sent by the city to notify the responsible agencies, trustee agencies, and involved federal agencies that the city plans to prepare an EIR for the project. The purpose of the notice is to solicit guidance from those agencies as to the scope and content of the environmental information to be included in the EIR.

     25.   “Person” means any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, company, district, city, county, city and county, town, the state, and any of the agencies or political subdivisions of such entities.

     26.   “Project” means the whole of an action, which has a potential for resulting in a physical change in the environment, directly or ultimately, and that is any of the following:

     a.     An activity directly undertaken by any public agency including, but not limited to, public works construction and related activities, clearing or grading of land, improvements to existing public structures, enactment and amendment of local general plans or elements thereof pursuant to Government Code Sections 65100 through 65700;

     b.     An activity undertaken by a person which is supported in whole or in part through public agency contracts, grants, subsidies, loans, or other forms of assistance from one or more public agencies;

     c.     An activity involving the issuance to a person of a lease, permit, license, certificate, or other entitlement for use by one or more public agencies.

     27.   Project, private. “Private project” means a project which will be carried out by a person other than a governmental agency and which will need a discretionary approval from one or more governmental agencies for:

     a.     A contract or financial assistance, or

     b.     A lease, permit, license, certificate, or other entitlement for use.

     28.   “Public agency” means any state agency, board or commission and any local or regional agency as defined in CEQA guidelines.

     29.   “Responsible agency” means a public agency which proposes to carry out or approve a project, for which a lead agency is preparing or had prepared an EIR or negative declaration. For the purposes of CEQA, the term responsible agency includes all public agencies other than the lead agency which have discretionary approval power over the project.

     30.   “Significant effect on the environment” means a substantial, or potentially substantial, adverse change in any of the physical conditions within the area affected by the project including land, air, water, minerals, flora, fauna, ambient noise, and objects of historic or aesthetic significance. A social or economic change related to a physical change may be considered only in determining whether the physical change is significant.

     31.   “Sponsor/project sponsor” means an applicant for a private project or the city of Brentwood and any other public agency proposing a public project subject to CEQA. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

Chapter 18.12 PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW
18.12.010 Applicability.
     No application for a private project shall be approved by the city nor shall any project be undertaken by the city or any other local agency where the city may be the lead agency until one of the following determinations has been made:

     A.    The project is not a “project” as defined by CEQA and CEQA guidelines or determined by the city and listed in Chapter 18.32;

     B.     The project is one which has a statutory exemption pursuant to Article 18 of CEQA guidelines and/or determined by the city and listed in Chapter 18.32;

     C.     The project is one which is categorically exempt pursuant to Article 19 of CEQA guidelines or determined by the city and listed in Chapter 18.32;

     D.    The project will have no possible significant effect on the environment;

     E.     A negative declaration has been prepared for the project;

     F.     A draft EIR has been prepared for the project;

     G.    The city and the project sponsor have agreed to defer preparation of an EIR where there is a likelihood that the project will be disapproved on its merits pursuant to Section 15270 of CEQA guidelines;

     H.    The city is not the lead agency. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.12.020 Preliminary project review— Private project.
     Within thirty days of receipt of a project application the CEQA administrator shall determine its completeness and whether it constitutes a project, is exempt from CEQA or will have no possible significant effect on the environment. If so determined a notice of exemption (CEQA guidelines Appendix E), may be prepared and filed with the Contra Costa county clerk following project approval. If found to be complete and subject to CEQA the CEQA administrator shall proceed with an initial study. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.12.030 Preliminary project review— Public project.
     A.    It shall be the responsibility of city department heads or other city officials and of local public agencies to assure through the CEQA administrator that a project to be undertaken is not subject to CEQA. Projects not subject to CEQA include but are not limited to those listed in Chapter 18.32.

     B.     If it is determined that a public project is or may be subject to CEQA the CEQA administrator shall be provided with a full description of the project and all the information necessary for a preliminary review to determine whether the project is exempt pursuant to Section 18.12.010.

     C.     Within thirty days of receipt of a project proposal the CEQA administrator shall determine its completeness and whether it constitutes a project, is exempt or will have no possible significant effect on the environment. If so determined a notice of exemption (CEQA guidelines Appendix B) may be prepared and filed with the Contra Costa county clerk following project approval. If found to be complete and subject to CEQA, the CEQA administrator shall prepare an initial study. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

Chapter 18.16 INITIAL STUDY
18.16.010 Applicability.
     Following preliminary review and a finding that a project is subject to CEQA, the CEQA administrator shall conduct an initial study to determine whether the project may have a significant effect on the environment. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.16.020 Required data.
     In addition to a description of the proposed project the project sponsor shall complete and submit an environmental information form (CEQA guidelines Appendix H) and any supporting data deemed by the CEQA administrator to be necessary to properly complete the environmental check list (CEQA guidelines Appendix I). (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.16.030 Initial study.
     Within thirty days following certification of an application or project proposal to be complete (forty-five days with the consent of the sponsor), the CEQA administrator shall review the project, consult with all responsible and trustee agencies, complete the initial study and make a determination as to whether an EIR is to be required or whether a negative declaration is to be prepared. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.16.040 Mandatory findings of significance.
     Pursuant to CEQA guidelines Section 15065, an EIR shall be required where any of the following conditions occur:

     A.    The project has the potential to substantially degrade the quality of the environment, substantially reduce the habitat of a fish or wildlife species, cause a fish or wildlife population to drop below self-sustaining levels, threaten to eliminate a plant or animal community, reduce plant or animal, or eliminate important examples of the major periods of California history or prehistory;

     B.     The project has the potential to achieve short-term environmental goals to the disadvantage of long-term environmental goals;

     C.     The project has possible environmental effects which are individually limited but cumulatively considerable. As used in this subsection, “cumulatively considerable” means that the incremental effects of an individual project are considerable when viewed in connection with the effects of past projects, the effects of other current projects, and the effects of probable future projects;

     D.    The environmental effects of a project will cause substantial adverse effects on human beings, either directly or indirectly. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.16.050 Findings—Negative declaration.
     Pursuant to CEQA guidelines Section 15070 a proposed negative declaration shall be prepared for a project when either of the following conditions occur:

     A.    The initial study shows that there is no substantial evidence that the project may have a significant effect on the environment; or

     B.     The initial study identified potentially significant effects but:

     1.     Revisions in the project plans or proposals made by or agreed to by the applicant before the proposed negative declaration is released for public review would avoid the effects or mitigate the effects to a point where clearly no significant effects would occur; and

     2.     There is no substantial evidence before the agency that the project as revised may have a significant effect on the environment. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

Chapter 18.20 NEGATIVE DECLARATION
18.20.010 Applicability.
     Following an initial study and a finding that a negative declaration may be prepared the CEQA administrator shall prepare a negative declaration and provide for its public review as follows. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.20.020 Contents—Negative declaration.
     A negative declaration shall include the following:

     A.    A brief description of the project, including a commonly used name for the project, if any;

     B.     The location of the project, preferably shown on a map, and the name of the project proponent;

     C.     A proposed finding that the project will not have a significant effect on the environment;

     D.    An attached copy of the initial study documenting reasons to support the finding; and

     E.     Mitigation measures, if any, included in the project to avoid potentially significant effects. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.20.030 Public notice.
     Public notice of consideration of a negative declaration shall be given in accordance with the following:

     A.    Following completion of a negative declaration, a copy shall be sent to each responsible trustee agency involved with the project, every public agency having jurisdiction by law, the project sponsor, and to all organizations and individuals who have requested such notice. Notice shall include the projected or actual date of public hearing and a deadline for a written comment for the approving body’s consideration.

     B.     For matters requiring public hearing, public notice shall be included in the public hearing notice on the matter under consideration for concurrent consideration.

     C.     For matters not requiring public hearing, public notice shall be given that a negative declaration is to be considered at a meeting prior to, but not later than, the meeting at which project approval or other authorization is to be given.

     D.    Public notice shall normally be by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, except that alternative or additional notice may be given pursuant to CEQA guidelines Section 15072. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.20.040 Consideration and approval.
     A.    Prior to making its recommendation on any project an advisory board shall consider the negative declaration.

     B.     Prior to approval of a project, the decision making body shall consider the negative declaration and any public comments and approve the negative declaration if they find that there is no substantial evidence that the project will have a significant effect on the environment.

     C.     Following project approval the CEQA administrator shall file a notice of determination (CEQA guidelines Appendix D) with the Contra Costa county clerk and, if discretionary approval from a state agency is required, with the State Office of Planning and Research. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.20.050 Time limit.
     A negative declaration for a private project shall be completed and ready for approval within one hundred five days from the date the project application was certified as complete except that the city may suspend the running of the time period or may disapprove the project in the event of unreasonable delay by the project sponsor in meeting requests by the city (CEQA guidelines Section 15107). (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

Chapter 18.24 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT
18.24.010 Applicability.
     Following an initial study and a finding that an EIR must be prepared, the CEQA administrator shall cause a draft EIR to be prepared and provide for its public review as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.24.020 Notice of preparation.
     A.    Immediately following a decision that an environmental impact report is to be prepared the CEQA administrator shall send a notice of preparation (CEQA guidelines Appendix J) to each responsible agency and each trustee or federal agency involved or affected by the project.

     B.     Notice of preparation shall be sent by registered mail or other method which provides a record of its receipt and shall include a copy of the initial study.

     C.     Notice of preparation may also be sent to other persons or organizations known to have a concern with the environmental effects of the project.

     D.    Failure of a responsible agency to respond to the notice within thirty days of their receipt of the notice or to request additional time shall allow a presumption that no response will be made. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.24.030 EIR preparation.
     The draft EIR shall be prepared directly by or under contract to the city pursuant to CEQA guidelines Section 15084. The EIR shall be an informational document containing the information required by Article 9 of CEQA guidelines with attention being given to the considerations contained in Article 10 of CEQA guidelines. The EIR may be any one of the type described in Article 11 of CEQA guidelines and in addition the city may choose to use a previously prepared EIR which adequately analyzes the project at hand pursuant to CEQA guidelines Section 15063. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.24.040 Administrative draft EIR.
     Prior to publication and circulation of the draft EIR an administrative draft EIR shall be reviewed by the CEQA administrator who will, when such is the case, certify the draft EIR as being complete. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.24.050 Notice of completion.
     Following completion of the draft EIR a notice of completion (CEQA guidelines Appendix C) shall be filed with the office of Planning and Research pursuant to CEQA guidelines Section 15085). (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.24.060 Consultations.
     Following completion of the draft EIR, copies shall be forwarded to all public agencies affected by the project and/or any person, or any organization having special expertise or interest in the project with a request for comments pursuant to CEQA guidelines Section 15086. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.24.070 Public review.
     Following completion of the draft EIR, public notice of its availability shall be given and the draft EIR shall be circulated pursuant to CEQA guidelines Section 15087. At the discretion of the city a public hearing on an EIR may be conducted either separately or in conjunction with any other hearing to be held on the project. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.24.080 Time limits for review.
     The review period for a draft EIR shall normally be not less than thirty days (forty-five days if a state agency is involved) and not more than ninety days. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.24.090 Evaluation and response to comments.
     The city shall evaluate and respond to all comments pursuant to CEQA guidelines Section 15088 and shall either revise the draft EIR or include them in an appendix to the draft EIR. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.24.100 Final EIR—Preparation.
     The CEQA administrator shall prepare a final EIR prior to approving a project pursuant to CEQA guidelines Section 15089. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.24.110 Final EIR—Certification.
     Prior to approving a project, the draft EIR shall be presented to the approving body for their review and certification that the EIR has been completed in compliance with CEQA and that the information contained therein was considered prior to project approval pursuant to CEQA guidelines Section 15090. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.24.120 Notice of determination.
     Following project approval the CEQA administrator shall file a notice of determination (CEQA guidelines Appendix D) with the Contra Costa county clerk and, if discretionary approval from a state agency is required, with the State Office of Planning Research. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.24.130 Time limit.
     An EIR for a private project shall be completed and certified within one year from the date the project application was certified as complete except that the city may suspend the running of the time period or disapprove the project in the event of unreasonable delay by the project sponsor in meeting requests by the city pursuant to CEQA guidelines Section 15108. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

Chapter 18.28 LEAD AGENCY PRINCIPLE
18.28.010 Lead agency—Identification.
     In the event a project is to be carried out by the city and one or more public agencies, the lead agency shall be determined pursuant to CEQA guidelines Section 15051 or, in the event of a dispute, by the office of Planning and Research pursuant to CEQA guidelines Section 15053. The lead agency shall also be responsible for preparing a negative declaration or EIR. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.28.020 Negative declaration or EIR review.
     Pursuant to CEQA guidelines Section 15050 the decision-making body of any responsible agency shall certify that the body has reviewed and considered the negative declaration or EIR prior to acting upon or approving the project. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

Chapter 18.32 EXEMPTIONS TO CEQA
18.32.010 General provisions.
     The provisions of this chapter set forth a listing of projects which are exempt from the provisions of CEQA pursuant to CEQA guidelines and the provisions of this title. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.32.020 Nonprojects pursuant to CEQA.
     Nonprojects are defined as follows:

     A.    Those actions set forth in CEQA guidelines Section 15378;

     B.     The acquisition of land by the city, in and of itself. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.32.030 Statutory exemptions.
     Statutory exemptions to CEQA are as follows:

     A.    Those projects set forth in CEQA guidelines Article 18;

     B.     Ministerial projects as follows:

     1.     Issuance of building, construction and related permits,

     2.     Design review of minor additions and remodeling which do not require the design and site development review procedure and the approval by the zoning administrator of a certificate of compatibility,

     3.     Issuance of business licenses,

     4.     Approval of final subdivision maps and parcel maps,

     5.     Approval of temporary use permits pursuant to the zoning ordinance,

     6.     Approval of individual utility service connections and disconnections,

     7.     Issuance of excavation permits,

     8.     Issuance of bicycle licenses,

     9.     Approval of home occupation permits pursuant to the zoning ordinance,

     10.   Approval of other projects where little or no discretionary judgment or deliberation is involved. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)

 

18.32.040 Categorical exemptions.
     Categorical exemptions to the provisions of CEQA are as follows:

     A.    Those projects set forth in CEQA guidelines Article 19;

     B.     Other: none at this time. (Ord. 404 (Exh. A), 1987)


