THE CODE OF THE CITY OF BARSTOW, CALIFORNIA 
____________ 
Published in 2015 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
BARSTOW OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Julie Hackbarth-McIntyre 
Mayor 
____________ 
Merrill Gracey 
Richard Harpole 
Carmen Hernandez 
Timothy R. Silva 
City Council 
____________ 
Teresa Highsmith 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Michael J. Lewis 
Elected City Treasurer 
____________ 
JoAnne V. Cousino 
Elected City Clerk 
____________ 
Charles C. Mitchell 
City Manager 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Barstow, California. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1969 Code, as supplemented and updated by ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council through February 2, 2015. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1969 Code, as supplemented and updated by subsequent ordinances which are included herein. 
    The titles of the Code have been arranged in an order indicative of the subject matter to which they pertain, and the various sections within each title have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Title, Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The title, chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of three parts separated by a decimal point. The figure before the first decimal point refers to the title number, and the figure between the first decimal point and the second decimal point refers to the chapter number. The figure appearing after the second decimal point refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 in Title 1 is numbered 1.01.010, and the second section of Chapter 1 in Title 1 is 1.01.020. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and title, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between Sections 1.04.010 and 1.04.020 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 1.04.015. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New titles may be included by using one of the reserved title numbers. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a title of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the title. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Mr. Jim Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Ramona Connors, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mrs. JoAnne Cousino, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Barstow, California. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; pretitle section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Barstow, California. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Barstow, California. 2015. 
THE CODE OF THE CITY OF BARSTOW, CALIFORNIA 
____________ 
Adopted: November 16, 2015 
Effective: December 16, 2015 
____________ 
Published in 2015 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
BARSTOW OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Julie Hackbarth-McIntyre 
Mayor 
____________ 
Merrill Gracey 
Richard Harpole 
Carmen Hernandez 
Timothy R. Silva 
City Council 
____________ 
Teresa Highsmith 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Michael J. Lewis 
Elected City Treasurer 
____________ 
JoAnne V. Cousino 
Elected City Clerk 
____________ 
Charles C. Mitchell 
City Manager 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Barstow, California. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1969 Code, as supplemented and updated by ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council through February 2, 2015. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1969 Code, as supplemented and updated by subsequent ordinances which are included herein. 
    The titles of the Code have been arranged in an order indicative of the subject matter to which they pertain, and the various sections within each title have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Title, Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The title, chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of three parts separated by a decimal point. The figure before the first decimal point refers to the title number, and the figure between the first decimal point and the second decimal point refers to the chapter number. The figure appearing after the second decimal point refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 in Title 1 is numbered 1.01.010, and the second section of Chapter 1 in Title 1 is 1.01.020. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and title, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between Sections 1.04.010 and 1.04.020 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 1.04.015. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New titles may be included by using one of the reserved title numbers. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a title of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the title. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Mr. Jim Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Ramona Connors, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mrs. JoAnne Cousino, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Barstow, California. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; pretitle section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Barstow, California. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Barstow, California. 2015. 
ORDINANCE NO. 940-2015 
  
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW MUNICIPAL CODE FOR THE CITY OF BARSTOW, CALIFORNIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
  
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BARSTOW: 
  
    Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Barstow, California," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Titles 1 through 19, each inclusive, is adopted. 
  
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 3, 2015, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
  
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
  
    Section 4. (a) Unless another penalty is expressly provided, a violation of any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code shall constitute a misdemeanor except that, notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this section may be charged and prosecuted as an infraction; and with the further exception that any violation of the provisions relating to parking, operation of bicycles, use of streets by animals, bicycles or pedestrians shall constitute an infraction. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code, (unless the provision is otherwise made in this code) shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. Any person convicted of an infraction under provisions of this code, unless provision is otherwise herein made, shall be punished by (1) a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars for a first violation; (2) a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; and (3) a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
(b)  Whenever any person has been convicted of three violations of any one article of this code within a one-year period, any fourth violation shall be a misdemeanor punishable as has been set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Each person shall be charged with a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall, upon conviction, be punished accordingly. In addition to the penalties provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by this city, summarily abated as such, and each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a violation of local building and safety codes determined to be an infraction is punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500) for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year of the first violation. 
(e)  In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
  
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
  
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 3, 2015, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
  
    Section 7. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted this municipal code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
  
    Section 8. Effective Date. The first reading and introduction of Ordinance 940-2015 was approved by the City Council at its regular meeting of November 2, 2015 and has been scheduled for adoption by the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting on November 16, 2015. Ordinance 940-2015 shall take effect 30 days after adoption. This Ordinance and the City Clerk's certification, together with proof of publication, shall be entered in the Book of Ordinances of the City Council. 
  
PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED, this 16 th day of November, 2015. 
  
  
/s/ Julie Hackbarth-McIntyre 
      Julie Hackbarth-McIntyre, Mayor     
ATTEST: 
  
/s/ JoAnne V. Cousino 
      JoAnne V. Cousino, City Clerk     
I, JoAnne V. Cousino, City Clerk for the City of Barstow, California and ex-officio Clerk of the City Council, do hereby certify, UNDER PENALTY OF PERJURY, that the foregoing is a true and correct copy of Ordinance No. 940-2015 which was introduced at the regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Barstow held on the 2 th day of November, 2015, and adopted at the regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Barstow on the 16 th day of November, 2015 by the following vote: 
  
AYES: COUNCIL MEMBERS GRACEY, HARPOLE, HERNANDEZ; MAYOR PRO TEM SILVA; MAYOR HACKBARTH-MCINTYRE NOES: NONE ABSENT: NONE ABSTAINED: NONE  
  
/s/ JoAnne V. Cousino 
      JoAnne V. Cousino, City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted"; however, a description can be found in the Code Comparative Table. 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this City Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance 
Number Adopted 
Date Included/ 
Omitted Supplement 
Number Ord. No. 936-2015  8-17-2015 Included 1 Ord. No. 938-2015  9-21-2015 Included 1 Ord. No. 937-2015  9-21-2015 Included 1 Ord. No. 939-2015U 10- 5-2015 Omitted 1 Ord. No. 940-2015 11-16-2015 Included 1 Ord. No. 941-2015U 11-16-2015 Omitted 1 Ord. No. 943-2015 12-21-2015 Included 1 Ord. No. 942-2015 12-21-2015 Included 1 Ord. No. 944-2015  1-19-2016 Included 1 Ord. No. 945-2015  1-19-2016 Included 1 Ord. No. 946-2016  2-16-2016 Included 2 Ord. No. 947-2016  2-16-2016 Included 2 Ord. No. 948-2016  3-21-2016 Included 2 Ord. No. 949-2016 11- 7-2016 Included 2 Ord. No. 950-2017  1-17-2017 Included 2 Ord. No. 951-2017  3- 6-2017 Included 2 Ord. No. 953-2017  5-15-2017 Included 3 Ord. No. 954-2017  7-17-2017 Included 3 Ord. No. 955-2017 12-18-2017 Included 4 Ord. No. 956-2018U  1-16-2018 Included 4 Ord. No. 957-2018 12-17-2018 Included 4 Ord. No. 958-2018  8-20-2018 Included 4 Ord. No. 959-2018U 12-17-2018 Included 4 Ord. No. 960-2019  2- 4-2019 Included 4  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local government generally, Const. of Cal., art. XI, § 1 et seq. 

CHAPTER 1.01. - CODE 

Sec. 1.01.020. - Title; citation; reference. 
    The provisions embraced in the following titles, chapters, and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Barstow, California," and may be so cited. This Code shall also be known as the "Barstow Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to the Code as the Barstow Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction of, or repeal of the Barstow Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Barstow Municipal Code and such reference shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in that Code. 
(Code 1969, § 1.01.020; Ord. No. 295, § 2, 1969) 
Sec. 1.01.030. - Reference applies to amendments. 
    Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the Barstow Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any portion of the ordinances of Barstow, California, that reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now, or hereafter made. 
(Code 1969, § 1.01.030; Ord. No. 295, § 3, 1969) 
Sec. 1.01.040. - Codification authority. 
    This Code consists of all of the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain administrative ordinances codified pursuant to Government Code §§ 50022.1 through 50022.10. 
(Code 1969, § 1.01.040; Ord. No. 295, § 4, 1969) 
Sec. 1.01.050. - Rules of construction. 
    Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than another more general provision imposed by the Code or other law, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be controlling. 
    California codes. Any reference to the codified statutes of the state, including, but not limited to, Business and Professions Code, Civil Code, Code of Civil Procedure, Commercial Code, Corporations Code, Education Code, Elections Code, Evidence Code, Family Code, Financial Code, Fish and Game Code, Food and Agricultural Code, Government Code, Harbors and Navigation Code, Health and Safety Code, Insurance Code, Labor Code, Military and Veterans Code, Penal Code, Probate Code, Public Contracts Code, Public Resources Code, Public Utilities Code, Revenue and Taxation Code, Streets and Highways Code, Unemployment Insurance Code, Vehicle Code, Water Code, or Welfare and Institutions Code are to such codes as adopted and now or hereafter amended. Any reference to a state law or state act by title is to such law or act as amended. 
    Computation of time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday and then it is also excluded. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Government Code § 6800. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that in appropriate cases the terms "or" and "and" are interchangeable: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either ... or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    Day. The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Government Code § 6806. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Month. A calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Government Code § 6804. 
    Officers, departments, etc. Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to shall mean officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the City of Barstow, California, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Signature or subscription by mark. Includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto. 
    Week. A week consists of seven consecutive days. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Government Code § 6805. 
Sec. 1.01.060. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases, where used in city ordinances, shall have the meaning and construction given in this section: 
    Across. The term "across" includes along, in or upon. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Barstow, California. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Barstow Municipal Code. 
    Council or city council. The term "council" or "city council" means the Barstow city council. 
    County. The term "county" means San Bernardino County. 
    Ex officio. The term "ex officio" means by virtue of office. 
    Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
    Goods. The term "goods" includes wares and merchandise. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation. 
    Operate or engage in. The term "operate" or "engage in" includes carry on, keep, conduct, maintain, or cause to be kept or maintained. 
    Owner. The term "owner," when pertaining to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" means any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, business trust, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of the above. 
    Process. The term "process" includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature. 
    Sale. The term "sale" includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. 
    Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory, the term "may" is permissive. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of California. 
    Street. The term "street" includes all streets, highways, public roads, county roads, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, parkways, or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
    Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when pertaining to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the present tense. 
    Title of office. The use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the City of Barstow. 
    Traffic committee. The term "traffic committee" means the planning commission established pursuant to chapter 2.24. 
(Code 1969, § 1.01.050; Ord. No. 295, § 5, 1969; Ord. No. 746, § 3, 1999) 
Sec. 1.01.070. - Title, chapter and section headings. 
    Title, chapter, article and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, article or section hereof. 
(Code 1969, § 1.01.060; Ord. No. 295, § 6, 1969) 
Sec. 1.01.080. - History notes; references; editor's notes. 
(a)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
(b)  References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect. 
Sec. 1.01.090. - Reference to specific ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within this Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
(Code 1969, § 1.01.070; Ord. No. 295, § 7, 1969) 
Sec. 1.01.110. - Effect on past actions and obligations. 
    Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or any part of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinance, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinance relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penalty provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Code 1969, § 1.01.080; Ord. No. 295, § 8, 1969) 
Sec. 1.01.120. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same in substance as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1.01.130. - Effective date. 
    The Barstow Municipal Code shall become effective on the date that the ordinance codified herein becomes effective. 
(Code 1969, § 1.01.090; Ord. No. 295, § 9, 1969) 
Sec. 1.01.140. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part, or portion of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, parts, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Code 1969, § 1.01.100; Ord. No. 295, § 10, 1969) 
Sec. 1.01.150. - Violations; misdemeanors and infractions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Code. A violation of any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Code shall constitute a misdemeanor except that, notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this section may be charged and prosecuted as an infraction; and with the further exception that any violation of the provisions relating to parking, operation of bicycles, use of streets by animals, bicycles or pedestrians shall constitute an infraction. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Code, unless the provision is otherwise made in this Code, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. Any person convicted of an infraction under provisions of this Code, unless provision is otherwise herein made, shall be punished by: 
(1)  A fine not to exceed $100.00 for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine not to exceed $200.00 for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; and 
(3)  A fine not to exceed $500.00 for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
(b)  Whenever any person has been convicted of three violations of any one article of this Code within a one-year period, any fourth violation shall be a misdemeanor punishable as has been set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Each person shall be charged with a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Code is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall, upon conviction, be punished accordingly. In addition to the penalties provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by this city, summarily abated as such, and each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a violation of local building and safety codes determined to be an infraction is punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $1,000.00 for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year of the first violation. 
(Code 1969, § 1.01.110; Ord. No. 295, § 11, 1969; Ord. No. 502, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 724, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 760, § 2(part), 2000) 
Sec. 1.01.160. - Enforcement. 
    The following employees, agents, and/or persons are authorized to enforce provisions of this Code, pursuant to Penal Code § 836.5(d): city manager, administrative services director, public works superintendent, public works supervisor, contract/project coordinator, code enforcement officer, city building official, construction inspector, community development director, parking enforcement officer, city engineer, associate civil engineer, city planner, associate planner, assistant planner, animal control officer, humane officer, and sworn officers of the city police department. 
(Code 1969, § 1.01.120; Ord. No. 503, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 609, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 760, § 2(part), 2000; Ord. No. 882-2011, § 1, 5-16-2011) 
Sec. 1.01.170. - Prosecution. 
    The city attorney or his designated representative, specifically including, but not limited to, those named in section 1.01.160, are authorized to prosecute in the municipal court any violations of this Code. 
(Code 1969, § 1.01.130; Ord. No. 596, § 2, 1988) 
Sec. 1.01.180. - Attorney's fees. 
    In addition to any authority to recover fees granted elsewhere in this Code, in the event any legal or administrative action is taken by the city, whether civil or criminal in nature, to recover damages or to enforce any provision of this Code, the prevailing party in the action shall recover attorney's fees and costs actually and reasonably incurred with respect to the action. 
(Code 1969, § 1.01.140; Ord. No. 697, 1987; Ord. No. 790, § 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1.01.190. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Each bill which proposes an ordinance to repeal, amend or add to any portion of this Code and each bill which proposes an ordinance of a general and permanent nature suitable for inclusion in this Code, though constituting new subject matter not therein contained, shall be drafted so as to specify the specific section numbers, subsections, etc., of this Code which are to be repealed or amended and, with respect to additions and to new subject matter, so as to provide appropriate chapter, article, section, etc., numbers therefor and each amendment of and addition to this Code shall be set out in full and appropriate title, chapter and article headings and section catchlines shall be included. 
(b)  Upon the adoption of an ordinance to repeal, amend or add to any portion of this Code or to include new subject matter in this Code, the city clerk shall separate the several titles, chapters, articles, sections, etc., of such ordinance and enter them in their proper places in each file copy of this Code and shall remove therefrom any portion so repealed or amended and in the margin of each insertion in the file copies of this Code he shall note and initial the date of passage, effective date and number of the amending or repealing ordinance. 
(c)  Items removed from the file copies of this Code pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall be maintained by the city clerk in a reasonably accessible manner. The volume in which such repealed and amended items are to be included shall be known as the "Record of Repealed and Amended Portions of the Code of Barstow, California," the purpose of which is to enable the city council and other persons interested to ascertain the statutes of this Code at any given time in the past. 
Sec. 1.01.200. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code during that period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate section headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in section headings, titles for sections and headings for other subdivisions of the Code; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the term "this ordinance" or terms of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1.01.210. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except pursuant to ordinance or other official act of the city council which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.150. 
Sec. 1.01.220. - Rates, charges, or fees established. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the city council, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the city pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the city council, and such changes shall be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)  Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the city council by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
Sec. 1.01.230. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing the salary of any city officer or employee, unless superseded; 
(5)  Any right of franchise granted by the city to any person, firm, or corporation; 
(6)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, widening, paving, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(9)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(11)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city or annexing property to the city; 
(12)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(13)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code; 
(14)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; 
(15)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; 
(16)  Any specific rezoning ordinance or amendments thereto; 
(17)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any specific subdivision plat; and 
(18)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution or part thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed or superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
CHAPTER 1.02. - CITATIONS-NOTICES TO APPEAR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Citations for misdemeanors, Penal Code § 853.5 et seq. 

Sec. 1.02.010. - Notice to appear. 
    If any person is arrested for the violation of any ordinance of the city and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate as prescribed in the Penal Code, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court. 
(Code 1969, § 1.02.010; Ord. No. 244, § 1, 1966; Ord. No. 760, § 3(part), 2000) 
Sec. 1.02.020. - Violations of promise to appear. 
    Any person willfully violating his written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(Code 1969, § 1.02.020; Ord. No. 244, § 2, 1966; Ord. No. 760, § 3(part), 2000) 
Sec. 1.02.030. - Warrant for arrest. 
    When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided in Penal Code § 853.6, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within 20 days after his failure to appear as promised, or if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he promises to appear, then, within 20 days after delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer, to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense. 
(Code 1969, § 1.02.030; Ord. No. 244, § 3, 1966; Ord. No. 638, § 1, 1990; Ord. No. 760, § 3(part), 2000) 
CHAPTER 1.05. - GENERAL PLAN 

Sec. 1.05.010. - Barstow general plan parts adopted. 
    The city general plan contains six parts as follows: 
(1)  PART A-Introduction. 
(2)  PART B-General Plan Elements. 
(3)  PART C-Master Environmental Assessment-Technical Reports. 
(4)  PART D-Implementation Plan-Mitigation Monitoring Program. 
(5)  PART E-Environmental Reference Document. 
(6)  PART F-Appendices. 
(Code 1969, § 1.05.010; Ord. No. 576, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 732, § 2, 1997) 
Sec. 1.05.020. - Barstow general plan elements adopted. 
    The city general plan consists of the following elements: 
(1)  Community development element - June, 1997. 
(2)  Natural factors element - June, 1997. 
(3)  Hazards element - June, 1997. 
(4)  Cultural resources element - June, 1997. 
(5)  Recreation and open space element - June, 1997. 
(6)  Infrastructure and public services element - June, 1997. 
(7)  Housing element - July 19, 2010. 
(8)  Air quality element - June, 1997. 
(Code 1969, § 1.05.020; Ord. No. 732, § 3, 1997) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Government of cities generally, Government Code § 34000 et seq.; city officials generally, Government Code § 36501 et seq. 

CHAPTER 2.04. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2.04.010. - Meeting time and place. 
    The city council shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. Regular meetings shall be held in the City Council Chambers, City Hall, 220 East Mountain View Street, Suite A, on the first or third Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m., or at such time and place as the council may from time to time designate. 
(Code 1969, § 2.04.010; Ord. No. 268, § 2, 1967; Ord. No. 361, § 1, 1972; Ord. No. 390, § 1, 1974; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 1974; Ord. No. 428, § 1, 1977; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 1981; Ord. No. 487, § 1, 1981; Ord. No. 667, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 808, § 1, 2005; Ord. No. 889-2011, § 1(2.04.010), 12-19-2011) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Government Code § 36805; state law as to time of adjourned meetings, Government Code § 36809. 
Sec. 2.04.011. - Consecutive meetings. 
    The city council establishes the alternative to hold consecutive or joint meetings with other agencies that the city council officiates as the governing board. Meetings will begin at the regularly scheduled meeting time of the city council unless the city council designates a different time when required. 
(Ord. No. 889-2011, § 1(2.04.011), 12-19-2011; Ord. No. 889-2011, § 1(2.04.011), 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 2.04.012. - Adjournment of meetings. 
    The city council may adjourn a regular or special meeting to another time, date and location. 
(Code 1969, § 2.04.011; Ord. No. 394, § 2, 1974; Ord. No. 889-2011, § 1(2.04.012), 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 2.04.020. - Meeting falling on holiday. 
    Whenever the regular city council meeting dates established by section 2.04.010 fall on a holiday as defined by the city's personnel policy, the city manager shall be authorized to cancel such regular meeting at his discretion, or reschedule such regular meeting at the same time and place on the next succeeding official business day of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 2.04.020; Ord. No. 361, § 2, 1972; Ord. No. 268, § 3, 1967; Ord. No. 808, § 2, 2005; Ord. No. 889-2011, § 1(2.04.020), 12-19-2011) 
CHAPTER 2.08. - CITY MANAGER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- City manager generally, Government Code § 34851 et seq. 

Sec. 2.08.010. - Office created. 
    The office of the city manager is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications, and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 2.08.010; Ord. No. 233, § 2, 1965) 
Sec. 2.08.020. - Residence. 
    Residence in the city at the time of appointment of a city manager shall not be required as a condition of the appointment, but no person shall hold the office of city manager unless such person resides within the regulated response time as stated in the personnel policies and procedures. 
(Code 1969, § 2.08.020; Ord. No. 233, § 3, 1965; Ord. No. 764, § 2(part), 2000) 
Sec. 2.08.030. - Councilmember; eligibility. 
    No person elected as a councilmember of the city shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such councilmember shall have ceased to be a member of the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 2.08.030; Ord. No. 233, § 4, 1965; Ord. No. 764, § 2(part), 2000) 
Sec. 2.08.040. - Bond. 
    The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager as herein prescribed. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. 
(Code 1969, § 2.08.040; Ord. No. 233, § 5, 1965) 
Sec. 2.08.050. - Temporary manager. 
    The city manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, one of the other officers or department heads of the city to serve as manager pro tem during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager, and his failure to so appoint a manager pro tem, the city council may designate some qualified city employee to perform the duties of the city manager during the period of absence or disability of the city manager; subject, however, to such person furnishing a corporate surety bond conditioned upon faithful performance of the duties required to be performed, as set forth in section 2.08.040. 
(Code 1969, § 2.08.050; Ord. No. 233, § 6, 1965) 
Sec. 2.08.060. - Compensation. 
(a)  The city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution, and the compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate. 
(b)  The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him in the performance of his duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council. Reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to the city council for approval. 
(Code 1969, § 2.08.060; Ord. No. 233, § 7, 1965) 
Sec. 2.08.070. - Powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city, under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The city manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his control. In addition to the city manager's general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be the city manager's duty and the city manager shall have all the powers set forth in the following subsections: 
(1)  Law enforcement. It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed; 
(2)  Authority over employees. It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his jurisdiction through their department heads; 
(3)  Power of appointment, etc. It shall be the duty of the city manager to appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and department heads of the city, except the city clerk, city attorney and city treasurer. The city manager shall appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all city employees except as aforesaid, subject to such personnel policies and procedures as may be adopted by the city council; 
(4)  Reorganization of offices, etc. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to recommend to the city council such reorganization of offices, positions, departments or units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city's business; 
(5)  Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the city manager to recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient; 
(6)  Attendance at council meetings. It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom, except when his removal is under consideration; 
(7)  Financial reports. It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city; 
(8)  Budget. It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval; 
(9)  Purchasing agent. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all of the departments or divisions of the city. No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on report and approval of the city manager; 
(10)  Investigations. It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligation of the city; 
(11)  Public utilities; franchises. It shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city, and to see that all franchise permits granted by the city are faithfully performed and observed; 
(12)  Public buildings. It shall be the duty of the city manager to exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council; 
(13)  Hours of employment. It shall be the duty of the city manager to devote his entire working time to the duties of his office in the interests of the city, except on permission of the city council by action thereof; 
(14)  Additional duties. It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the city council; 
(15)  Council-manager relations. The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry; and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the city council, and no individual councilmember shall give any orders, or instructions to the city manager. Nothing in this section, however, shall prevent any member of the city council from discussing with the city manager any matter of general public interest or concern relative to the proper operations of the city of the needs, problems, or projects thereof; 
(16)  Departmental cooperation. It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city clerk, city treasurer and city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and ordinances of the city; 
(17)  Attendance at commission meetings. The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission and any other commissions, boards or committees hereafter created by the city council, upon his own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof, and he shall inform the members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council, and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council; 
(18)  Removal of manager. The removal of the city manager shall be only upon a majority vote of the whole council of the city seated in regular council meeting; subject, however, to the provisions of the next succeeding subsections hereof. In case of his intended removal by the city council, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council's intention to remove him and the reason therefor, at least 30 days before the effective date of his removal; 
(19)  Hearing. Within seven days after the delivery to the city manager of such notice, he may, by written notification to the city clerk, request a hearing before the city council. Thereafter, the city council shall fix a time for the hearing which shall be held at its usual meeting place, but before the expiration of the 30-day period, at which the city manager shall appear and be heard, with or without counsel; 
(20)  Suspension pending hearing. After furnishing the city manager with written notice of intended removal, the city council may suspend him from duty, but his compensation shall continue until his removal by resolution of the council passed subsequent to the aforesaid hearing unless a written waiver therefor by the city manager has been filed with the city clerk; 
(21)  Discretion of council. In removing the city manager, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing; the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to present to the city council his grounds of opposition to his removal prior to its action; 
(22)  Limitation on removal. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter hereinbefore enumerated, the city manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of 90 days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the city council is elected; the purpose of this provision being to allow any newly elected members of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his office. After the expiration of the 90-day period aforementioned, the provisions of the preceding action as to the removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective. 
(Code 1969, § 2.08.070; Ord. No. 223, § 8, 1965; Ord. No. 303, § 2, 1969; Ord. No. 371, §§ 1-3, 1972; Ord. No. 427, §§ 1-3, 1977; Ord. No. 496, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 916-2013, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
State Law reference- Power to dismiss and appoint other officers and employees, Government Code § 34856. 
CHAPTER 2.12. - CITY CLERK-CITY TREASURER 

Sec. 2.12.010. - Official bonds. 
    The city clerk and city treasurer shall execute to the city an official bond for the true and faithful performance of their respective official duties. The penal sum of each such bond shall be in a reasonable amount recommended by the city attorney and fixed by resolution of the city council. The city council may change the penal sum of the bonds during an incumbent's term of office. 
(Code 1969, § 2.12.010; Ord. No. 285, § 2, 1968; Ord. No. 317, § 1(part), 1970; Ord. No. 764, § 4(part), 2000) 
Sec. 2.12.020. - Local appointments lists. 
    The city clerk shall compile and publish a local appointments list in accordance with Government Code § 54970 et seq. 
(Code 1969, § 2.12.020; Ord. No. 764, § 4(part), 2000) 
State Law reference- Requirement that city council annually prepare an appointments list of all regular and ongoing boards, commissions, and committees which are appointed by the city council, Government Code § 54970 et seq. 
CHAPTER 2.16. - DISASTER COUNCIL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish local disaster council, Government Code § 8610 et seq.; authority of local government regarding local emergency, Government Code § 8630 et seq.; emergency powers of local agency, Government Code § 53019 et seq. 

Sec. 2.16.010. - Definition. 
    As used in this chapter, the term "emergency" or "local emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the governor's warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat, or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage requires extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the state public utilities commission. 
(Code 1969, § 2.16.010; Ord. No. 442, § 3(part), 1978) 
Sec. 2.16.020. - Disaster council membership. 
    The city disaster council is created and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The mayor, who shall be chairperson. 
(2)  The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chairperson. 
(3)  The assistant director of emergency services. 
(4)  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(5)  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veteran's, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 2.16.020; Ord. No. 442, § 3(part), 1978) 
Sec. 2.16.030. - Disaster council powers and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the city disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairperson or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chairperson. 
(Code 1969, § 2.16.030; Ord. No. 442, § 3(part), 1978) 
Sec. 2.16.040. - Director and assistant director of emergency services. 
(a)  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. 
(b)  There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. 
(Code 1969, § 2.16.040; Ord. No. 442, § 3(part), 1978) 
Sec. 2.16.050. - Powers and duties of the director and assistant director of emergency services. 
(a)  The director is empowered to: 
(1)  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. 
(2)  Request the governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency. 
(3)  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter. 
(4)  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them. 
(5)  Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies, as defined herein. 
(b)  In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency, as herein provided, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the governor or the director of the state office of emergency services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is empowered to: 
(1)  Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council; 
(2)  Obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property, and to bind the city for the fair value thereof, and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
(3)  Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the county in which this city is located, or the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers; 
(4)  Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; and 
(5)  Execute all of his ordinary powers as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan adopted pursuant to this chapter by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
(c)  The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council. 
(d)  The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Code 1969, § 2.16.050; Ord. No. 442, § 3(part), 1978) 
Sec. 2.16.060. - Emergency organization. 
    All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of section 2.16.050, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 2.16.060; Ord. No. 442, § 3(part), 1978) 
Sec. 2.16.070. - Emergency plan. 
    The city disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. 
(Code 1969, § 2.16.070; Ord. No. 442, § 3(part), 1978) 
Sec. 2.16.080. - Expenditures. 
    Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 2.16.080; Ord. No. 442, § 3(part), 1978) 
Sec. 2.16.085. - Excessive price increases prohibited. 
(a)  Upon proclamation of a state of emergency resulting from an earthquake, flood, fire, riot, storm, or natural or manmade disaster declared by the President of the United States or the governor, or upon the declaration of a local emergency resulting from an earthquake, flood, fire, riot, storm, or natural or manmade disaster by the executive officer of the city, and for a period of 30 days following that declaration, it shall be unlawful for any person, contractor, business, or other entity to sell or offer to sell any consumer food items or goods, goods or services used for emergency cleanup, emergency supplies or medical supplies, home heating oil, building materials, housing, transportation, freight, and storage services, or gasoline or other motor fuels for an amount that exceeds ten percent of the price charged by such person immediately prior to the proclamation or emergency; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply upon demonstration that the increase in price was directly attributable to additional costs imposed by the supplier of the goods or additional costs of providing the good or service during the state of emergency, the price represents no more than ten percent above the total of the cost to the seller plus the markup customarily applied by the seller for that good or service in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the state of emergency. 
(b)  Upon the proclamation of a state of emergency resulting from an earthquake, flood, fire, riot, or storm declared by the President of the United States or the governor, or upon the declaration of a local emergency resulting from an earthquake, flood, fire, riot, or storm by the executive officer of the city, and for a period of 180 days following that declaration, it is unlawful for a contractor to sell or offer to sell any repair or reconstruction services or any services used in emergency cleanup for a price of more than ten percent above the price charged by that person for those services immediately prior to the proclamation of emergency. However, a greater price increase is not unlawful if that person can prove that the increase in price was directly attributable to additional costs imposed on it by the supplier of the goods, or directly attributable to additional costs for labor or materials used to provide the services, provided that in those situations where the increase in price is attributable to the additional costs imposed by the contractor's supplier or additional costs of providing the service during the state of emergency, the price represents no more than ten percent above the total of the cost to the contractor plus the markup customarily applied by the contractor for that good or service in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the state of emergency. 
(c)  Upon the proclamation of a state of emergency resulting from an earthquake, flood, fire, riot, storm, or other natural disaster declared by the President of the United States or the governor, or upon the declaration of a local emergency resulting from an earthquake, flood, fire, riot, storm, or other natural disaster by the executive officer of the city, and for a period of 30 days following that proclamation or declaration, it is unlawful for an owner or operator of a hotel or motel to increase the hotel or motel's regular rates, as advertised immediately prior to the proclamation or declaration of emergency, by more than ten percent. However, a greater price increase is not unlawful if the owner or operator can prove that the increase in price is directly attributable to additional costs imposed on it for goods or labor used in its business, to seasonal adjustments in rates that are regularly scheduled, or to previously contracted rates. 
(d)  The provisions of this section may be extended for additional 30-day periods by the city council, if deemed necessary to protect the lives, property, or welfare of the citizens. 
(e)  The definitions set forth in Penal Code § 396 (Emergencies and major disasters; unfair advantage of consumers; price controls; definitions), as amended, shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this section. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this section, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in Penal Code § 396, as amended, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in Penal Code § 396, as amended. 
(Code 1969, § 2.16.085; Ord. No. 764, § 5(part), 2000) 
State Law reference- Prohibition against price gouging during an emergency, Penal Code § 396. 
Sec. 2.16.090. - Punishment of violations. 
    It is a misdemeanor for any person, during an emergency, to: 
(1)  Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter. 
(2)  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
(3)  Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(Code 1969, § 2.16.090; Ord. No. 442, § 3(part), 1978) 
Sec. 2.16.100. - Liability for response costs. 
    Each person responsible for an emergency shall be jointly and severally liable for the city's emergency response costs; provided, however, that if any such person is a minor, then the parents or legal guardians of such minor shall be jointly and severally liable in the minor's place. As used herein, the term "emergency response costs" means the actual costs incurred by the city in responding to an emergency. The city manager shall have the authority to collect the emergency response costs from liable parties through any available legal remedy. 
(Code 1969, § 2.10.100; Ord. No. 764, § 5(part), 2000) 
CHAPTER 2.20. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 

Sec. 2.20.010. - Finance department; creation; duties. 
    There is created and established in and for the city a finance department, which department is vested and charged with the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  To maintain and operate the general accounting system of the city and of each and all of the respective departments, offices and agencies thereof. 
(2)  To perform or to prescribe such accounting functions and duties in accordance with the latest and most modern accounting methods as the science of accounting progresses. 
(3)  To keep and maintain, or to prescribe and require the keeping and maintaining of inventory records of municipal properties necessary in accordance with modern municipal accounting practices. 
(4)  To assume, maintain and perform all functions and duties relating to the administration and control of business licenses levied by the city, and of the collection thereof. 
(5)  To assume and perform all municipal functions and duties relating to the preparation, auditing, presenting and disbursement of claims and demands against the city, including payrolls. 
(6)  To assist the city manager in the preparation of the annual budget and in the administration thereof. 
(7)  To prepare and present to the city council through the city manager in sufficient detail to show the exact financial conditions: 
a.  A monthly (or more frequently as may be desired) statement of all receipts, disbursements and balances of the city. 
b.  An annual statement and report of the financial condition of the city. 
c.  Such other financial reports as may be required by the city council or the city manager. 
(8)  To prepare and present the annual report required by law to the state controller, and such other further and additional reports as may be required from time to time by law. 
(9)  To perform such additional duties and functions as may be hereafter prescribed or required by the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 2.20.010; Ord. No. 183, § 1, 1962) 
Sec. 2.20.020. - Finance director; appointment; duties. 
    The position of finance director is established and created. The finance director shall be appointed by the city manager subject, however, to the approval of the city council in such manner as pertains to the appointment of other department heads. The duties and functions of the finance director shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  That the financial and accounting duties heretofore imposed upon the city clerk under Government Code §§ 40802 through 40805 are hereby transferred to the finance director and the performance of such duties as required by said code sections is hereby imposed under the finance director. 
(2)  Supervise and direct the finance department of the city subject to direction and approval of the city manager. 
(3)  Appoint such subordinate employees as may be authorized by the city council for the department. 
(4)  Cooperate with the city treasurer and other department heads of the city in establishing and maintaining sufficient and satisfactory procedures and controls over municipal revenues and expenditures in all departments of the city in accordance with modern municipal accounting practices. 
(5)  Furnish an official bond for the faithful performance of his duties in such amount as may be determined by the city council at the time of his employment. 
(6)  Perform such other duties as the city manager or the city council through the city manager may from time to time direct. 
(Code 1969, § 2.20.020; Ord. No. 183, § 2, 1962) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish office, duties, and powers of director of finance, Government Code § 40805.5. 
Sec. 2.20.030. - Limitation of responsibility. 
    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the administration, operation or fiscal affairs of the Barstow Community Hospital. 
(Code 1969, § 2.20.030; Ord. No. 427, § 6, 1977) 
CHAPTER 2.24. - PLANNING COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- City planning agencies generally, Government Code § 65100 et seq. 

Sec. 2.24.010. - Established. 
    A city planning commission of five members is established by appointment by the majority of the city council. No member of such planning commission shall hold any other office with the city. 
(Code 1969, § 2.24.010; Ord. No. 275, § 1, 1968; Ord. No. 803, § 1, 2005; Ord. No. 839, § 1(part), 2008; Ord. No. 860-2010, § 1, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2.24.020. - Term. 
    Planning commissioners shall be appointed and/or reappointed for one or more four-year terms. 
(Code 1969, § 2.24.020; Ord. No. 275, § 2, 1968; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 1972; Ord. No. 764, § 8(part), 2000; Ord. No. 803, § 2, 2005; Ord. No. 839, § 1(part), 2008; Ord. No. 860-2010, § 1, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2.24.030. - Vacancy. 
    If a permanent vacancy on the planning commission occurs by resignation, disqualification, removal by the city council, incapacitation, or death, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment pursuant to the provisions of sections 2.24.010 and 2.24.035 for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Code 1969, § 2.24.030; Ord. No. 275, § 3, 1968; Ord. No. 803, § 3, 2005; Ord. No. 839, § 1(part), 2008; Ord. No. 860-2010, § 1, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2.24.035. - Appointment and reappointment procedures. 
    Members of the planning commission shall only be appointed after notification to the city council of any vacancy or the expiration of the term of any member. At the time of notification, the city council may elect to cause public notice of such vacancy or may elect to appoint a member. However, in the event of an unscheduled vacancy, the council will comply with Government Code § 54974 or applicable statute. If public notice is given, appointment or reappointment shall be made after the city council has given due consideration to all qualified applicants for appointment. 
(Code 1969, § 2.24.035; Ord. No. 459, § 1, 1979; Ord. No. 666, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 670, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 803, § 4, 2005; Ord. No. 839, § 1(part), 2008; Ord. No. 860-2010, § 1, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2.24.040. - Removal. 
    Any member or alternate member of the planning commission may be removed by a majority of the city council at the will and pleasure of such council. 
(Code 1969, § 2.24.040; Ord. No. 275, § 4, 1968; Ord. No. 803, § 5, 2005; Ord. No. 860-2010, § 1, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2.24.050. - Meetings; notice. 
    The city planning commission hereby established shall hold not less than one meeting each calendar month. The time, place, and date of regular meetings of the commission shall be set by resolution of the commission. Special meetings may be called in the following manner: 
(1)  By action of the majority of the commission present at any regular meeting or special meeting thereof. 
(2)  By call of the chairperson to be delivered in writing through the United States mail, such notice to be postmarked not less than three days prior to the date of such called meeting. 
(3)  By the call of the chairperson, without such three-day notice, provided a written waiver of notice signed by each member with the secretary before any action taken at the special meeting thus called shall become effective. 
(4)  The secretary shall call a special meeting upon the written request of two or more members of the commission, the notice of such special meeting to be delivered by posting in the United States mail not less than three days preceding the date of such special meeting. 
(Code 1969, § 2.24.050; Ord. No. 275, § 5, 1968; Ord. No. 860-2010, § 1, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2.24.060. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the city planning commission shall be those which are now, or which may hereafter be, prescribed by law together with such additional duties as may from time to time be assigned to it by the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 2.24.060; Ord. No. 275, § 6, 1968; Ord. No. 803, § 6, 2005; Ord. No. 860-2010, § 1, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2.24.070. - Procedures. 
    The procedures to be followed by the city planning commission in discharging its functions shall be those which are now, or which may hereafter be, prescribed by law or ordinance, provided that in matters wherein procedures are not so prescribed, the city planning commission may by resolution adopt its own procedures. 
(Code 1969, § 2.24.070; Ord. No. 275, § 7, 1968; Ord. No. 860-2010, § 1, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2.24.080. - Council resolutions. 
    The city council from time to time by resolution may establish minimum qualifications for eligibility for appointment to the planning commission, provide for attendance at planning commission meetings legally set or called, and other provisions deemed by the council to be in the public interest. Any such resolutions in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section are hereby validated. 
(Code 1969, § 2.24.080; Ord. No. 275, § 8, 1968; Ord. No. 860-2010, § 1, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2.24.090. - Automatic adjournment. 
    In the event a quorum of the commission fails to appear at any regular, regular adjourned or legally called special meeting, the secretary of the commission shall adjourn the meeting at the same hour and place on the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting, or to a specific date and time. 
(Code 1969, § 2.24.090; Ord. No. 275, § 9, 1968; Ord. No. 860-2010, § 1, 2-16-2010) 
CHAPTER 2.26. - RESIDENT OVERSIGHT COMMISSION 

Sec. 2.26.010. - Resident oversight commission established. 
    A resident oversight commission of five members is established. No member of the resident oversight commission shall hold any other office with the city. All members of the commission must be residents of the City of Barstow. 
(Ord. No. 960-2019 , § 1, 2-4-2019) 
Sec. 2.26.020. - Term of office. 
    Commission members shall be appointed and/or reappointed for one or more two-year terms, commencing on January 1st and ending on December 31st. For the initial appointment beginning in 2019, three members of the commission shall serve an initial two-year term, and two members shall serve an initial one-year term (partial term), in order to stagger the terms so that the terms of no more than three members of the commission shall expire in the same year. Members serving an initial one-year partial term may be reappointed to a subsequent full term of two years. 
(Ord. No. 960-2019 , § 1, 2-4-2019) 
Sec. 2.26.030. - Appointment and reappointment procedures. 
    The city council may elect to cause public notice of commission position vacancies and receive applications from interested residents on a city-wide basis. Alternatively, the mayor may request nominations of applicants from each councilmember for an eligible appointee residing in their district, with the mayor nominating one eligible appointee residing anywhere in the city. 
    Upon receipt of each nomination, a majority vote of the city council will confirm the appointment. In the event that the city receives no applicant from one or more electoral districts, the council may appoint that commissioner without regard to the district in which they reside. 
    In the event of an unscheduled vacancy, the council may seek applicants to fill the vacancy with an eligible appointee who resides in the same district as the vacated member, or, if no eligible appointee applies, the council may fill the vacancy, without regard to the district in which the appointee resides. 
(Ord. No. 960-2019 , § 1, 2-4-2019) 
Sec. 2.26.040. - Removal. 
    Any member of the resident oversight commission may be removed by the majority of the city council at the will and pleasure of the council. 
(Ord. No. 960-2019 , § 1, 2-4-2019) 
Sec. 2.26.050. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the resident oversight commission shall be: 
(a)  Review, on a quarterly basis, the city's expenditure of revenues received from the one percent transaction and use tax; 
(b)  Prepare a report at the close of each fiscal year of the total revenues received from the one percent transaction and use tax and the expenditure amounts categorized by each city department, including the Barstow Fire Protection District ("annual report"); 
(c)  Present the annual report to the city council as part of the annual budget process. 
(Ord. No. 960-2019 , § 1, 2-4-2019) 
Sec. 2.26.060. - Limitations. 
    The resident oversight commission may discharge its responsibilities in the manner and selected by it, except as follows: 
(a)  It shall not direct the expenditure of revenues for any purpose; 
(b)  Unless expressly authorized to do so by the city council, it shall not commit the officers, employees or staff of the city in any manner or to any course of action; however, staff may assist the commission by providing information required to prepare the annual report; 
(Ord. No. 960-2019 , § 1, 2-4-2019) 
Sec. 2.26.070. - Meetings. 
    The resident oversight commission shall hold one regular meeting each quarter. The chair may call for a special meeting if needed with concurrence of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 960-2019 , § 1, 2-4-2019) 
CHAPTER 2.28. - SALARIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Ordinance and schedule concerning salaries of city council members, Government Code § 36516. 

Sec. 2.28.010. - Purpose and authority. 
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to Government Code § 36516, authorizing the council to provide by ordinance that each member of the council shall receive a prescribed salary the amount of which is based upon the population of the city as determined by estimates made by the state department of finance. 
(Code 1969, § 2.28.010; Ord. No. 543, § 2(part), 1985) 
Sec. 2.28.020. - Salaries of councilmembers. 
    Each member of the city council shall receive a salary in the amount of $504.42 per month, which shall be payable at the same time and in the same manner as the salaries are paid to other officers and employees of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 2.28.020; Ord. No. 543, § 2(part), 1985; Ord. No. 764, § 9(part), 2000; Ord. No. 770, § 2, 2001) 
Sec. 2.28.030. - Increase or decrease in councilmembers' salaries. 
    Following any new and later estimate of population made by the state department of finance placing the city in a different population group, the salary payable to each member of the council shall be increased or decreased accordingly to equal the sum prescribed for that population group in Government Code § 36516. 
(Code 1969, § 2.28.030; Ord. No. 543, § 2(part), 1985; Ord. No. 764, § 9(part), 2000) 
Sec. 2.28.040. - Reimbursement. 
    The salaries prescribed herein are and shall be exclusive of any amount payable to each member of the council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by him in the performance of official duties for the city. 
(Code 1969, § 2.28.040; Ord. No. 543, § 2(part), 1985) 
CHAPTER 2.40. - PURCHASING SYSTEM[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 868-2010, adopted Dec. 6, 2010, amended ch. 2.40 in its entirety to read as set out herein. The former ch. 2.40, §§ 2.40.010-2.40.220, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 706, § 1(part), 1994, and Ord. No. 810, §§ 2, 4, 5, 7-11(part), 2005. Previously, the title of ch. 2.40 was amended by Ord. No. 810, § 1. Ord. No. 868-2010 has subsequently been amended by Ord. No. 907-2013, adopted June 17, 2013. 
State Law reference- Purchases of supplies and equipment by local agencies, Government Code § 54202 et seq. 

Sec. 2.40.010. - Adoption of a purchasing system. 
    In order to clearly define the authority for the purchasing function; to establish efficient procedures; to secure for the city supplies, services and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality requirements; and to exercise positive financial control over purchases, a purchasing system is adopted. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.010, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.020. - Purchasing agent-Authority. 
    The city council shall delegate the purchasing responsibility to the finance director as the city's designated purchasing agent. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to delegate purchasing responsibilities to each department head. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.020, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.030. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    The purchasing agent shall have authority to: 
(1)  Purchase of contract for supplies, services and equipment required by any using agency, shall be done in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, administrative regulations, and the purchasing and contract guidelines, as prescribed by the purchasing agent for internal management and operation of the purchasing office and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council or city manager. 
(2)  Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment. 
(3)  Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies, services and equipment at the least expense to the city. 
(4)  Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as practical on all purchases. 
(5)  Prepare and recommend to the city council rules governing the purchase of supplies, services and equipment for the city. 
(6)  Prepare and recommend to the city council revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules. 
(7)  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products. 
(8)  Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations. 
(9)  Supervise either directly or indirectly the inspection of all supplies, services and equipment purchased to ensure conformance with specifications. 
(10)  Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for city use. 
(11)  Maintain a vendors' catalog file and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing division. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.030, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.040. - Decentralized purchasing system. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to create a decentralized purchasing system. Each department head delegated with purchasing functions by the purchasing agent shall be responsible for the function of the procurement of suitable equipment, materials, supplies and services for their departments. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.040, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.050. - Supervision of purchasing system. 
    The purchasing agent shall have general supervision of the purchasing system. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.050, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.060. - Estimates of requirements. 
    All using agencies shall file detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies, services and equipment by requisition forms as prescribed by the purchasing agent. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.060, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.070. - Requisitions required. 
    Using agencies shall submit requests for supplies, services and equipment by requisition forms as prescribed by the purchasing agent. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.070, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.080. - Encumbrance of fund. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the purchasing agent shall not issue any purchase order for supplies, services or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation and is duly authorized for expenditures in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.080, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.100. - City manager's contract authority. 
    The city manager may approve and authorize all contracts and purchase orders without city council approval as follows: 
(1)  Contracts and purchase orders involving an expenditure of city funds may be approved and executed by the city manager in accordance with the adopted limits as set by resolution. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, contracts involving the settlement of worker's compensation claims may be approved and executed by the city manager if the total amount of the settlement is $10,000.00 or less. 
(3)  Contracts involving software licensing agreements without regard to amount of the contract, but excludes purchases of computer hardware. 
(4)  Any contract approved by the city council where the city council expressly authorizes the city manager to execute the contract on its behalf. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.100, 6-17-2013; Ord. No. 947-2016, 2-16-2016 ) 
Sec. 2.40.110. - Types of exemptions from purchasing system. 
    The following purchases, contracts or obligations shall be exempt, at the purchasing agent's discretion, from the requirements of sections 2.40.130 and 2.40.140: 
(1)  Emergency purchases. In emergency situations, the purchasing agent has authorization to expend city funds without limitation by way of amount and without the requirement for either formal or informal bids. The purchasing agent has authorization to conclude that an emergency exists without further declaration by the city council. Expenditures made during an emergency must be reported to the city council at the next regular meeting if such expenditure would have been otherwise authorized by the city council. 
a.  The city manager may authorize any employee or department head to make purchases of supplies, equipment or services in an emergency situation. 
b.  An emergency, as used in this section, exists when a department has an immediate need for supplies, equipment or services, and that without immediate procurement, the need would have a serious effect on public safety, welfare or city operations. The city manager or a city employee or department head, with the city manager's approval, has the authority to approve emergency purchases of supplies, equipment or services, including public works projects so long as consistent with state law, in a manner and amount set by the city's purchasing and contract guidelines. 
(2)  Professional services or specialized services. Services of professional or specialized services to be performed by specially trained persons or firms and/or requiring a high degree of certification, unique skill or specialized expertise, such as, but not limited to, services rendered by architects, attorneys, accountants, auditors, engineers, and other specialized or professional consultants, are exempt so long as procured is consistent with the city's purchasing and contracting guidelines. 
(3)  Cooperative agreements. Purchases made pursuant to a cooperative purchasing agreement authorized by the city council are exempt. Cooperative agreements shall be used when such agreements have been competitively bid within a 12-month period and the use of such agreements shall be financially advantageous to the city. 
(4)  Petty cash funds. Purchases made from this fund as authorized by the finance director, or by his designee, are exempt. 
(5)  Uniqueness. The supplies, services or equipment is unique because of its quality, durability, proprietary nature, availability or fitness for a particular purpose or where warranty, guarantee or other assurances could be voided, they are exempt. 
(6)  City working with own employees. Any work performed by the city with its own employees is exempt. 
(7)  Open market purchases. Open market purchases are those which are under the threshold level of informal bidding requirements as set forth in the city's purchasing and contracting guidelines. 
(8)  Sole source purchases. Purchases of supplies, services and equipment are exempt from this chapter if they are one-of-a-kind or unique and can be obtained from only one vendor. Any sole source purchase shall be made within the expenditure limits set by adopted administrative regulations. 
(9)  Open purchase order. Where the merchandise or service is provided by an independent contractor who has a contract with the city to provide labor and materials for projects other than a public works project if issued under one of the following circumstances: 
a.  To ensure efficient and effective control of purchases that are difficult to anticipate. 
b.  For goods and/or services that are required on a recurring basis and are uneconomical to store. 
c.  To facilitate the acquisition of supplies and services needed by various departments in their day-to-day operations. 
d.  To reduce the volume of small value purchase orders. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.110, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.120. - Bidding required. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the purchase of supplies, services and equipment shall be by bid procedures pursuant to sections 2.40.130 and 2.40.140, except as set forth in section 2.40.110. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.120, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.130. - Informal bidding procedure. 
    Purchases and contracts of supplies, equipment or services of an estimated value between $15,000.00 and $24,999.00 shall be made by the purchasing agent pursuant to the informal bidding procedures set forth herein. In determining the estimated value of the purchase, the total amount of all items subject to the informal bidding procedure shall be considered. 
(1)  Minimum number of quotations. For purchases procured under the informal bidding requirements, at least three quotations shall be solicited in writing, at least one of which shall be a local vendor, if available, shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible vendor. 
(2)  Records of quotations. The city clerk shall keep a record of all informal bid orders and quotations submitted in competition thereon. Such records shall be open to public inspection during business hours. Records of such open market orders or purchases may be disposed of by the purchasing agent in the manner provided by the city's purchasing and contracting guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.130, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.140. - Formal bidding procedure. 
    Purchases and contracts for supplies, services, and equipment with an estimated value of $25,000.00 or more shall be by written contract pursuant to the procedure prescribed in this section. 
(1)  Notice inviting bids. Notices inviting bids shall include, at minimum, a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold, shall state where bid forms and specifications may be secured, and the time, date and place for opening bids. 
a.  Published notice. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least ten days before the scheduled date of opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a city newspaper of widest circulation. In the event there is no bidder for the required supplies, services and equipment within the area of circulation and no bidders were solicited from the bidders' list, the city clerk shall cause to be published a notice inviting bids at least ten days before the scheduled date of opening of the bids in a trade publication or other publication likely to be received by prospective bidders. It shall be the responsibility of the potential bidder to be self-informed of such publications and no other form of communication shall be deemed necessary to inform said bidder. 
b.  Bidders' list. The purchasing agent shall promote competition to the maximum extent practicable and compatible with efficiency and economy in regarding administrative costs and time, and, as necessary, solicit sealed bids from selected responsible prospective vendors whose names are in the vendor file. 
(2)  Bid bond. When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, a bid bond may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the city council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the next lowest bid and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. Any subsequent refusals or failures to execute the contract under the terms shall continue in like fashion as the first lowest bidder and the second lowest bidder. 
(3)  Business license. The successful bidder shall be required to obtain a business license pursuant to title 5 of this Code. 
(4)  Performance, labor, material and other bonds. The city council shall have authority to require performance, labor, material and other bonds before entering a contract in such amount as they shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the city council requires such a bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. Such a bond in said amount shall be furnished by a surety authorized to do a surety business in the state. 
(5)  Insurance requirements. The purchasing agent shall require sufficient evidence of insurance before entering a contract in such amount as they shall find reasonably necessary to protect the interests of the city. The form and amount of the insurance shall be described in the notice inviting bids. Such insurance in said amount shall be furnished by a surety authorized to do a surety business in the state. 
(6)  Certification requirements. The city council shall have authority to require sufficient evidence of certification before entering a contract in such amount as they shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the city council requires such certification, the same shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
(7)  Submission of bids. Bids shall be submitted in sealed packages that are: 
a.  Addressed to the office specified in the solicitation; 
b.  Showing the date and time specified for receipt; and 
c.  Showing the solicitation number, name and address of the bidder. 
Bids must be submitted in sufficient time so that they will be delivered to the bid opening room prior to the scheduled time of bid opening. The only acceptable evidence establishing the time of receipt at the specified office shall be the time/date stamp or other documentary evidence of receipt maintained by such an office. 
(8)  Submission of bid modifications or withdrawals. Bid modifications or withdrawals must be submitted in like manner as the submission of bid. The bid may be withdrawn or modified in writing or in person by a bidder or its authorized representative if, before the scheduled bid opening, the identity of the requester is established and if upon request for withdrawal the same signs a receipt for the bid. A telephone request for any submittal or its modification or withdrawal is strictly prohibited. A facsimile request for any withdrawal must be in like form as described herein and in the solicitation, the bidder bears the sole responsibility for its delivery to the bid opening room before the scheduled time of bid opening and for the clarity thereof. Final determination shall be the city's. 
(9)  Bid opening procedures. Unless otherwise provided in the notice inviting bids, bids shall be opened in the council chambers of the city located at 220 East Mountain View Street, Barstow, California, 92311. Bid openings shall be open to the public. The department head or their representative most closely affected by the bid shall be present at the bid opening. The city clerk or his designee shall decide when the time set for opening bids has arrived and shall inform those present of that decision. The city clerk or his designee shall then: 
a.  Personally and publicly open all bids which were received prior to the scheduled time of bid opening; 
b.  If practical, read the bids aloud to the persons present; and 
c.  Have the bids recorded. 
Following the bid opening, the city clerk or his designee shall prepare a tabulation of bids and submit the same to the city council along with an appropriate recommendation as to disposition of bids. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than 30 calendar days after the bid opening. 
(10)  Rejection of bids. With discretion, the purchasing agent may recommend rejection of any and all bids by the city council and readvertise for bid. 
(11)  Award of contracts. With discretion, the purchasing agent may recommend contracts to be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(12)  Tie bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the city council may accept the one they choose or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation prior to the time of award. 
(13)  No bids. If either no bids are received or none meet the specifications, the purchasing agent may proceed to have the services performed or the supplies purchased without further competitive bidding. 
(14)  Waiver of requirements. The purchasing agent may waive any informalities or minor irregularities in the bids which are deemed to have no effect upon the essential requirements of the solicitation. 
(15)  Waiver of procedures. Where it is deemed to be in the best interests of the city, the city council, upon motion duly carried, may waive the procedures required in this section, and may authorize the purchasing agent to purchase supplies, equipment and contract services pursuant to the procedures prescribed in section 2.40.130. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.140, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.150. - Bid award appeal procedures. 
    Any bid with the value in excess of the threshold level of formal bidding may be appealed in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The purchasing agent shall post a letter of intent to award bid on the public bulletin board located in the first floor of city hall three working days prior to awarding any formal competitive bid. 
(2)  An appellant shall file a written notice of appeal to any letter of intent to award bid in accordance with the following procedures: 
a.  The written notice of appeal shall be filed with the city manager prior to bid award. 
b.  The written notice of appeal must include specifics as to the nature of the appeal. 
c.  The appellant must provide any and all documentation to support the appeal. 
d.  The city manager will respond in writing to the appellant within five working days. 
e.  In the event the appeal is denied by the city manager, the appellant may appeal the city manager's ruling to the city council at the next available council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.150, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.155. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 876-2011, § 1, adopted May 2, 2011, deleted § 2.40.155, which pertained to public projects and derived from Ord. No. 868-2010 adopted December 6, 2010. See chapter 2.42 for regulations pertaining to awarding public projects. 
Sec. 2.40.160. - Threshold levels of bidding. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all thresholds for informal bid, and formal bid for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment shall be bound by the purchasing and contract guidelines and the state laws pertaining to a general law city. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.160, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.170. - Inspection and testing. 
    The city department receiving or utilizing services or supplies shall inspect supplies delivered and services performed to determine their conformity with the specifications applicable thereto or set forth in the contract and shall report any deficiencies to the purchasing agent. The city may require chemical and physical tests of supply samples submitted with bids and samples of supply deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.170, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.180. - Preference to local vendors. 
(a)  In establishing a preference to local vendors in the award of contracts for supplies, equipment or services under this chapter, the city council finds that local businesses are disadvantaged in comparison to business located outside the city, particularly due longer commutes for the delivery of goods and services and the high gas prices which increase the cost of goods and services delivered to and from the city limits. 
(b)  The city council, or the city staff pursuant to purchasing and contract guidelines, in awarding bids pursuant to sections 2.40.130 and 2.40.140, may, at their discretion, grant qualified local vendors a bidding preference of ten percent for any contract awarded under this chapter. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a "qualified local vendor" means any individual, business, partnership or corporation which maintain a place of business located within the limits of the city, which have a current city business license and which must report to the state sales tax returns for goods purchased at its business located within the boundaries of the city which regularly maintains a place of business and an inventory of merchandise for sale within the sphere of influence of the city and has the necessary licenses, certificates, bonds and insurances, and is in good financial and legal standing with the city. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.180, 6-17-2013; Ord. No. 947-2016, 2-16-2016 ) 
Sec. 2.40.190. - Preference for recycled content, recyclable, reusable and waste minimization. 
    The purchasing agent in awarding bids pursuant to sections 2.40.130 and 2.40.140, may, with discretion, grant a bidding preference in accordance with adopted administrative regulations for any contract awarded under this chapter for items which either are recycled, recyclable, reusable or provide waste minimization. Such preference shall be in accordance with performance, price, delivery, other requirements, and are deemed equivalent or acceptable by the purchasing agent. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.190, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.200. - Refunds. 
    The purchasing agent, with the approval of the city manager, may authorize refunds for business licenses and payroll related items in an amount not to exceed the prescribed limits in the administrative regulations. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.200, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.210. - Surplus supplies and equipment. 
    All surplus supplies and equipment shall be disposed of in accordance with adopted administrative regulations for the sale of surplus supplies and equipment. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.210, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.40.220. - Purchasing and contract guidelines. 
    The purchasing agent shall prepare purchasing and contract guidelines which shall be adopted by city council resolution and will serve as the administrative regulations for the purchasing system. The purchasing and contract guidelines shall clearly define and describe the aim and purpose of this chapter. The purchasing and contract guidelines manual shall describe and explain in detail the procedures that the purchasing agent or his designees must follow in the procurement of supplies, services and equipment. It shall include, among other things, control procedures established under the authority of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 868-2010, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 907-2013, § 2.40.220, 6-17-2013) 
CHAPTER 2.41. - DISQUALIFICATION OF CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 2.41.010. - Application. 
    This chapter shall apply to all contracts awarded by or entered into by the city, including, without limitation, purchases, contracts or leases for supplies, materials or equipment; contracts for professional and nonprofessional services; contracts for public works or construction projects; and contracts with insurance or surety companies issuing insurance policies or bonds for city public works or construction projects, city-sponsored events or privately sponsored events at city facilities. The provisions of this chapter are intended to determine in advance of submittal of bids or proposals on city contracts whether a person has the necessary qualifications, fitness, capacity, integrity and trustworthiness to perform city contracts. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the city's ability to determine prior to or at the time of contract award whether a bid or proposal is responsive to the city's solicitation for bids or proposals and whether the person submitting the bid or proposal has the requisite qualifications, fitness, capacity, trustworthiness and integrity needed to perform the contract. 
(Ord. No. 920-2013, § 1(2.41.010), 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 2.41.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affiliates. Persons are affiliates if: 
(1)  One person directly or indirectly controls or has the power to control or influence the decisionmaking of the other; 
(2)  A third person controls or has the power to control or influence the decisionmaking of both; or 
(3)  The person has the same or overlapping management, ownership or one or more of the same principals as the other person. 
Indicia of control include, but are not limited to, interlocking management or ownership, identity of interests among family members, shared facilities and equipment or common use of employees. 
    City manager means the city manager of the City of Barstow or his designee. 
    Contract includes, but is not be limited to, city contracts, leases, licenses, agreements, purchase orders or lease-purchase agreements for the acquisition of: 
(1)  Supplies, materials or equipment; 
(2)  Professional or nonprofessional services; 
(3)  Public works or construction projects; 
(4)  Insurance policies or bonds provided in connection with a public works or construction project, a city-sponsored activity or event or a privately sponsored activity or event at a city-owned, -operated or -controlled facility; and 
(5)  Other goods and services. 
    Disqualification means the action taken pursuant to this chapter or by another local, state or federal agency, to disqualify, suspend, prohibit, debar or render a person ineligible to bid upon, solicit, be awarded or perform public contracts or any portion thereof. 
    Hearing officer means the person appointed by the city manager to administer the disqualification procedures set forth in section 2.41.090. 
    Predecessor-in-interest means a person whose rights, property or assets and/or debts or obligations are acquired or assumed by another person. 
    Principal means any officer, director, owner, partner, joint venturer, shareholder, responsible managing officer, responsible managing employee or person with primary management or supervisory responsibilities, including any person who has a substantial influence or substantive control over performance of a contract. 
    Public contract means any contract, lease, license, agreement, purchase order or lease-purchase agreement that is awarded or entered into by any federal, state or local agency, including the city, or any insurance policy or bond provided in connection with a government public works or construction project, government-sponsored activity or event or privately sponsored activity or event at a government-owned, -operated or -controlled facility. 
    Successor-in-interest means a person who acquires the rights, property or assets and/or assumes the debts or obligations of another person. 
(Ord. No. 920-2013, § 1(2.41.020), 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 2.41.030. - Effect of disqualification. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code: 
(1)  The hearing officer may disqualify or prohibit any person, or any principal, affiliate or successor-in-interest thereof, from bidding upon, soliciting, or being awarded any contract with the city or from being a subcontractor, supplier, insurer or surety at any tier upon such contract, in accordance with the procedures established by this chapter. 
(2)  During the time period that a disqualification pursuant to this chapter is in effect for any person, the city shall not accept bids or proposals from, contract with or allow performance of all or any portion of a city contract including, but not limited to, subcontracts, supply contracts, insurance or surety agreements, by any person who has been disqualified in accordance with this chapter. 
(3)  During the time period that a disqualification of any person by a local, state or federal agency is in effect, the city shall not accept bids, solicitations or proposals from, contract with or allow performance of subcontracts, material or supply contracts, insurance or surety agreements, by such person, whether or not such person has been disqualified by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 920-2013, § 1(2.41.030), 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 2.41.040. - Notice. 
    Whenever notice is required to be given under this chapter, it shall be deemed effective on the day such notice is either personally delivered or deposited in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, sent via certified mail, and addressed to the last known address of the person to be notified. 
(Ord. No. 920-2013, § 1(2.41.040), 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 2.41.050. - Grounds for disqualification. 
    Disqualification may be imposed on a person by the hearing officer in accordance with the procedures established by this chapter on one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Commission by such person of any act of: 
a.  Fraud, bribery, collusion or conspiracy; 
b.  Bid rigging, price fixing or any other act in violation of any local, state or federal law in connection with the bidding upon, solicitation, award or performance of any public contract; or 
c.  Embezzlement, theft, forgery, falsification or fabrication of records, moral turpitude or perjury. 
(2)  Commission of any act indicating a lack of integrity or honesty. 
(3)  Submission of a bid, proposal, insurance policy, bond, guarantee or other document that is known, or should be known, by such person to be false, misleading or nonmeritorious or to contain false information. 
(4)  Submission of any false, misleading or nonmeritorious claim, demand or lawsuit against any private party or public agency, including the city. 
(5)  Pending litigation between the person and the city, which could impact the ability of the parties to work cooperatively with each other. 
(6)  Breach of the terms of a public contract by a willful or material failure to perform in accordance with the terms thereof. 
(7)  Violation of a local, state or federal law or regulation applicable to a public contract. 
(8)  Current or past suspension or disqualification from award or performance of a public contract by any local, state or federal agency. 
(9)  Knowingly doing business with a disqualified third person in performance of any public contract awarded after disqualification of said third person. 
(10)  Substandard performance on any public contract, including, without limitation: 
a.  A material breach thereof; 
b.  A failure to complete work required thereunder in a timely manner or within the contract price when such failure is attributable to the negligent or wrongful actions or inactions of such person or such person's subcontractors or suppliers; 
c.  Substandard quality of work; or 
d.  Any negligent or wrongful failure to cooperate with the contracting agency during performance of the public contract. 
(11)  One or more violation during the performance of any public contract of any labor or safety statutes, regulations or standards including, without limitation, applicable local, state or federal statutes, regulations or standards governing prevailing wage, occupational safety and health, nondiscrimination requirements or other local, state or federal laws. 
(12)  Failure to have or maintain in good standing all necessary licenses, permits or other approvals required to transact business within the state. 
(13)  One or more violation of any law or regulation governing the handling, transfer, storage or disposal of hazardous materials or hazardous wastes. 
(14)  One or more violation of any law or regulation governing the handling, transfer, storage or disposal of solid waste generated during the performance of such public contract. 
(15)  A violation of any law or regulation governing conflicts of interest. 
(16)  Evidence that the person lacks financial responsibility, such as unpaid debts, unfulfilled insurance or bond obligations or other evidence of financial instability or irresponsibility. 
(17)  Engagement in altercations or any other acts of hostility with the contracting agency, other contractors, or the public. 
(18)  The commission of any act which may bring reproach or discredit upon the contracting agency. 
(19)  Any other ground that the hearing officer determines that would impair the ability of the person to perform a public contract or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 920-2013, § 1(2.41.050), 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 2.41.060. - Existence of grounds. 
(a)  Existence of grounds for disqualification as described in section 2.41.050 may be determined to exist by the hearing officer by a preponderance of the evidence if, not more than ten years prior to the date that a written notice of proposed disqualification is provided to such person pursuant to section 2.41.090: 
(1)  Such person has been convicted of a criminal charge for any act or omission described in section 2.41.050, whether entered by a verdict or a plea including a plea of no contest; 
(2)  A civil judgment has been entered against such person for any act or omission described in section 2.41.050; 
(3)  A penalty or sanction including, without limitation, monetary penalties, imprisonment and other sanctions, such as disqualification, has been imposed on such person by a federal, state or local agency for any act or omission described in section 2.41.050; or 
(4)  Such person has committed one or more acts or omissions described in section 2.41.050, based on a preponderance of evidence in the record of facts and information presented to the hearing officer. 
(b)  An act or omission described in section 2.41.050 may be imputed to a person who is the subject of a proposed disqualification when such act or omission is committed for or on behalf of such person, and such person had actual or constructive knowledge of such act or omission. 
(c)  In determining whether to disqualify a person and the duration of such disqualification, the hearing officer may consider, in addition to any other relevant factors, one or more of the following: 
(1)  The degree to which the person cooperated with local, state or federal authorities in any criminal proceeding forming the basis for disqualification; 
(2)  The degree to which the person provided restitution for any damages or injury occasioned by the person's acts or omissions; 
(3)  Whether the person had in place adequate and effective standards of conduct and internal control systems at the time of such acts or omissions; 
(4)  Whether the person provided timely notice of such acts or omissions to the appropriate government agency or agencies; 
(5)  Whether the person fully investigated the circumstances surrounding such acts or omissions and promptly provided the city with the result of the investigation; 
(6)  Whether the person took appropriate remedial or disciplinary action against the individuals responsible for such acts or omissions; 
(7)  Whether the person implemented or agreed to implement remedial measures to prevent a recurrence of such acts or omissions including, without limitation, new or revised internal control procedures and other measures recommended, identified or prescribed by any government agency; and 
(8)  Whether the person had adequate time to eliminate or mitigate the circumstances or factors leading to or causing such acts or omissions. 
(Ord. No. 920-2013, § 1(2.41.060), 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 2.41.070. - Scope of disqualification. 
(a)  Disqualification of a person under this chapter constitutes disqualification of that person from submitting bids or proposals to the city for the purpose of entering into or in any manner participating in any city contract, or any part thereof, and shall apply to all individuals, divisions, subsidiaries, affiliates and parent corporations of that person unless the decision to qualify is limited by its terms to one or more specifically identified individuals, divisions, subsidiaries, affiliates, parents or other organizational elements. 
(b)  The disqualification of a person shall apply to any existing affiliate of the person where the affiliate is specifically named and given notice of the proposed disqualification and an opportunity to respond. The disqualification shall also apply to any successor-in-interest or any affiliate of the disqualified person formed during or after the disqualification proceedings. 
(c)  Disqualification of any person shall apply to any business entity, whether or not such business entity was in existence at the time of such disqualification, for which the disqualified person acts as a principal during the disqualification period. 
(Ord. No. 920-2013, § 1(2.41.070), 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 2.41.080. - Period of disqualification. 
    The disqualification period shall be for a period of up to five years as determined by the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 920-2013, § 1(2.41.080), 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 2.41.090. - Disqualification procedures. 
(a)  Prior to disqualifying any person under this chapter, the hearing officer shall send via certified mail or deliver by personal service a written notice of the proposed disqualification to the person proposed to be disqualified, hereinafter referred to as "respondent." Such notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  Notice that a disqualification is being considered; 
(2)  The grounds for the proposed disqualification, in terms sufficient to put the respondent on notice of the conduct or actions upon which it is based; 
(3)  The intended period of the disqualification; 
(4)  A summary of the disqualification procedures set forth is this chapter; and 
(5)  The name and address of the hearing officer to which the respondent may submit a written request for a hearing on the proposed disqualification. 
(b)  Within ten calendar days after personal service or mailing of the notice of the proposed disqualification, the respondent or the respondent's representative may submit a written request for a hearing on the proposed disqualification. Such written request shall specify the name and address of the person to which all subsequent notices and communications should be mailed. Failure of the respondent or respondent's representative to submit a written request for a hearing within the time provided by this subsection, or failure of respondent or respondent's representative to appear at the requested hearing, shall be deemed to be a waiver by respondent of respondent's right to request a hearing on the proposed disqualification and the hearing officer's decision shall be final. 
(c)  If the respondent requests a hearing in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, the hearing officer shall schedule a hearing at which the respondent or the respondent's representative shall have an opportunity to provide relevant information and argument, including the presentation and questioning of witnesses, to the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall provide the respondent with written notice of the time, date, and location of such hearing, which shall be held no sooner than five calendar days from the date of such notice. 
(d)  The formal rules of evidence shall not apply during the hearing. The hearing officer may admit into evidence all relevant evidence, including the affidavits or declarations of witnesses; limit the scope of discovery; shorten the time to produce records or witnesses; exclude witnesses from the hearing when not testifying; exclude disorderly or disruptive persons from the hearing; and make other orders necessary to ensure the fair and orderly conduct of the hearing. The hearing shall be open to the public. 
(e)  The proceedings at the hearing may be tape recorded if ordered by the hearing officer or requested by the respondent. A stenographer shall also transcribe the proceedings if ordered by the hearing officer or requested by the respondent, with the costs thereof to be borne by the person making the order or request. A copy of the tape recording or transcript of the proceedings shall be made available to the respondent upon request and upon payment of the cost of preparation thereof. 
(f)  Following the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a decision on the proposed disqualification. The decision shall be in writing and shall specify the reasons therefor. If the hearing officer upholds the disqualification, the notice of decision shall specify the length of the disqualification period and notify the respondent of his or her right to appeal the decision pursuant to subsection (g) of this section. 
(g)  The respondent shall have ten calendar days from the date of the hearing officer's decision to appeal the decision to the city manager. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be received by the city manager by the close of business not later than the tenth calendar day following the date of the hearing officer's decision except that, if such date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or city holiday, the appeal period shall be extended to the close of business on the next regular business day. 
(Ord. No. 920-2013, § 1(2.41.090), 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 2.41.100. - Appeal to the city manager. 
(a)  Upon the timely receipt of an appeal, the hearing officer's decision shall be abated and the city manager shall schedule a time at which the respondent or the respondent's representative shall meet with the city manager to explain why the hearing officer's decision should be set aside or modified. 
(b)  Evidence or testimony not previously presented to the hearing officer shall not be permitted at the meeting unless the city manager determines, in his or her sole discretion, that the interest of justice requires the consideration of such new evidence or testimony. 
(c)  If ordered by the city manager, the proceedings may be tape recorded or transcribed in the manner described in section 2.41.090(e). 
(d)  At the conclusion of the meeting, the city manager shall render a decision to uphold, modify, or set aside the hearing officer's decision and shall provide written notice of the decision to the respondent or the respondent's representative. If the city manager determines to uphold the hearing officer's decision to disqualify the respondent, the disqualification period shall commence from the date of the city manager's decision. The city manager's decision shall be final, nonappealable and not subject to judicial review, except as provided for in section 2.41.110. 
(Ord. No. 920-2013, § 1(2.41.100), 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 2.41.110. - Review of decision. 
(a)  The city manager's or hearing officer's decision to disqualify a person as provided in this chapter may be modified or vacated by the city manager, if, in his sole judgment, good cause exists for such modification or vacation. Good cause for review may be based on one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Newly discovered, material evidence not previously available to the parties. 
(2)  A bona fide change in ownership or management of the respondent's business. 
(3)  Elimination of the grounds upon which the disqualification was based. 
(b)  The respondent shall have no right of review by the city manager. Such review shall be at the city manager's sole discretion. 
(c)  A request for review shall be submitted by the respondent or the respondent's representative in writing and shall be accompanied by competence evidence in support thereof. Upon receipt of the request, the city manager or hearing officer, as the case may be, shall respond within a reasonable period of time as to whether the decision will be reviewed. The city manager's or hearing officer's denial of such request shall be nonappealable and not subject to judicial review. 
(d)  If the city manager or hearing officer agrees to review the decision, he shall render a written decision within a reasonable time thereafter. The decision shall be final and delivered to the respondent or respondent's representative. 
(Ord. No. 920-2013, § 1(2.41.110), 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 2.41.120. - Requirement to submit information. 
    The city may require any person submitting a bid or proposal on a city contract to submit the following as part of such bid or proposal: 
(1)  A statement under penalty of perjury, that neither such person, including any principal, affiliate or predecessor-in-interest of such person, nor any subcontractor, supplier or surety engaged or to be engaged by the person: 
a.  Is currently disqualified or has been disqualified at any time during the preceding ten years, from submitting a bid or proposal on a contract by any federal, state or local agency. 
b.  Has, at any time during the preceding ten years, been convicted of any offense, been subject to a civil judgment or been subject to a penalty or sanction by any federal, state or local agency for any act or omission described in section 2.41.050. 
(2)  Any other information or documentation deemed necessary to determine the person's eligibility to submit a bid or proposal on a city contract. 
(Ord. No. 920-2013, § 1(2.41.120), 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 2.41.130. - Doing business with a disqualified person. 
(a)  In performance of any city contract, no person having actual or constructive knowledge shall utilize the services of any person who is currently disqualified pursuant to this chapter. No person having actual or constructive knowledge shall use or list, in any bid or proposal for a city contract, any subcontractor, supplier, insurer or surety who is currently disqualified pursuant to this chapter. Violation of this section may result in rejection of the bid or proposal, nonpayment by the city for work performed by such person, annulment of award or termination of an award of contract, issuance of a stop work order, disqualification from submitting future bids or proposals on city contracts, or any other remedy provided by law. 
(b)  A person who uses or lists a disqualified subcontractor, supplier, insurer or surety without having actual or constructive knowledge of such disqualification shall be allowed to substitute the disqualified subcontractor, supplier, insurer or surety in accordance with state law or, if not applicable, the provisions of the contract governing contract changes. 
(Ord. No. 920-2013, § 1(2.41.130), 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 2.41.140. - Existing contracts. 
(a)  The city shall not renew or extend the term of any contracts with any person who is disqualified in accordance with this chapter, or who utilizes the services of any supplier, subcontractor, insurer or surety who is disqualified in accordance with this chapter, unless the city manager determines that such renewal or extensions is in the best interest of the city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the disqualification of any person, the city may, at its sole option, elect to continue a contract in existence at the time the person is disqualified, unless the city manager determines that termination of such contract is in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 920-2013, § 1(2.41.140), 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 2.41.150. - List of disqualified persons. 
(a)  The city manager shall maintain a list of all persons who are currently disqualified by the city pursuant to this chapter and the effective dates of such disqualification. Such list shall not include a person disqualified by another local agency or the state or federal government unless the person has been disqualified by the city under this chapter. Such list shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall make the list available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours and in accordance with the California Public Records Act. 
(b)  Such list shall be deemed to be constructive notice as to the persons who have been disqualified from submitting bids or proposals on city contracts or who are ineligible to participate in such contracts. 
(Ord. No. 920-2013, § 1(2.41.150), 12-16-2013) 
CHAPTER 2.42. - AWARDING PUBLIC PROJECTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, Public Contracts Code § 22000 et seq. 

Sec. 2.42.010. - Purpose. 
    This chapter is intended to establish regulations to apply to all public contracts in a manner that is consistent with the requirements of the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (Public Contracts Code § 22000 et seq.). 
(Code 1969, § 2.42.010; Ord. No. 876-2011, § 2, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 893-2012, § 2, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 908-2013, § 1, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.42.020. - Public projects. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, the city manager may cause public projects of $45,000.00 or less to be performed by employees of the city by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, public projects of $175,000.00 or less may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in section 2.42.040. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, and section 2.42.040(e), public projects of more than $175,000.00 shall be let to contract by the formal bidding procedure outlined in sections 2.42.050 and 2.42.060. 
(d)  The term "public project" shall have the definition set forth in Public Contracts Code § 22002. 
(e)  The dollar limits set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall increase or decrease automatically as necessary to comply with any adjustment mandated by the controller pursuant to the authority granted by Public Contracts Code § 22020. 
(Code 1969, § 2.42.020; Ord. No. 876-2011, § 2, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 893-2012, § 2, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 908-2013, § 1, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.42.030. - List of contractors. 
    A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with Public Contracts Code § 22034(a) and any criteria promulgated from time to time by the state uniform construction cost accounting commission (commission). Such list will be maintained by the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(Code 1969, § 2.42.030; Ord. No. 876-2011, § 2, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 893-2012, § 2, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 908-2013, § 1, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.42.040. - Informal bidding procedure. 
    The following apply to informal bids for public projects: 
(1)  Notice inviting informal bids. 
a.  Required noticing. When a public contract is to be bid pursuant to the procedures in this section, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all construction trade journals specified by the commission in accordance with Public Contracts Code § 22036. 
b.  Optional noticing. Notification may be also provided to the contractors on the list created pursuant to section 2.42.030 for the category of work being bid, and to any additional contractors and/or construction trade journals. 
c.  Exception. If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from certain contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractors. 
(2)  Mailing notices. All mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals pursuant to subsection (1)a and (1)c of this section shall be completed not less than ten calendar days before bids are due. 
(3)  Description of project. The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms and how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids. 
(4)  Authority to award contracts. The city manager is authorized to award a contract if the lowest bid received is $75,000.00 or less. Contracts valued at more than $75,000.00 can only be awarded by the city council. 
(5)  Bids exceeding $175,000.00. If all bids received pursuant to the informal process are in excess of $175,000.00, the city council may adopt a resolution by a four-fifths vote to award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines the city's cost estimate was reasonable. 
(6)  Award of contract. The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(Code 1969, § 2.42.040; Ord. No. 876-2011, § 2, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 893-2012, § 2, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 908-2013, § 1, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.42.050. - Notice inviting formal bids. 
    The following rules apply to notices for bids for public projects pursuant to the formal bidding process: 
(1)  Contents of notice. Notice inviting formal bids shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the project. 
(2)  Publication of notice. The notice shall be published at least 14 calendar days before the date of opening the bids in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city, or otherwise comply with the requirements of Public Contracts Code § 22037. 
(3)  Electronic transmission of notice. The notice inviting formal bids shall also be sent electronically, if available, by either facsimile or electronic mail and mailed to all construction trade journals specified in accordance with Public Contracts Code § 22036. The notice shall be sent at least 15 calendar days before the date of opening the bids. The city may provide additional notice. 
(Code 1969, § 2.42.050; Ord. No. 876-2011, § 2, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 893-2012, § 2, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 908-2013, § 1, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.42.060. - Awarding formal bids. 
    The following rules apply to awarding formal bids for public projects: 
(1)  Rejecting formal bids. In its discretion, the city council may reject any bids presented, if the city, prior to rejecting all bids and declaring that the project can be more economically performed by employees of the agency, furnishes a written notice to an apparent low bidder. The notice shall inform the bidder of the city's intention to reject the bid and shall be mailed at least two business days prior to the hearing at which the city intends to reject the bid. If after the first invitation of bids, all bids are rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the city shall have the option of either of the following: 
a.  Abandoning the project or readvertising for bids in the manner described by this chapter. 
b.  By passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote of the city council declaring that the project can be performed more economically by city employees, may have the project done by force account without further complying with this article. 
(2)  Lowest bidder. If a contract is awarded, it shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the city may accept the one it chooses. 
(3)  No bids. If no bids are received through the formal or informal procedure, the project may be performed by the employees of the public agency by force account, or negotiated contract without further complying with this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 2.42.060; Ord. No. 876-2011, § 2, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 893-2012, § 2, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 908-2013, § 1, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 2.42.070. - Emergencies. 
(a)  In cases of emergency when repair or replacements are necessary, the city council may proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility without adopting plans, specifications, strain sheets, or working details, or giving notice for bids to let contracts. The work may be done by day labor under the direction of the governing body, by contractor, or by a combination of the two. 
(b)  In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the city shall comply with chapter 2.5 of part 3 of division 2 of the Public Contracting Code (commencing with § 22050). 
(Code 1969, § 2.42.070; Ord. No. 876-2011, § 2, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 893-2012, § 2, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 908-2013, § 1, 6-17-2013) 
CHAPTER 2.48. - PERSONNEL SYSTEM[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of a city to establish a personnel system, merit system, or civil service system, Government Code § 45000 et seq. 

Sec. 2.48.010. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as indicated, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acting appointment means an appointment of a person who possesses the minimum qualifications established for a particular class and who has been appointed to a position in that class in the absence of available eligibles. 
    Appointing power means the officers of the city who, in their individual capacities, or as a board, commission, or city council, have the final authority to make the appointment to the position to be filled. 
    At-will employee means an employee employed at the will of the appointing authority and who may be disciplined or removed at any time without cause or right of appeal. At-will employees include the city manager, city attorney, chief of police, fire chief, assistant fire chief, assistant to the city manager, assistant city manager, community and economic development director, finance director and other department heads. 
    Casual employee means those individuals filling intermittent relief needs on a scheduled or unscheduled basis, subject to their own availability. 
    City service means all positions of employment in the service of the city except those specifically excluded by this chapter. 
    Class means all positions sufficiently similar in duties, authority, and responsibility, to permit grouping under a common title in the application with equity of common standards of selection, transfer, demotion and salary. 
    Days mean calendar days, unless otherwise stated. 
    Demotion means the movement of an employee from one class to another class having a lower maximum rate of pay. 
    Employment list means a list of names of persons who may be considered for employment with the city under specified conditions. 
    Examination means selection techniques used to measure the relative capacities of the persons applying for positions within the competitive service. 
    Layoff means the separation of employees from the active work force due to lack of work or funds, or to the abolition of positions by the city council for the above reasons or due to organizational changes. 
    Position means a group of duties and responsibilities in the competitive service requiring the full-time or part-time employment of one person. 
    Probationary period means a working test period during which an employee is required to demonstrate his fitness for the position to which he is appointed by actual performance of the duties of the position. 
    Promotion means the movement of an employee from one class to another class having a higher maximum rate of pay. 
    Reinstatement means the reemployment without examination of a former regular employee or probationary employee. 
    Suspension means the temporary separation from the service of an employee without pay, for disciplinary purposes. 
    Transfer means a change of an employee from one position to another position in the same class or in a comparable class. 
(Code 1969, § 2.48.010; Ord. No. 350, § 1(part), 1971; Ord. No. 496, § 3, 1982; Ord. No. 884-2011, § 2(2.48.010), 8-1-2011) 
Sec. 2.48.020. - Personnel officer. 
    The city manager shall be the personnel officer within the scope of his powers and duties as defined in this title. The personnel officer may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him as personnel officer under this chapter to any other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in section 2.48.140. The personnel officer shall: 
(1)  Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the city council. 
(2)  Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules. 
(3)  Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the city council. 
(4)  Provide for the publishing or posting of notices for vacant positions, the receiving of applications therefor, the certification to the appointing power of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the competitive service. 
(Code 1969, § 2.48.020; Ord. No. 350, § 1(part), 1971; Ord. No. 371, § 5, 1972; Ord. No. 427, § 4, 1977; Ord. No. 496, § 4, 1982) 
State Law reference- Authority of legislative body of city to appoint personnel officer and delegate powers and duties in relation to system, Government Code § 45004. 
Sec. 2.48.030. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the city, except: 
(1)  The city manager. 
(2)  Elective officers. 
(3)  Members of appointive boards. 
(4)  Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or any other services. 
(5)  Volunteer personnel, such as police reserves. 
(6)  The city attorney. 
(7)  Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood, or earthquake which threatens life or property. 
(8)  Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in permanent positions. 
(9)  At-will employees. 
(Code 1969, § 2.48.030; Ord. No. 350, § 1(part), 1971; Ord. No. 496, § 5, 1982; Ord. No. 884-2011, § 2(2.48.030), 8-1-2011) 
Sec. 2.48.040. - Adoption and amendment of rules. 
    Personnel rules and regulations shall be adopted by the city council after notice of such action has been furnished to each employee organization affected by the ordinance, rule, resolution or regulation or amendment thereof proposed to be adopted by the city council. Amendments and revisions may be suggested by any interested party and shall be processed as provided in the personnel rules. The rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system, including: 
(1)  Preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions, including employment standards and qualifications for each class. 
(2)  Public announcement of all tests and acceptance of applications for employment. 
(3)  Preparation, establishment and use of employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment. 
(4)  Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional appointments. 
(5)  Establishment of probationary periods. 
(6)  Evaluation of employees during the probationary period. 
(7)  Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees. 
(8)  Separation of employees from the city service. 
(9)  The establishment of adequate personnel records. 
(10)  The establishment of appeal procedures concerning the interpretation or application of this chapter and any rules adopted hereunder. 
(Code 1969, § 2.48.040; Ord. No. 350, § 1(part), 1971) 
Sec. 2.48.050. - Appointments. 
(a)  Appointments to vacant positions shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness. Examinations may be used and conducted to aid in the selection of qualified employees and may consist of achievement and aptitude tests, written tests, personal interview, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples, or any combinations of these or other tests. The probationary period shall be considered an extension of the examination process. Physical and medical tests may be given as a part of any examination. 
(b)  In any examination the personnel officer may include, in addition to competitive tests, qualifying tests, and set minimum standards therefor. 
(c)  When appointment is to be made to a vacancy, the personnel officer shall transmit to the appointing power the names of all persons on the appropriate certified employment list. 
(Code 1969, § 2.48.050; Ord. No. 350, § 1(part), 1971) 
Sec. 2.48.060. - Probationary period. 
    All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than six months. During the probationary period, the employment may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal or hearing. 
(Code 1969, § 2.48.060; Ord. No. 350, § 1(part), 1971) 
Sec. 2.48.070. - Status of present employees. 
(a)  Any person holding a position included in the service who, on August 14, 1971, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for his class, shall assume regular status in the service in the position held on August 14, 1971, without qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules. 
(b)  Any other person holding positions in the service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. 
(Code 1969, § 2.48.070; Ord. No. 350, § 1(part), 1971) 
Sec. 2.48.080. - Applicability of rules to certain exempt positions. 
    The provisions of the personnel rules relating to attendance and leaves shall apply to the incumbents of full-time exempt positions, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1969, § 2.48.080; Ord. No. 350, § 1(part), 1971) 
Sec. 2.48.090. - Demotion, dismissal, reduction in pay, suspension. 
(a)  Any appointing power shall have the right, for due cause, to demote, dismiss, reduce in pay, or suspend without pay for 30 calendar days any regular employee. Notice of such action must be in writing and served personally on such employee, except where an emergency situation exists, in which case the notice shall be served within three working days of the action taken. Such notice shall specify the penalty and contain a statement of the reasons therefor. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to reductions in pay which are a part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages or to eliminate positions. 
(Code 1969, § 2.48.090; Ord. No. 350, § 1(part), 1971) 
Sec. 2.48.100. - Right of appeal. 
(a)  Any employee in the service shall have the right to appeal to the city council any disciplinary action, or alleged violation of this chapter adopted thereunder, except in those instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this chapter or the rules adopted thereunder. 
(b)  All appeals shall be concluded as expeditiously as possible and in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in the personnel rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 2.48.100; Ord. No. 350, § 1(part), 1971) 
Sec. 2.48.110. - Layoff and reemployment. 
(a)  Whenever, in the judgment of the city manager, it becomes necessary, either in the interest of economy, or because the necessity for a position no longer exists, the employee holding such position may be laid off without disciplinary action being taken and without the right of appeal. 
(b)  Whenever, in the judgment of the city council, it becomes necessary, either in the interest of economy, or because the necessity for a position no longer exists, any position may be abolished in the service; and the employee holding such position may be laid off, without disciplinary action being taken, and without the right of appeal. 
(c)  The order of layoff of employees shall be established by the personnel officer on the recommendation of the division or department head involved. The division or department head shall take into consideration the job performance and length of service of employees in preparing a recommended layoff list; provided, however, that no regular or probationary employee shall be laid off from his position in any department while any emergency, temporary, casual or acting employee is serving in the same class in that department. 
(d)  The names of regular and probationary employees laid off or demoted in lieu of layoff shall be placed upon reemployment lists for six months for those classes requiring basically the same qualifications, duties and responsibilities of the class from which layoff or demotion in lieu of layoff was made. 
(e)  Persons whose names are placed on reemployment lists in accordance with this section, and who are reemployed within the prescribed period, shall be regarded as having been on leave of absence during this period of absence and entitled to all benefits accruing from such leave. 
(Code 1969, § 2.48.110; Ord. No. 350, § 1(part), 1971; Ord. No. 496, § 6, 1982) 
Sec. 2.48.120. - Improper political activity. 
    The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state law. 
(Code 1969, § 2.48.120; Ord. No. 350, § 1(part), 1971) 
State Law reference- Political activities of public employees generally, Government Code § 3201 et seq. 
Sec. 2.48.130. - Discrimination. 
    No person in the service, or seeking admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted or discharged, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations, race, color, ancestry, age, national origin, religious creed, sex, marital status or handicap, medical condition, genetic information, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or because of the exercise of his rights under Government Code § 3502 and Government Code §§ 45050 through 45054. 
(Code 1969, § 2.48.130; Ord. No. 350, § 1(part), 1971; Ord. No. 641, § 1, 1990) 
Sec. 2.48.140. - Right to contract for special service. 
    The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city council may contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter: 
(1)  The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof. 
(2)  The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof. 
(3)  The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests. 
(4)  The conduct of employee training programs. 
(5)  Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. 
(Code 1969, § 2.48.140; Ord. No. 350, § 1(part), 1971; Ord. No. 371, § 6, 1972) 
State Law reference- Authority of legislative body of city to contract for conducting of competitive examinations of applicants for positions and employment in the city service and performance of any other service in connection with personnel selection and administration, Government Code § 45008. 
CHAPTER 2.52. - CLAIMS AGAINST CITY[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Claims and actions against public entities and public employees, Government Code § 810 et seq. 

Sec. 2.52.010. - Authority. 
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to Government Code § 935. 
(Code 1969, § 2.52.010; Ord. No. 713(part), 1995; Ord. No. 887-2011, § 1(2.52.010), 9-19-2011) 
Sec. 2.52.020. - Claims required. 
    All claims against the city for money or damages for which the Tort Claims Act (Government Code § 900 et seq.) or another state law authorizes local agencies to prescribe procedures (hereinafter in this chapter, "claims") shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by part 3 of division 3.6 of title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with § 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 2.52.020; Ord. No. 713(part), 1995; Ord. No. 887-2011, § 1(2.52.020), 9-19-2011) 
Sec. 2.52.030. - Form of claim. 
    All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by Government Code § 910. 
(Ord. No. 887-2011, § 1(2.52.030), 9-19-2011) 
Sec. 2.52.040. - Claim prerequisite to suit. 
    In accordance with Government Code §§ 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by the city council prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of sections 2.52.020 and 2.52.030. 
(Ord. No. 887-2011, § 1(2.52.040), 9-19-2011) 
Sec. 2.52.050. - Suit. 
    Any action brought against the city upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Government Code §§ 940 through 949. Any action brought against any employee of the city shall confirm with the requirements of Government Code §§ 950 through 951. 
(Ord. No. 887-2011, § 1(2.52.050), 9-19-2011) 
CHAPTER 2.54. - BY-DISTRICT ELECTORAL SYSTEM 

Sec. 2.54.010. - By-district electoral system. 
(a)  The city council declares that the change in method of electing members of this city council hereby enacted is being made in furtherance of the CVRA of 2001. 
(b)  Beginning with the municipal election in November 2018, members of the city council shall be elected in the electoral districts established by section 2.54.010(c) and subsequently reapportioned as provided by State law. Elections shall take place by-district as that term is defined in California Government Code (GC) Section 34871, meaning one member of the city council shall be elected from each district, by the voters of the district alone. Each member of the city council shall serve a four-year term. 
(c)  Members of the city council shall be elected on a by-district basis from the four city council districts hereby established. The boundaries and identifying number of each district shall be as described on the City Council District Map attached hereto as "Exhibit A" and incorporated by reference. 
(d)  Commencing with the general municipal election in November 2018 and thereafter the voters in districts 1 and 2 shall elect members of the city council by-district for full four year terms. At the general municipal election in November 2020 and thereafter, the voters in districts 3 and 4 shall elect members of the city council by-district for full four year terms. 
(e)  Each member of the city council elected to represent a district must reside in that district and be a registered voter in that district, and any candidate for city council must reside in, and be a registered voter in, the district in which he or she seeks election at the time nomination papers are issued pursuant to G.C. Section 34882 and E.C. [Elections Code] Section 10227. It is the intent of the city council that no term of any member of the city council that commenced prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be affected by this chapter. 
(f)  Registered voters signing nomination papers or voting for a member of the city council shall be residents of the geographical area making up the district from which the candidate is to be elected. 
(g)  Termination of residency in a district by a member of the city council shall create a vacancy for that city council district unless a substitute residence within the district is immediately declared and established within 30 days after the termination of residency. In the event that a vacancy is created as a result of termination of residency as provided herein, such vacancy shall be filled pursuant to the provisions of the E.C. 
(h)  If necessary to facilitate the implementation of this article, the city clerk is authorized to make technical adjustments to the district boundaries that do not substantively affect the populations in the districts, the eligibility of candidates, or the residence of elected officials within any district. The city clerk shall consult with the city manager and city attorney concerning any technical adjustments deemed necessary and shall advise the city council of any such adjustments required in the implementation of the districts. 
(Ord. No. 956-2018U , § 3, 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 2.54.020 - At-large mayor. 
    The office of Mayor of the City of Barstow is a separate office, which shall continue to be elected at-large, pursuant to the 1976 ballot measure approved by a majority of the city's electorate. 
(Ord. No. 956-2018U , § 3, 1-16-2018) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
CHAPTER 3.04. - TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Power of city legislative body to transfer the duties of the city treasurer to the treasurer of the county in which the city is situated, Government Code § 51501. 

Sec. 3.04.010. - Transfer of duties. 
    In accordance with the Government Code § 43000 et seq., providing for the levy and collection of taxes by and for municipal corporations by certain officers of the county, the city elects by this chapter that the duties of assessing property and collecting taxes provided by law to be performed by the assessor and tax collector of such city shall be performed by the county assessor and the county tax collector of San Bernardino County, in which such city is situated. 
(Code 1969, § 3.04.010; Ord. No. 141, § 1, 1958) 
State Law reference- City legislative body shall provide by ordinance a system for the assessment, levy, and collection of city taxes, Government Code § 43000. 
Sec. 3.04.020. - Filing. 
    A certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be filed with the county auditor immediately following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and thereafter assessments made by the county assessor, as the same may be equalized or corrected by the board of supervisors of the county or the board of equalization of the state, shall be used as a basis for the levy of the tax of the city, and the taxes shall be collected by the assessor and tax collector of such county at the same time and in the manner county taxes are collected. 
(Code 1969, § 3.04.020; Ord. No. 141, § 2, 1958) 
CHAPTER 3.08. - DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Documentary Transfer Tax Act, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq. 

Sec. 3.08.010. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Barstow." It is adopted pursuant to part 6.7 (commencing with section 11901) of division II of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.010; Ord. No. 269, § 1, 1967) 
Sec. 3.08.020. - Tax imposed; rate. 
    There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to or vested in the purchasers, or any other persons, by his or their direction when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of 27.5 cents for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.020; Ord. No. 269, § 2, 1967) 
Sec. 3.08.030. - Person obligated to pay tax. 
    The tax imposed by section 3.08.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, issued or signed. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.030; Ord. No. 269, § 3, 1967) 
Sec. 3.08.040. - Inapplicability to instrument securing debt. 
    The tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.040; Ord. No. 269, § 4, 1967) 
Sec. 3.08.050. - Government entities not liable for payment. 
    The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia, shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor pursuant and subject to Revenue and Taxation Code § 11922. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.050; Ord. No. 269, § 5, 1967; Ord. No. 642, § 1, 1990) 
Sec. 3.08.060. - Exempt transactions-Bankruptcy, receivership; change of identity, place, or form of organization. 
(a)  The tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
(1)  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
(2)  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of section 205 of title II of the United States Code as amended; 
(3)  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of section 506 of title II of the United States Code, as amended; or 
(4)  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
(b)  Subsections (a)(1) through (a)(4) of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.060; Ord. No. 269, § 6, 1967) 
Sec. 3.08.070. - Same-Conveyance pursuant to securities and exchange commission order. 
    The tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the securities and exchange commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
(1)  The order of the securities and exchange commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recited that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of section 79k of title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
(2)  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
(3)  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.070; Ord. No. 269, § 7, 1967) 
Sec. 3.08.075. - Same-Revenue and Taxation Code § 11926 et seq. 
    In addition to those exempt transactions identified hereinabove, the tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply where such transactions are exempt pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code § 11926 et seq. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.075; Ord. No. 642, § 2, 1990) 
Sec. 3.08.080. - Applicability to partnership transactions. 
(a)  In the case of any realty held by a partnership or other entity treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, no tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of any interest in the partnership or other entity or otherwise, if: 
(1)  Such partnership or other entity treated as a partnership is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 USCA 708); and 
(2)  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
(b)  If there is a termination of any partnership or other entity treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, within the meaning of section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; for the purposes of this chapter, such partnership or other entity shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair-market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership or other entity at the time of such termination. 
(c)  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection (b) of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership or other entity at the time of such termination. 
(d)  No levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer between individuals and a legal entity or between legal entities that results solely in a change in the method of holding title to the realty and in which proportional ownership interests in the realty, whether represented by stock, membership interest, partnership interest, cotenancy interest, or otherwise, directly or indirectly, remain the same immediately after the transfer. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.080; Ord. No. 269, § 8, 1967) 
Sec. 3.08.090. - Inter vivos gifts. 
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any deed, instrument, or other writing which purports to grant, assign, transfer, convey, divide, allocate, or vest lands, tenements, or realty, or any interest therein, if, by reason of such inter vivos gift or by reason of the death of any person, such lands, tenements, realty, or interests therein are transferred outright to, or in trust for the benefit of, any person or entity. 
Sec. 3.08.100. - Administration, allocation, and distribution of proceeds. 
    The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of part 6.7 (commencing with section 11901) of division II of the Revenue and Taxation Code and pursuant to chapter III of division IV of title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code. For the purposes of this section, the recorder may use adhesive stamps as provided for in section 9.040 of chapter III of division IV of title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.090; Ord. No. 269, § 9, 1967) 
Sec. 3.08.110. - Stamps required before recordation; location and sales data required. 
(a)  The recorder shall not record any deed, instrument or writing subject to the tax imposed by this chapter unless the stamps described in section 3.08.100 are affixed thereto having a face value equal to the total amount of the tax due under this chapter. If the party submitting the document for recordation so requests, stamps having a face value equal to the total amount of tax due under this chapter may be deposited with the recorder and shall be affixed to the document by the recorder after the permanent record is made and before the original is returned as specified in Government Code § 27321. 
(b)  Every document subject to tax hereunder which is submitted for recordation shall show on the face of the document, or in a separate document, the amount of taxes due under this chapter and the recorder may rely thereon. 
(c)  Every document subject to tax hereunder which is submitted for recordation shall show on the face of the document, or in a separate document, the location of lands, tenements, or other realty described in the document, and the name of the city shall be set forth. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.100; Ord. No. 269, § 10, 1967) 
Sec. 3.08.120. - Cancellation of stamps by recorder. 
    The recorder shall cancel the stamps affixed to any document by printing or stamping thereon the date of affixation or recordation. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.110; Ord. No. 269, § 11, 1967) 
Sec. 3.08.130. - Procedure for claiming refunds of taxes. 
    Claims for refunds of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of chapter V (commencing with section 5096) of part IX of division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.120; Ord. No. 269, § 11, 1967) 
Sec. 3.08.140. - Administrative interpretation. 
    In the administration of this chapter, the recorder shall interpret its provisions consistently with those documentary stamp tax regulations adopted by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States Treasury Department which relate to the tax on conveyances and identified as sections 47.4361-1, 47.4361-2, and 47.4362-1 of part 47 of title 26 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as they existed on November 8, 1967, except that for the purposes of this chapter, the determination of what constitutes realty shall be determined by the definition or scope of that term under state law. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.130; Ord. No. 269, § 13, 1967) 
Sec. 3.08.150. - Recorder may require sales records. 
    Whenever the county recorder has reason to believe that the full amount of tax due under this chapter has not been paid, he may, by notice served upon any person liable therefor, require him to furnish a true copy of his records relevant to the amount of the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.140; Ord. No. 269, § 14, 1967) 
Sec. 3.08.160. - Intentional avoidance by misrepresentation a misdemeanor. 
(a)  Any person who makes, signs, issues, or accepts, or causes to be made, signed, issued, or accepted, and who submits or causes to be submitted for recordation any deed, instrument or writing subject to the tax imposed by this chapter and makes any material misrepresentation of fact for the purpose of avoiding all or any part of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  No person shall be liable, either civilly or criminally, for any unintentional error made in designating the location of the lands, tenements or other realty described in a document subject to the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 3.08.150; Ord. No. 269, § 15, 1967) 
CHAPTER 3.12. - SALES AND USE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Sales and Use Tax Law, Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.; Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq. 

Sec. 3.12.010. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance." 
(Code 1969, § 3.12.010; Ord. No. 408, § 1, 1975) 
Sec. 3.12.020. - Rate. 
    The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Code 1969, § 3.12.020; Ord. No. 408, § 2, 1975) 
Sec. 3.12.040. - Purpose. 
    The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
(1)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(2)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(3)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the state board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting the state sales and use taxes. 
(4)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 3.12.040; Ord. No. 408, § 4, 1975) 
Sec. 3.12.050. - Contract with state. 
    Prior to the operative date, this city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this city has not contracted with the state board of equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract, and in such a case, the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 3.12.050; Ord. No. 408, § 5, 1975) 
Sec. 3.12.060. - Sales tax. 
    For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in section 3.12.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. 
(Code 1969, § 3.12.060; Ord. No. 408, § 6, 1975) 
Sec. 3.12.070. - Place of sale. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out of state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out of state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the state board of equalization. 
(Code 1969, § 3.12.070; Ord. No. 408, § 7, 1975) 
Sec. 3.12.080. - Use tax. 
    An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in section 3.12.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Code 1969, § 3.12.080; Ord. No. 408, § 8, 1975) 
Sec. 3.12.090. - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Code 1969, § 3.12.090; Ord. No. 408, § 9, 1975). 
Sec. 3.12.100. - Limitations on adoption of state law. 
    In adopting the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title of the state controller, the state treasurer, the state board of control, the state board of equalization, the state treasury, or the constitution of the state. The substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. The substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code. The substitution shall not be made in Revenue and Taxation Code § 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828. The substitution shall not be made for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203. 
(Code 1969, § 3.12.100; Ord. No. 408, § 10, 1975) 
Sec. 3.12.110. - Permit not required. 
    If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Revenue and Taxation Code § 6067, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 3.12.110; Ord. No. 408, § 11, 1975) 
Sec. 3.12.120. - Exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
(b)  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
(c)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sales of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(d)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Code 1969, § 3.12.120; Ord. No. 408, § 12, 1975; Ord. No. 527, § 1, 1983) 
Sec. 3.12.130. - Amendments. 
    All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 3.12.130; Ord. No. 408, § 13, 1975) 
Sec. 3.12.140. - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Code 1969, § 3.12.140; Ord. No. 408, § 14, 1975) 
Sec. 3.12.150. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable in accordance with section 1.01.150. 
(Code 1969, § 3.12.150; Ord. No. 408, § 15, 1975; Ord. No. 761, § 2, 2000) 
Sec. 3.12.160. - Confidentiality. 
    Confidential or proprietary information furnished to or secured by the city in the implementation of this chapter shall be confidential. This section shall not apply, however, to disclosures made in connection with any hearing, appeal, or any civil action or proceeding relating to the determination or recovery of the tax. 
CHAPTER 3.16. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Hotel occupancy tax, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7280 et seq. 

Sec. 3.16.010. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance of the City of Barstow." 
(Code 1969, § 3.16.010; Ord. No. 678(part), 1992) 
Sec. 3.16.020. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any portion of any transient occupancy facility for sleeping, lodging, dwelling or similar purposes. 
    Operator means any person, corporation, entity or partnership which is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, debtor in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs its functions though a managing agent of any type or character other than as an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator and shall have the same duties and liabilities as its principal. For purposes of the notice and appeal provisions of this chapter only, the term "operator" also means and includes any managing employee or employee in charge of the hotel. 
    Rent means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Tax means all taxes, interest and penalties due on the return. 
    Tax administrator means the tax and license collector of the city. 
    Transient means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to exercise occupancy, whether by agreement (oral or written), concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, payment of rent or similar entitlement, for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any person so occupying space in a transient occupancy facility shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired, and there is a lease agreement or month-to-month rental agreement in writing between the operator and the transient, providing for a period of occupancy in excess of 30 days. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. 
    Transient occupancy facility means any structure, or portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for lodging or sleeping purposes in conformance with the city's zoning regulations and including, but not limited to, any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel or other similar structure or portion thereof, and shall further include any space, lot, area or site in any trailer court, camp, park or lot which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by a tent, trailer, recreational vehicle, mobile home, motor home, or other similar conveyance, for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
(Code 1969, § 3.16.020; Ord. No. 678(part), 1992) 
Sec. 3.16.030. - Tax imposed. 
    For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of 12.5 percent of the rent charged by the operator. This tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. 
(Code 1969, § 3.16.030; Ord. No. 678(part), 1992; Ord. No. 780, § 1, 2002) 
Sec. 3.16.040. - Exemptions. 
    Upon review and written approval by the city manager, any charitable organization exempt from both federal and state taxes while said organization is providing emergency housing for victims of a natural disaster shall be exempt from payment of the transient occupancy tax as shall the lodging facility providing such occupancy to transients. Said exemption shall apply only to those victims of natural disasters who are placed by said tax exempt organization. 
(Code 1969, § 3.16.040; Ord. No. 689, § 1, 1993) 
Sec. 3.16.050. - Operator's collection duties. 
    Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of the rent and the tax thereon shall be separately stated from all other amounts on all receipts and books of record of the hotel, and each transient shall be tendered a receipt for payment from the operator with rent and tax separately stated thereon. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 3.16.050; Ord. No. 678(part), 1992) 
Sec. 3.16.060. - Business license. 
    Each operator of a transient occupancy facility shall obtain a business license prior to commencing business. This license does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. 
(Code 1969, § 3.16.060; Ord. No. 678(part), 1992) 
Sec. 3.16.070. - Reporting and remitting. 
    Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any business license holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
(Code 1969, § 3.16.070; Ord. No. 678(part), 1992) 
Sec. 3.16.080. - Penalties and interest; license cancellation. 
(a)  Original delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of $10.00 or ten percent of the amount of the tax, whichever dollar amount is greater, in addition to the amount of the tax. 
(b)  Continued delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of $10.00 or ten percent of the amount of the tax, whichever dollar amount is greater, in addition to the amount of the tax and the first penalty imposed. 
(c)  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of 11/2; percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. In the event of payment of the tax and nonpayment of interest or penalties, interest at the rate set in this section shall accrue upon the amount of the unpaid interest and penalty until date of payment. 
(d)  License cancellation. If the tax, penalties and interest are not paid within 60 days from the date on which the tax became delinquent, the tax administrator shall give written notice to the operator in whose name the business license was issued of his intention to cancel the license after 15 days from the date on the notice, should the taxes, penalties and interest then due not be paid. Written notice shall be deemed given when a copy of same is enclosed in a sealed envelope with postage thereon fully prepaid and certified in the United States mail and addressed to that address given by the operator in the application for the license. The license shall be canceled upon lapse of the 15 days provided in the notice, if all taxes, penalties and interest are not paid in full within the 15-day period. 
(e)  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Code 1969, § 3.16.080; Ord. No. 678(part), 1992) 
Sec. 3.16.090. - Failure to collect and report tax; determination of tax by tax administrator; application for hearing. 
(a)  In addition to section 3.16.080(d), if any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to determine an estimate of any tax imposed by this chapter, payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to assess against such operator the tax and administrative charges provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid and certified, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. 
(b)  Such operator may, within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax and administrative charges, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. 
(c)  If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the estimated tax specified therein should not be fixed for such tax. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such estimated tax should not be so fixed. 
(d)  After such hearing, the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax and administrative charges. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days unless an appeal is taken as provided in section 3.16.100. 
(Code 1969, § 3.16.090; Ord. No. 678(part), 1992) 
Sec. 3.16.100. - Appeal. 
    Any operator aggrieved by a decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax and administrative charges, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within 15 days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in section 3.16.090 for the service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Code 1969, § 3.16.100; Ord. No. 678(part), 1992) 
Sec. 3.16.110. - Records. 
(a)  No reports or statements of an operator shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of such reports or statements preclude the city from collection by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable. Each report or statement and each of the items therein shall be subject to audit and verification by the tax administrator or authorized agents of the city who are hereby authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or determine the tax due. 
(b)  Every operator shall keep and preserve for a period of four years all records as may be necessary to determine the tax. Said record shall be made available to the city at all reasonable times within ten days of the date of the written request sent by certified mail. Each operator is required to permit an examination of such books and records at a location within the city. In the event the books and records cannot be made available within the city, the operator shall reimburse the city for the cost of all transportation, lodging, meals, portal to portal travel time, and other incidental costs reasonably incurred by the city in conducting the audit. 
(c)  Confidential or proprietary information furnished to or secured by the city from an operator in the implementation of this chapter shall be confidential. This section shall not apply, however, to disclosures made in connection with any hearing, appeal, or any civil action or proceeding relating to the determination or recovery of the tax. 
(Code 1969, § 3.16.110; Ord. No. 678(part), 1992) 
Sec. 3.16.120. - Refunds. 
(a)  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
(b)  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
(c)  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
(d)  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Code 1969, § 3.16.120; Ord. No. 678(part), 1992) 
Sec. 3.16.130. - Actions to collect. 
(a)  Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(b)  If any tax is not paid when due, the tax administrator may record, in the office of the county recorder of such counties as the tax administrator may determine, a certificate of lien which specifies the amount of tax due and the name and address of the operator owing the tax. The certificate shall include a statement that the tax administrator has complied with all legal requirements in the determination of the tax owed, and a legal description of the real property of the owner. Upon recording of the certificate, the tax constitutes a lien upon all real property owned or thereafter acquired by the operator. The lien has the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien. 
(c)  At any time after the recording of a certificate of lien, the tax administrator may issue a check or warrant directed to any sheriff or marshal for the enforcement of the lien and the collection of such tax. The warrant shall have the same effect as a writ of execution, and be executed in the same manner and with the same effect as a levy and sale pursuant to writ of execution. The tax administrator may pay or advance to the sheriff or marshal such fees, commissions and expenses for services as are provided by law. 
(d)  In lieu of issuing a check or warrant as provided in subsection (c) of this section, after an assessment is issued or certificate of lien is recorded under subsection (b) of this section, the tax administrator may collect the delinquent amount by seizing or causing to be seized any property, real or personal, of the operator and selling non-cash or nonnegotiable property at public auction to pay the tax due, together with any cost of the seizure and sale. Any seizure made shall only be of property not exempt from execution under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Code 1969, § 3.16.130; Ord. No. 678(part), 1992) 
Sec. 3.16.140. - Duty and liability of operator's successor. 
(a)  Any operator liable for any tax who sells or otherwise disposes of a hotel, and the operator's successor, shall notify the tax administrator of the date of sale at least 30 days prior to the date of sale, immediately. The successor shall withhold from the operator for the account of the city a portion of the purchase price sufficient to pay the amount of the tax owed to the city until the operator secures a written release from the tax administrator stating that no tax is due from the operator through the date of the sale. If no release is presented by the operator to the successor within 30 days after the successor commences operation of the hotel, the successor shall immediately deposit the amount withheld from the amount of the tax owed by the prior operator. 
(b)  If the successor fails to withhold the amount required by subsection (a) of this section, the successor is liable to the city for payment of the tax owed by the operator. 
(c)  The tax administrator shall, within 30 days of receipt of a written request for a release, either issue the release or give written notice to the operator, with a copy to the successor, of the amount of tax which must be paid to secure issuance of the release. The release shall be a defense, available solely to the successor and not the operator, to any claim the city may assert against the successor for taxes owed by the operator. 
(d)  Any operator from whom the successor has withheld and paid to the city a portion of the purchase price may challenge the tax administrator's determination pursuant to section 3.16.090, by making application in writing for a hearing on the amount determined by the tax administrator within ten days of mailing by the tax administrator. Following receipt of a timely request for hearing, the hearing provisions of section 3.16.090 shall apply. 
(Code 1969, § 3.16.140; Ord. No. 678(part), 1992) 
Sec. 3.16.150. - Rules and regulations; interpretation. 
    The tax administrator may make rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement and administration of this chapter. Any such rule or regulation which may affect the amount of the tax owed the city shall be subject to approval of the city council. Said rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the tax administrator and maintained in an orderly and readily accessible manner. Taxes are considered paid only upon receipt of the return, and penalty, interest, and completed exemption certificate when appropriate. The burden to secure and comply with the rules and regulations shall be upon the operator. 
(Code 1969, § 3.16.150; Ord. No. 678(part), 1992) 
CHAPTER 3.20. - SPECIAL GAS TAX IMPROVEMENT FUND[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Highway Users Tax Fund, Streets and Highways Code § 2100 et seq.; apportionment of money from the Highway Users Tax Fund only allowed after city has set up by ordinance a special gas tax street improvement fund, Streets and Highways Code § 2113. 

Sec. 3.20.010. - Special fund established. 
    There is established among the funds and accounts of the city a special fund which shall be the special gas tax improvement fund. 
(Code 1969, § 3.20.010; Ord. No. 267, § 1, 1967) 
Sec. 3.20.020. - Deposits to and expenditures from. 
    All funds derived from motor fuels taxes collected by the state and paid over to the city shall be deposited forthwith into that special fund established by this chapter, and all expenditures therefrom shall comply with the appropriate sections of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Code 1969, § 3.20.020; Ord. No. 267, § 2, 1967) 
CHAPTER 3.24. - CAPITAL OUTLAY FUND AND SPECIAL REVENUE FUNDS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city council by ordinance to provide for levy and collection of assessments or taxes for the creation and accumulation of a capital outlays fund, Government Code § 53730.5. 

Sec. 3.24.010. - Capital outlay fund established. 
    There is established among the funds and accounts of the city a special fund which shall be the capital outlay and special revenue funds as required. 
(Code 1969, § 3.24.010; Ord. No. 316, § 1(part), 1970) 
Sec. 3.24.020. - Deposits to funds. 
    The proceeds of all special taxes levied for municipal improvements shall be deposited into a special revenue fund restricted to the purpose as designated by the special tax, together with such other funds as the city council may direct from time to time. 
(Code 1969, § 3.24.020; Ord. No. 316, § 1(part), 1970; Ord. No. 643, § 1, 1990) 
Sec. 3.24.030. - Interest. 
    All interest earned through the deposit of the capital outlay fund shall accrue to the fund and shall become a part thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 3.24.030; Ord. No. 316, § 1(part), 1970) 
CHAPTER 3.29. - TRUST FUND 

Sec. 3.29.010. - Established. 
    There is established among the funds and accounts of the city a fiduciary fund which shall be a trust fund with guidelines set forth by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 3.29.010; Ord. No. 536, § 1(part), 1984) 
Sec. 3.29.020. - Use of funds. 
    All funds derived from donations or contributions shall be deposited forthwith into that fiduciary fund established by this chapter and all expenses therefrom shall comply with generally accepted accounting principles and auditing standards. 
(Code 1969, § 3.29.020; Ord. No. 536, § 1(part), 1984) 
Sec. 3.29.030. - Interest on investments. 
    All interest earned through the deposit of the trust fund shall accrue to the fund and become a part thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 3.29.030; Ord. No. 536, § 1(part), 1984) 
CHAPTER 3.33. - TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX 

Sec. 3.33.010. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the City of Barstow Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance. The City of Barstow will hereinafter be called city. This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.020. - Operative date. 
    "Operative Date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of this chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.030. - Purpose. 
    This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof to be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
B.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the California Department of Tax and Fee administration in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.040. - Contract with state. 
    Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the city council operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.050. - Transactions tax rate. 
    For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.060. - Place of sale. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.070. - Use tax rate. 
    An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.080. - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.090. - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
    In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.  The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; 
2.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; 
3.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or; 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code. 
4.  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  The word "City" shall be substituted for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.100. - Permit not required. 
    If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.110. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised, 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance; 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in sections 6366 and 6366 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California, 
3.  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter; 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
6.  Except as provided in subsection (7), a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer. 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3 5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.120. - Resident oversight. 
    A five-member residents' oversight committee shall be created and meet annually to review and publically report on the expenditure of revenues generated by the tax imposed by this chapter. Members of the committee will be appointed to two-year terms by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.130. - Audit and review. 
    The proceeds of the tax imposed by this chapter, as well as the expenditure thereof, shall be audited annually by an independent accounting firm. 
    The city council shall discuss the results of such audit at a meeting of the city council that is open to the public. The report of such audit shall be posted on the city's website. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.140. - Amendments. 
    All amendments subsequent to the Effective Date of this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become adopted and part of this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.150. - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.160. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.170. - Effective date. 
    This chapter relates to the levying and collecting of city transactions and use taxes and shall take effect immediately. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 3.33.180. - Discontinuation of tax. 
    If control over the Barstow Fire Protection District or the City Police Department is transferred from the City of Barstow to any other public agency the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be discontinued as of the date of that transfer. 
(Ord. No. 957-2018 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS AND LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to license, for revenue and regulation, and fix the license tax upon, every lawful business transacted in the city, Government Code § 37101; authority of city to license in the exercise of police power and for purpose of regulation, Business and Professions Code § 16000 et seq. 

CHAPTER 5.04. - BUSINESS LICENSES 

Sec. 5.04.010. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter and chapters 5.08 and 5.12, unless otherwise more particularly defined, the following terms are hereby defined: 
    Business includes all trades, professions, vocations, occupations, callings, operation, rendering service, conduct of affairs, trade or commerce, of whatever kind or nature, engaged in for profit, directly or indirectly. 
    Collector means the city officer designated by the city manager to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
    Established place of business means a permanent store, market or other place of business within the corporate limits of the city where business is regularly transacted from month to month in such a manner as business of like nature is generally conducted, and where the circumstances show a bona fide intention to become an established, fixed and continuous part of the regular and legitimate business life of the city, and not otherwise temporarily on the public streets or highways, or in any hotel, lodginghouse or any place whatsoever where only a temporary accommodation is established and not where any temporary expedient is resorted to for a temporary purpose as distinguished from the bona fide intention to become an established, fixed and continuous business within the city. 
    Gross receipts means the gross total amount of receipts from the sales and/or services of any kind or nature received in the conduct or operation of such business or rendering of services. Sales tax and receipts from sales of alcoholic beverages shall be excluded from computation of gross receipts. 
    Itinerant means a transient licensee with no fixed or established place of business within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Licensee means any person, firm or corporation to whom a business license shall be issued hereunder, or of whom a business license shall be required hereunder. 
    Quarterly, quarter, per quarter means each three-month quarter of the calendar year. 
    Year, annual, per annum means the fiscal year of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 5.04.010; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.04.020. - Tax and license collector. 
    There shall be a tax and license collector whose duty shall be to collect all taxes and licenses due hereunder to the city and to enforce all the provisions of chapters 5.04 through 5.12. The city manager shall have the power to designate by written order that particular officers or employees shall be authorized to perform the duties of collector. 
(Code 1969, § 5.04.020; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.04.030. - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation; whether as principal or agent, employer or employee, or in any manner whatsoever to conduct, engage in, transact or operate any business, specified in chapters 5.04 through 5.12, within the corporate limits of the city without having first obtained a business license from the city and made payment of the license fees provided for herein. 
(Code 1969, § 5.04.030; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.04.040. - Application. 
(a)  Applications for licenses issued hereunder shall be in a manner and form as directed by the collector, provided all such applications shall have the approval of the officer, agent or employee in charge of the department. The following departments or agencies are authorized to approve business license applications for compliance with other applicable ordinances and statues: 
(1)  Police. 
(2)  Fire. 
(3)  Building. 
(4)  Health. 
(5)  Planning. 
(b)  No business license shall be issued to conduct, maintain or operate any business in the city unless the location of the business is within a proper zone as indicated by title 19 of this Code. 
(Code 1969, § 5.04.040; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.04.050. - Temporary events. 
    No business license shall be issued for a temporary event, as described in chapter 9.45, unless a temporary event permit has first been obtained. 
(Code 1969, § 5.04.050; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.04.060. - Revocation. 
(a)  All licenses issued hereunder, shall be in compliance with all ordinances of the city and all the laws of the state and of the United States of America. Upon failure to comply, any and all licenses issued hereunder may be revoked by the city manager, subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. Any license obtained by fraud or misrepresentation by the licensee will automatically be null and void, with forfeiture of any and all monies paid to the city for the license. Any license issued for a business which may be conducted in a manner adverse to the public health, welfare and safety may be revoked by the city manager at any time. 
(b)  Prior to any revocation of license, the city manager shall, by his order, give the licensee 15 days notice of intent to revoke such license. Within 15 days after any such order the licensee may appear and show cause before the city council why such license should not be revoked. Upon the failure of the licensee to appear within said time, or, if after appearance and hearing before the council, the council shall find good and sufficient cause for revocation, the license shall be revoked. 
(c)  Upon any revocation of license, no refund of any license fee shall be made and the fee shall be forfeited to the city. 
(d)  No business shall be conducted or operated in any manner during any period of license revocation. 
(Code 1969, § 5.04.060; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.04.070. - Separate licenses. 
(a)  Separate licenses shall be obtained for each place of business or branch thereof except temporary events permitted under chapter 9.45. Licenses issued hereunder shall be valid for the conduct of business only at the street address specified in the business license and may be transferable to a successor upon receipt by the city of a business license application and the payment of a transfer charge in the amount of $10.00. 
(b)  In the event any licensee shall engage in two or more separate and distinct businesses and each such business is completely unrelated, either upon a single or separate business site, a license shall be obtained for each business or separate business address. 
(Code 1969, § 5.04.070; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.04.080. - Unpaid fee; penalty. 
(a)  Any license fee remaining unpaid at the close of the 15th day after the expiration date of the license shall incur a penalty of 25 percent of such license tax due. The penalty shall be added to the license fee due, and the fee and penalty shall bear interest from and after the 15th day until paid, at the rate of six percent per year. 
(b)  The tax and license collector shall have the authority to waive or adjust penalty and interest charges when the amount of the license tax or charge is incorrectly computed or incorrectly levied, upon approval of the supervisor of that department. 
(Code 1969, § 5.04.080; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.04.090. - Display. 
    Every licensee shall conspicuously post each current license issued by the city at the place of business. A licensee with no established place of business shall produce the licenses upon request by the tax and license collector, deputy collector or any officer of the police department of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 5.04.090; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.04.100. - Due date. 
(a)  All license fees shall be due and payable in full at the office of the tax and license collector on the dates as follows: 
(1)  Annual license: One year from date of original issuance or renewal. 
(2)  Quarterly license: January 1, April 1, July 1, October 1. 
All licenses shall be renewable upon expiration. 
(b)  The license fee shall not be prorated for any business commenced during the year or quarter for which the license is issued. 
(c)  All business license fees are due and payable in advance. There shall be no refund of prepaid license fees to any licensee terminating or abandoning a business during the period for which a license has been paid. 
(d)  Any license fees due under chapters 5.04 through 5.12, or any other business license ordinance of this city, shall be a debt due to the city. 
(Code 1969, § 5.04.100; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.04.110. - Fee waiver, reduction. 
    Whenever any dance, carnival, circus, show, exhibition, activity or venture is wholly sponsored, conducted, managed or operated as a single benefit by any fraternal, civic, educational or religious organization, and when all of the net proceeds thereof inure to the benefit of such organization, the license fees provided in chapters 5.04 through 5.12 may be waived by the city manager, but a license under chapters 5.04 through 5.12 shall be obtained. 
(Code 1969, § 5.04.110; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.04.120. - Application affidavit. 
    For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of any license fees due or any other information requisite to the issuance of a license or renewal, the collector may require information to be in affidavit form, under oath, and upon forms provided by the applicant. 
(Code 1969, § 5.04.120; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.04.130. - Basic fees. 
(a)  Fees shall be based on payment schedule in chapters 5.08 and 5.12. 
(b)  A $40.00 application processing fee shall accompany each original application submitted to the collector. Renewal applications shall be accompanied by a $24.00 renewal processing fee. 
(Code 1969, § 5.04.130; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.04.140. - Activities exempt. 
    No provision of chapters 5.04 through 5.12 shall be construed to require payment of license fees of any business or activity which is exempt by state or federal law. The city manager shall have the power to authorize exemptions from fees in accord with accepted business license practice. 
(Code 1969, § 5.04.140; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.04.150. - Records. 
(a)  No reports or statements of an operator shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of such reports or statements preclude the city from collection by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable. Each report or statement and each of the items therein shall be subject to audit and verification by the tax administrator or authorized agents of the city who are hereby authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or determine the tax due. 
(b)  Every operator shall keep and preserve for a period of four years all records as may be necessary to determine the tax. Said record shall be made available to the city at all reasonable times within ten days of the date of the written request sent by certified mail. Each operator is required to permit an examination of such books and records at a location within the city. In the event the books and records cannot be made available within the city, the operator shall reimburse the city for the cost of all transportation, lodging, meals, portal to portal travel time, and other incidental costs reasonably incurred by the city in conducting the audit. 
(c)  Confidential or proprietary information furnished to or secured by the city from an operator in the implementation of this chapter shall be confidential. This section shall not apply, however, to disclosures made in connection with any hearing, appeal, or any civil action or proceeding relating to the determination or recovery of the tax. 
Sec. 5.04.160. - Applicability of chapter to nonprofit organizations. 
    The provisions of this chapter relating to business licensing and fees shall not apply to any bona fide nonprofit organization when the proceeds of the activities covered by the exemption are to be used for the lawful purposes of the organization; provided, however, that no exemption under this section shall be valid unless a nonprofit organization registration form has been completed and submitted to the city accompanied by proof of tax exemption from the California secretary of state or the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and complies with the following: 
(1)  An initial building and safety inspection will be conducted by the city's building department prior to approval of the exemption for any nonprofit organization who has a fixed meeting or gathering location which is donated for use, rented, leased or owned by the nonprofit organization. Exemptions will remain valid for the nonprofit organization so long as they remain at the location to which the exemption was issued and an annual informational update is provided to the city. Should the nonprofit organization relocate to a different location within the city, a subsequent nonprofit organization registration form must be completed and the new location will be subject to a building and safety inspection by the city's building department. An annual information update listing the nonprofit's primary contacts shall be provided to the city. 
(2)  Nonprofit organizations who have established a fixed meeting or gathering location prior to enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall not be required to have an initial building and safety inspection but will be required to complete and submit a nonprofit organization registration form accompanied by proof of tax exemption from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and proof that the nonprofit organization has been established within the city (i.e., copy of utility statement). An annual informational update listing the nonprofit's primary contacts shall be provided to the city. 
(3)  Nonprofit organizations which do not have a permanent meeting or gathering location that is donated for use, rented, leased or owned within the incorporated city limits or who meet or gather at a public establishment or facility (i.e., city-owned building, recreation area, park or privately owned business) with the property owner's permission shall be exempt from the provisions of this section and are not required to submit a nonprofit organization registration form. 
(4)  Nonprofit organizations that provide aid or services to crime victims shall not be required to comply with the provisions of this section, but shall be required to provide the nonprofit organization's primary location, description of services which the nonprofit provides and the responsible party's contact information to the city chief of police. 
(5)  No exemption shall be granted under this section when any person, firm, concern or organization not meeting the foregoing qualifications receives any share or interest in the activities proposed to be covered by the exemption, or the proceeds or income therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 921-2014, § 1, 2-18-2014) 
CHAPTER 5.08. - FLAT RATE BUSINESS CLASSIFICATION AND FEES 

Sec. 5.08.010. - Auto wrecking. 
    The license fee for the purchase and sale of damaged motor vehicles or parts is $100.00 per year. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.010; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.020. - Barbershop. 
    The license fee for a barbershop is $30.00 per year for one chair, plus $10.00 per year for each additional chair. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.020; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.030. - Baths, public. 
    The license for public baths of any type, including steam, hamman, Turkish, mineral, mud, vapor, medicinal or otherwise, is $60.00 per year. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.030; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.040. - Beauty shop. 
    The license fee for a beauty shop is $30.00 per year for one operator, plus $10.00 per year for each additional operator. This section includes all businesses performing services of women's hair dressing and/or facial treatments wherever the same shall be performed. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.040; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.050. - Bureaus, travel; ticket agencies. 
    The license fee for travel bureaus, when operated independently of any common carrier, is $30.00 per year. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.050; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.060. - Cleaners, laundries. 
    For soliciting, receiving or delivering clothing or textiles of any form or nature, in any manner, for dry cleaning or laundry services or other cleaning services, when such dry cleaning, laundry or other cleaning services are performed outside of the city, the license fee is $60.00 per year for each vehicle engaged or operated in such soliciting, receiving or delivering. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.060; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.070. - Confectionery wagons. 
(a)  For the sale or offering for sale of ice cream, soft drinks, candies, prepared foodstuffs or other foods for immediate consumption from any wagon or other vehicle operated in the street by any licensee not having an established retail place of business with the city, the license fee is $25.00 per year for each vehicle. 
(b)  When any such vehicle is operated by an established licensed retail place of business in the city, the license fee is $20.00 per year for each vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.070; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988; Ord. No. 959-2018U , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 5.08.080. - Contractors; builders. 
    This section refers to contractors, as defined in division 3, chapter 9, article 2, section 7026 of the Business and Professions Code. Contractors who undertake, or offer to undertake, the performance of any work of improvement, maintenance, alteration or repair in or upon real property, the annual license fee is as follows: 
Contractor Classification Annual Business License Fee General engineering contractor A $100.00 General building contractor B1 100.00 Boilers, hot water heating, steam fitting C4 40.00 Cabinet and mill work C6 40.00 Cement and concrete C8 60.00 Electrical (general) CIO 60.00 Electrical signs C45 40.00 Elevator installation C11 40.00 Excavating, grading, trenching, paving, surfacing C12 60.00 Fire protection engineering C16 40.00 Flooring C15 40.00 Glazing C17 40 00 Heating and air conditioning C20 60.00 House and building moving C21 60.00 Insulation C2 40.00 Landscaping C27 40.00 Lathing C26 40.00 Masonry C29 40.00 Ornamental metals C23 40.00 Painting, decorating C33 40.00 Plastering C25 60.00 Plumbing C36 60.00 Refrigeration C38 40.00 Roofing C39 60.00 Sewer, sewage disposal, drains, cement pipe laying C42 40.00 Sheet metal C43 40.00 Steel reinforcing C50 40.00 Steel structural C51 60.00 Structural pest control C22 40.00 Tile (ceramic or mosaic) C54 40.00 Welding C60 40.00 Well drilling C57 40.00 Classified specialist C61 40.00 All other classifications (C) 40.00  
(Code 1969, § 5.08.080; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.090. - Dances, public. 
    The license fee for operating a public dance hall is $200.00 per year; for operating or conducting a single public dance, $15.00 per year, each. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.090; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.100. - Gymnasium. 
(a)  Public. The license fee for operating any public gymnasium, physical or health conditioning or physical training business is $100.00 per year. 
(b)  Private. The license fee for operating any private gymnasium, physical or health conditioning or physical training business, to which individual membership is held or available, is $100.00 per year. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.100; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.110. - Hotels, motels, lodginghouse, etc. 
    For operating any hotel, motel or similar accommodation, the license fee is $4.00 per year for each such rental unit rented or offered for rent. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.110; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.120. - Importing of merchandise for wholesale. 
(a)  For the importing into the city, for any delivery therein, of any goods, wares or merchandise, when such importing and delivery is by means of any vehicle operated upon the public streets or highways, the license fees for such importing and delivery shall be based upon the average number of importings and deliveries per week and shall be in accord with the following schedule: 
Deliveries per Week Fee per Year Less than 2 $30.00 2 or 3 40.00 4 or more 50.00  
(b)  The license fees in this section apply to each and every vehicle used and/or employed in the importing of merchandise under this section; provided, however, in no case shall these fees exceed $200.00 per year. 
(c)  The term "importing of merchandise," or any variation, as used in this section, refers to importing of merchandise at wholesale only, and for the purpose of resale. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any importing of goods, wares or merchandise where the sale and/or delivery of any goods, wares or merchandise is at retail to the ultimate consumer and/or user of such goods, wares or merchandise. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to vehicles owned and/or operated by an established licensed place of business in the city and used exclusively for such licensed business. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.120; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.130. - Importing of merchandise for retail sale. 
(a)  Whenever any business consists of the sale and delivery, at retail, of goods, wares or merchandise from house to house, or place to place, when such business does not maintain and operate an established retail sales store, market, or other fixed business in the city for retail sales to the general public, such business shall pay a license fee of $50.00 per year for each and every vehicle used in the conduct of business. 
(b)  The term "vehicle," as used in this section, includes all automobiles, vans, trailers, or other means of transportation of persons or property on the public streets. 
(c)  The term "sale at retail," as used in this section, refers to all sales where the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise is to the ultimate consumer and/or user. 
(d)  The provisions of this section refer only to regularly established and regularly operated retail sales routes, and shall not apply to any transient, sporadic or irregular sales business which shall be classified as itinerant sales under the provisions of section 5.08.140. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.130; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988; Ord. No. 959-2018U , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 5.08.140. - Itinerant vendor, peddler, salesman, solicitor, etc. 
(a)  For the sale or solicitation for sale of any goods, wares or merchandise to the ultimate consumer when the seller has no established place of business in the city, the license fee is $15.00 per day, per individual person, or $50.00 per quarter. 
(b)  Itinerant Christmas tree vendors shall pay a license fee of $25.00 per quarter, except for the following: 
(1)  Sale of trees as a part of, and on the premises of, an established place of business shall include Christmas tree sales as part of the gross receipts of such business. 
(2)  Sale of trees solely for the benefit of a charitable or nonprofit organization. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.140; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.150. - Masseur. 
    The license fee for masseurs is $40.00 per year for each masseur and masseuse. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.150; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.160. - Palmist, fortuneteller, clairvoyant, etc. 
    For practicing or engaging in the business of palmist, fortuneteller, clairvoyant, phrenologist, astrologer, necromancer, or any kindred business, the license fee is $100.00 per year or any fraction thereof without proration. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.160; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.170. - Photographer, itinerant. 
    For every itinerant photographer or itinerant vendor or solicitor of photographic services the license fee is $15.00 per day or $75.00 per quarter. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.170; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.180. - Professions and specified personal services. 
(a)  For the rendering and performing of business services in the classifications specified in this section, a license fee is due and payable annually as follows: 
Accountant, certified public $ 60.00 Agent, real estate, all others 50.00 Anesthetist 100.00 Architect 100.00 Assayer 40.00 Attorney 100.00 Bookkeeping and accounting 40.00 Broker, real estate, insurance 50.00 Chemists 40.00 Chiropodist 80.00 Dental lab (technician) 40.00 Dentist, orthodontist 100.00 Designer, structural or building 50.00 Draftsman 40.00 Engineer, registered 100.00 Geologist 60.00 Medical lab or technician 50.00 Mortgage companies 200.00 Oculist, optician, optometrists 100.00 Physician, surgeon, psychiatrist 100.00 Physiotherapist 40.00 Psychologist 40.00 Surveyors, licensed land 60.00 Veterinarian 80.00  
(b)  In the event of an omission of any profession not listed above, the minimum license fee is $40.00 per year, per person so engaged. 
(c)  Whenever more than one person is engaged in the conduct of a profession listed in this section, in association with others of the same profession, the license fee for each such additional person is 40 percent of the license fee established for such profession. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.180; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.190. - Private detective, private patrol, watchman. 
    For the business of private detective, private watchman and/or merchant patrol, the license fee is $30.00 per year for each individual person employed or engaged therein. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.190; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.200. - Shoe shining. 
    For operating any shoe shine stand or parlor or conducting the business of boot-blacking or shoe shining, the license fee is $5.00 per year without proration for each individual person so employed; provided, however, that payment of such fee shall be waived for any operator under the age of 16 years. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.200; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.210. - Shows, theaters, carnivals, exhibitions. 
(a)  For engaging in the business of operating any theater, playhouse or motion picture house at an established place of business, wholly within a structure designed and constructed for theater or auditorium purposes, the license fee shall be $100.00 per year. 
(b)  For operating any carnival, traveling show, circus, collection of shows and/or attractions, exhibitions, rides, concessions, animal or mechanical, games of skill or chance, wherever conducted, the license fee is $75.00 per day, plus $10.00 per day for each concession booth, stand, exhibition, show, sideshow amusement, ride, game, gallery, attraction or other unit. 
(c)  Whenever any exhibition consists solely of the exhibition of any animal or article of public interest contained in, or upon, a single vehicle not operated in connection with any carnival, circus, or traveling show, the license fee is $10.00 per day for each exhibit in, or upon, such vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.210; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.220. - Solicitor, salesman, service repairman or canvasser. 
(a)  A solicitor, salesman, service repairman or canvasser, for the purpose of this section, refers to any person who goes from house to house or place to place, or at any place, soliciting or taking orders for or offering to sell any goods, wares or merchandise for future delivery to the ultimate consumer or user; or soliciting or taking orders for any services or repairing to be performed in the future or doing or performing any services or repairs. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any solicitor, salesman, service repairman or canvasser employed by any business maintaining and operating an established place of business in the city. 
(b)  Every solicitor, salesman, service repairman or canvasser shall pay a license fee of $40.00 per year. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.220; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.230. - Tattoo artists. 
    The license fee for tattoo artists is $500.00 per year. In addition, the operator shall file with the city clerk a certificate of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 naming the city as an additionally named insured. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.230; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988; Ord. No. 657, § 1, 1991) 
Sec. 5.08.240. - Trucking, hauling. 
(a)  For the business of owning and operating any vehicle and/or vehicles for transportation of property for hire, irrespective of point of origin or destination of haul, where such business has an established place of business within the city, the annual license fee is $30.00 for the first vehicle plus $10.00 for each additional vehicle. 
(b)  When the business specified in this section has no established place of business, the annual fee for operation of each vehicle operated is $30.00. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.240; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.08.250. - Wrestling; boxing. 
(a)  For operating or maintaining any wrestling or boxing arena for professional wrestling or boxing contests or exhibitions at an established place of business, the license fee is $120.00 per year. 
(b)  For holding professional wrestling or boxing contests or exhibitions not conducted or held at an established place of business, the license fee is $25.00 per day. 
(Code 1969, § 5.08.250; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
CHAPTER 5.12. - GROSS RECEIPTS BUSINESS CLASSIFICATION AND FEES 

Sec. 5.12.010. - Recreation and entertainment. 
(a)  Every business engaged in providing entertainment, recreation or amusement, and not otherwise specifically listed elsewhere in the provisions of chapters 5.04 through 5.12, shall pay an annual license fee based upon the gross receipt schedule in section 5.12.020. 
(b)  The business of providing entertainment, recreation or amusement shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Billiards, pool. 
(2)  Shuffleboard. 
(3)  Bowling. 
(4)  Coin-operated music devices. 
(5)  Coin-operated game machines. 
(6)  Shooting gallery. 
(7)  Skating rink. 
(8)  Miniature golf. 
(Code 1969, § 5.12.010; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.12.020. - Sales and services. 
(a)  For the maintaining, operating or carrying on of any business at an established place of business or the performance or rendering of any services within the city when such business, or the rendering of services, is not elsewhere in chapters 5.04 through 5.12, or provided for in any other ordinance. 
(b)  The term "monthly receipts" refers to the average monthly gross receipts for the quarter immediately preceding the issuance and/or renewal of any business license. Upon commencement of a new business not in existence during such preceding quarter the minimum license fee shall be paid. Sales tax collected shall not be included in gross receipts. 
(c)  The annual license fee shall be based upon the monthly gross receipts and in accord with the following schedule: 
Monthly Gross Receipts Fee per Year $4,000.00 or less $ 28.50 $4,000.01 to $6,000.00 45.00 $6,000.01 to $10,000.00 76.00 $10,000.01 to $15,000.00 95.00 $15,000.01 to $20,000.00 133.00 $20,000.01 to $30,000.00 171.00 $30,000.01 to $50,000.00 228.00 $50,000.01 and over 285.00  
(d)  In the event any business, under this section, consists entirely of sales at wholesale for purposes of resale to ultimate consumers, the license fee for such completely wholesale business shall be one-half of the fee provided in subsection (c) of this section, but in no event less than $20.00 per year. In the event any licensee operates both a retail and wholesale business at the same premises, the licensee may, at his option, segregate the wholesale from the retail business and obtain a license for each type of business. Upon failure of the licensee to so segregate, the business shall be licensed in accord with the full schedule of fees set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  In the event any business combines both sales of goods or personal property and the rendering of services, the term "monthly receipts" includes receipts for both sales and services, whether they shall be charged for separately or as a unit price. 
(f)  No license is required of any person employed solely for wages by any person, firm or corporation in the furtherance of a business regularly licensed by the city. 
(g)  This section shall include, but not be limited to, the following businesses, or any combination thereof: 
(1)  Auction house. 
(2)  Automotive sales and service. 
(3)  Airplane renting, sales or service. 
(4)  Blacksmith. 
(5)  Garage. 
(6)  Retail and/or wholesale merchant. 
(7)  Repairman. 
(8)  Mechanic. 
(9)  Painter. 
(10)  Machine shop. 
(11)  Welder. 
(12)  Electrician. 
(13)  Carpenter. 
(14)  Foundry. 
(15)  Manufacturer. 
(16)  Ice plant. 
(17)  Service station. 
(18)  Restaurant and/or dining room, coffee shop, lunch room, stand or lunch counter. 
(19)  Pharmacy. 
(20)  Plumber. 
(21)  Printing and publishing. 
(22)  Soda fountain. 
(23)  Bar and/or cocktail lounge. 
(24)  Cleaning and/or dyeing. 
(25)  Laundry. 
(26)  Photographer and/or photographic studio. 
(27)  Television cable relay systems. 
(28)  Pay or subscription television. 
(29)  Warehouse. 
(30)  Stockyard. 
(31)  Shoe repairing. 
(32)  The rendering of any service whatsoever. The rendering of any service or carrying on of any business not provided elsewhere in chapters 5.04 through 5.12, or any other ordinance. 
(Code 1969, § 5.12.020; Ord. No. 597, § 1(part), 1988) 
CHAPTER 5.24. - TAXICABS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local regulation of taxicabs, Government Code § 53075.5; authority to regulate taxicabs and vehicles for hire, Vehicle Code § 21100(b); municipal authority to license and regulate the operation of vehicles for hire, Vehicle Code § 16501. 

Sec. 5.24.010. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section unless, from the particular context, some other meaning is clearly intended. 
    Carrier means every person, corporation, partnership, joint venture or other form of business organization, their lessees, receivers or trustees, engaged in operating, or causing to be operated, any vehicle required by the provisions of this chapter to obtain a taxi company permit. 
    Chief of police includes any designee of the chief of police. 
    Compensation means any money, thing of value, payment, consideration, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or profit paid to, accepted, or received by the driver of any vehicle in exchange for transportation of persons, whether paid upon solicitation, demand or contract or voluntarily, or intended as a gratuity or donation. 
    Driver means every person driving, operating or in charge of any vehicle as defined by this chapter. 
    Identification card means the card issued by the city clerk which shows, among other things, the name and picture of the taxi driver who has been issued a taxi driver's permit. 
    Permittee means every person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter. 
    Person means a natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or assigns or the agent of any of the aforesaid. 
    Stand means a particular place on a public street in the city which has been designated by the city council for the use of the particular vehicles authorized by this chapter to stop or stand in said place while awaiting employment. 
    Taxi driver's permit means the permit issued by the chief of police to any persons operating or driving any vehicle as defined by this chapter. No person may operate a taxi, or obtain a business license therefor, without a valid taxi driver's permit. 
    Taxicab or taxi means every vehicle of a distinct color or commercial appearance used for the transportation of passengers and/or baggage and packages over the streets of the city for compensation irrespective of whether or not the operation extends beyond the boundaries of the city; and whose service is demand-responsive; and whose fare is determined and indicated by a taximeter, or by posted rates pertaining to a shared ride; and which has a top light and a uniform monogram or insignia, a vehicle number, and telephone number clearly visible on the body of the vehicle; and whose route and destination are under the exclusive control of the passengers being transported. 
    Taximeter means a mechanical or electronic device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is automatically calculated, either for distance traveled or for waiting time, or both, and upon which such charge is plainly registered by means of figures indicating dollars and cents. 
    Vehicle means every motor-propelled vehicle used for the transportation of persons over the public streets, and not upon rails or tracks. 
    Vehicles for hire means every vehicle designed for carrying not more than eight persons, excluding the driver, which is covered by this chapter, and where the destination and route are under the control of the passengers being carried for compensation. 
(Code 1969, § 5.24.010; Ord. No. 558, § 1(part), 1986; Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.010), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.015. - Overview of taxi regulations. 
(a)  Taxi company requirements. As more fully described in section 5.24.020, no person may operate a taxi company unless the city issued the company a taxi company permit. Taxi companies shall also comply with any applicable requirements of chapter 5.04 (Business licenses). 
(b)  Taxi drivers. As more fully described in section 5.24.340, no person may operate a taxi unless that person has first obtained a taxi driver's permit and a taxi driver identification card. Independent contractors operating pursuant to a taxi company permit must also comply with chapter 5.04 (Business licenses). 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.015), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.020. - Taxi company permit required. 
    No person shall drive, operate or cause to be operated, nor shall any person employ, permit or allow another to drive, operate or cause to be operated, any vehicle over any street of this city for the purpose of transporting any passengers for compensation, regardless of whether such operation extends beyond the boundary limits of the city, nor shall any person solicit, induce, persuade, invite or procure such transportation of passengers for compensation or accept compensation therefor without a taxi company permit first having been obtained from the city council authorizing such operations and acts, except: 
(1)  Vehicles from other municipalities. A vehicle which is lawfully transporting passengers from a point outside the city to a destination within the city or is en route to a destination outside the city; provided that no driver shall, without such company permit, solicit, or accept passengers from within this city for transportation to any destination whatsoever. 
(2)  Public transit vehicles. A vehicle being operated pursuant to a franchise or company permit issued by the city and vehicles operated by public agencies. 
(3)  School transit vehicles. A vehicle being operated for the purpose of transporting bona fide pupils attending an institution of learning between their homes and such institutions. For these purposes, the term "institution of learning" means a school wherein is conducted a regular program of general education and instruction in the public schools of the state. 
(4)  Ride-share vehicles. A vehicle being operated under what is commonly referred to as a share the ride plan or arrangement, where a person en route from his place of residence to his place of business, or vice versa, transports another person or other persons living and working in the same general vicinities upon payment of a sum estimated to cover the actual or approximate cost of operation of the vehicle. 
(5)  U-drive vehicles. Vehicles rented or leased for self-operation by a person using such vehicle under a plan commonly known as a U-drive, but not when transporting other persons for compensation. 
(6)  Funeral vehicles. Vehicles used exclusively in funerals by a person engaged in the business of undertaker or funeral director. 
(7)  CPUC-authorized vehicles. Vehicles operating pursuant to a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the state public utilities commission, but only to the extent, character and type of operation and regulation expressly prescribed by the certificate issued by said commission. No person shall be exempt from the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter if operating pursuant to an exemption certificate issued by either the state public utilities commission or interstate commerce commission. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.020), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.030. - Application for taxi company permit. 
    Any person desiring a taxi company permit to operate vehicles covered by this chapter shall file an application therefor with the city council. Such petition shall be verified by oath of the applicant, if a natural person; or by oath of an officer or partner of the applicant, if applicant is a corporation, partnership, association or unincorporated company, and which application shall set forth: 
(1)  Contact information. The name, age and address of the applicant, if a natural person; or if a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, address of its principal place of business and the names of all its officers, together with their respective addresses; or if a partnership, association or unincorporated company, then the names of the partners comprising the partnership, association or company, together with their respective addresses. 
(2)  Business location. The address or proposed address of place of business. 
(3)  Experience. Summary of current and/or past related business experience of applicant. 
(4)  Balance sheet. A full and current statement of the applicant's assets and liabilities. 
(5)  Business plan. Full information pertaining to the extent, character, and quality of the proposed operation of the business and the manner in which such proposed operations are to be conducted, including statement of how the business will ensure vehicles will be adequately maintained and operated in a safe manner. 
(6)  Service and hours. Proposed hours of operation, service area, and dispatch procedures, employee training, safety record, and method for monitoring the quality of service. 
(7)  Rates. Proposed rates to be charged. 
(8)  Insignia. The trade name or style under which the applicant proposes to operate and the description of the proposed color scheme, insignia or other distinguishable characteristics of every vehicle to be used, including the type of illuminated sign to be mounted on the top of the vehicle and legend thereon. 
(9)  Vehicle information. For each vehicle proposed to be operated for which a permit will be requested, the manufacturer, model, year, state license numbers, vehicle identification number (VIN), mechanical and interior condition of the vehicle, and manufacturer's established seat capacity. 
(10)  Independent mechanical inspection. Written proof acceptable to the city manager that an independent professional automotive mechanic has inspected each vehicle to be operated and has declared the safety of each vehicle to be operated. 
(11)  Police department inspection. Written proof acceptable to the city manager that the chief of police has inspected each vehicle to be operated and declared that each vehicle meets all requirements of this Code. 
(12)  Vehicle legality. A statement that there are no outstanding parking and registration violations on any of the vehicles proposed to be used. 
(13)  Insurance. Proof that the applicant and all vehicles will have insurance that meets the requirements of state law and the requirements of section 5.24.070 (Insurance and indemnity). 
(14)  Driver information. The names of all taxi drivers that the applicant expects to operate taxicabs in the city pursuant to the taxi company permit, and a statement that the taxi company will not allow any person to operate a taxi unless the person is operating pursuant to a valid city issued taxi driver's permit. The applicant shall submit evidence that each such taxi driver has passed all required drug testing requirements. 
(15)  Additional information. Any further information which the applicant believes supports the granting of a permit, or that the city council may require. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.030), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.040. - Processing of permit application. 
(a)  Background check. Each applicant for a taxi company permit shall undergo a background investigation which shall include a criminal history investigation and a credit check. The background investigation may include, among other things, reviewing police reports filed by or about any applicant, contacting references, investigating the accuracy of information submitted in the application, reviewing applications for licenses or certificates, and reviewing any other information reasonably deemed to relate to whether the city should issue a taxi company permit. 
(b)  Public hearing. Upon receipt of any completed application referred to hereinabove, the city clerk shall set forth a time not less than ten, nor more than 50, days after the applicant has been advised that the application is complete, including the background check required by subsection (a) of this section, for the hearing of the application before the city council and notice shall be given to the applicant by mail of the time so set at least five days before the date of such hearing. A notice of the public hearing shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted consistent with the requirements of section 5.24.080 (Taxi company permit hearing). 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.040), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.050. - Term and renewal of taxi company permits. 
(a)  Year-end expiration. All taxi company permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(b)  Application contents. Each renewal application for a taxi company permit shall include a report on the prior year's operations, proof that every taximeter in each vehicle has been tested for accuracy in the last year as required by section 5.24.200 (Taximeters), and a current financial statement in a form approved by the city manager. The application shall be filed on a form provided or otherwise approved by the city manager. 
(c)  Sixty-day deadline. Complete renewal applications shall be filed with the city manager at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the taxi company permit. 
(d)  Criteria for renewal. After receipt of a timely and complete application of the permittee, the city manager shall renew the permit if the city manager determines that, based upon the contents of the application and the applicant's operational history, the permittee is likely to comply with the requirements and purposes of this Code for the succeeding year. 
(e)  Deadlines for city manager decision. 
(1)  For all complete renewal applications received by the city manager at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the permit, the city manager shall issue a written determination of whether to renew the taxi company permit within 30 days of receipt. Such determination shall be final unless an appeal therefrom is filed with the city council within ten days of the city manager issuing written notice of his decision. 
(2)  If the applicant files a complete application for renewal less than 60 days prior to the expiration of the taxi company permit, but before the expiration of the permit, the city manager shall issue a written determination of whether to renew the taxi company permit within 30 days of receipt; if the city manager's decision is not made until after the permit would otherwise expire, then the applicant shall not operate pursuant to the expired (and still unrenewed) permit unless and until the permit is renewed. Such determination shall be final unless an appeal therefrom is filed with the city council within ten days of the city manager issuing written notice of his decision. 
(3)  If an appeal of the city manager's decision is timely filed, within ten days thereof, the city clerk shall notify the appellant and permittee of the date, time and place of the hearing. At the time set, the council shall hear the permittee, city manager, and other interested persons and may either affirm, amend, or annul the city manager's decision. If the city council does not conclude its public hearing on an appeal prior to the date the permit would otherwise expire, then the applicant shall not operate pursuant to the expired (and still unrenewed) permit unless and until the permit is renewed. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(4)  If no application for renewal is filed prior to the expiration date, the company permit shall expire and cannot be renewed. The taxi company with the expired taxi company permit may apply for a new permit under section 5.24.030 (Application for taxi company permit). 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.050), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.060. - Sale or transfer of business. 
(a)  Buyer must apply to city. If an owner to whom a taxi company permit has been issued desires to sell or transfer his business, the intended buyer must make application to the city for a permit as required by this chapter. The seller and holder of the permit must file an affidavit of intention to surrender and cancel the existing permits conditionally upon and concurrently with consummation of sale and issuance of permits in the name of the buyer. 
(b)  Issuance of new permit to buyer. If the buyer applicant meets the requirements as set forth in this chapter for the issuance of a taxi company permit, the city shall issue a new permit to the buyer and concurrently shall cancel the seller's permit. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.060), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.070. - Insurance and indemnity. 
(a)  Insurance required. No taxi company permit or taxi driver's permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect and covering each vehicle classified hereunder a policy of insurance, which policy shall insure the public against any loss or damage that may result from the operation of the vehicle, and provided further that the policy of insurance shall provide for maximum recovery of not less than $1,000,000.00 combined single limit with the city as an additional named insured. Current evidence of insurance shall be filed and maintained with the city clerk. Each policy shall be issued by an insurer admitted in the state and have a rating of at least A- in the latest edition of Best's Insurance Guide. 
(b)  Replacing expiring insurance. The applicant shall provide proof that required policies of insurance that are expiring will be renewed or replaced with other policies providing at least the same coverage. Such proof shall be furnished at least two weeks prior to the expiration of the coverages. All of the policies required under this chapter shall contain an endorsement providing that the policies cannot be canceled or reduced except on at least 14 days prior written notice to the city. Applicant shall require its insurer to modify the certificates of insurance to delete any exculpatory wording stating that failure of the insurer to mail written notice of cancellation imposes no obligation, and to delete the word "endeavor" (or similar language) with regard to any notice provisions. 
(c)  Insurance is primary. All insurance benefitting the city shall be primary to any coverage available to the city. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by city and/or its officers, employees, agents or volunteers shall be in excess of applicant's insurance and shall not contribute with it. Applicant shall waive all rights of subrogation against the city. 
(d)  Enforcement. Failure to maintain required insurance shall be cause for suspension and/or revocation of a permit pursuant to section 5.24.110 (Taxi company permit, suspension or revocation) or 5.24.370 (Taxi driver's permit and taxi driver's identification card in vehicle). 
(e)  Indemnification. Prior to the issuance or renewal of any permit under this chapter, the applicant or permittee shall execute an indemnity agreement on a form provided by the city which provides that, by the acceptance or use of the permit, the permittee shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officials, agents, and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, damage, causes of action, proceedings, loss, liability, costs and expenses (including reasonable attorney fees) (collectively in this subsection, "claim") alleging injury to or death of persons or damage to property and that such injury, death or damage arises from or is attributable to or caused by the operations conducted pursuant to said permit and provides that permittee shall notify the city of any claim within ten days. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.070), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.080. - Taxi company permit hearing. 
(a)  Hearing on application. No taxi company permit shall be granted to any carrier, as defined in this chapter, except after a hearing thereon conducted under and in accordance with such rules and regulations as may from time to time be prescribed by the city council, nor until the city council has determined that the public convenience and necessity require the operation proposed by the applicant for the permit. The city council, in determining whether such facts exist, shall take into consideration the public demand for the service, the adequacy or inadequacy of service being rendered by other carriers, the effect of the service upon traffic, the financial responsibility of the applicant, the amount of wages to be paid to employees, the character of equipment proposed to be furnished, the history of claims, insurance and accidents, all information provided with the application that the city council deems relevant, and any and all other facts which the city council may deem relevant. Before granting any such permit, the city manager shall present to the city council, either orally or in writing, a report, together with his opinion, as to the existence of public convenience and necessity for the operation of additional vehicles. However, the burden of establishing the existence of public convenience and necessity shall always be borne by the applicant for a taxi company permit, and no such taxi company permit shall be issued unless there has been an affirmative showing of the existence of such public convenience and necessity by the applicant. 
(b)  Issuance of permit. The city council shall either grant or deny a permit upon the proposed terms, or upon terms and conditions other than those proposed. The permit shall authorize the operation of a maximum number of vehicles which may be increased only by action of the city manager. When issued, the permit shall constitute evidence of compliance with the terms of this chapter and shall authorize the permittee to operate vehicles under the conditions therein specified; subject, however, to the requirements, obligations and limitations imposed by other applicable laws, ordinances, and orders of the city council, and shall become effective only upon payment of all fees required by this chapter for which fees have been established. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.080), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.090. - Application; taxi company permit fees. 
(a)  Application fee. A nonrefundable application fee to defray the cost of processing the application for a taxi company permit under this chapter shall be required to be paid by every applicant seeking such a permit. 
(b)  Permit issuance fee. A permit issuance fee shall be required to be paid by each applicant whose application for a taxi company permit has been granted and/or renewed, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, to defray the cost of processing the permit. 
(c)  Establishing fees. The city manager is authorized to establish the amount of the application and permit fees, which amount shall not exceed the actual cost of processing the application and the permit. Such fee may also be established by resolution of the city council. If no fees have been established, then no payment of such fees is required. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.090), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.100. - Grandfathering. 
(a)  Grandfathering existing company permits. Every owner operating a taxicab or public transportation vehicle for hire within the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be presumed, in the absence of any contrary evidence presented to the council, to have provided prima facie evidence of public convenience and necessity for the licensing of the taxicab or public transportation vehicles for hire in operation, and is authorized to continue to operate under existing certificates. Such company permits shall expire as described in section 5.24.050 (Term and renewal of company permits), and may be renewed consistent with the procedures set forth therein. 
(b)  Grandfathering annexed areas. Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, any person who has been authorized by proper governmental authority to operate vehicles for hire in an unincorporated area which is later annexed to the city, and who is so authorized at the completion of such annexation proceedings, may, upon the application of such person therefor, and at the discretion of the city council, be issued a permit to operate vehicles for hire in the annexed area. Application for such permit shall be made and the permit may be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except that no hearing thereon is required and no such person shall be required to establish the existence of public convenience and necessity for such operation in the annexed area. In such case, the city council shall be under no duty, as a condition precedent to the issuance of such permit, of determining that the public convenience and necessity require the operation. 
(c)  Limitation of grandfathering. Nothing in this subsection (c), nor in any permit issued pursuant subsection (b) of this section, shall be construed as authorizing the permittee to operate in any portion of the city other than the annexed area, except when transporting passengers from a point within such area to any other point within the city. In no event shall the permit authorize the permittee to solicit or accept passengers from within any portion of this city, other than the annexed area, for transportation to any destination whatever. Nothing in this section nor in any permit issued pursuant to this section shall exempt the permittee from the necessity of complying with the remainder of the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of any other ordinance of the city applicable to his operation or lawful rule or regulation of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.100), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.110. - Taxi company permit, suspension or revocation. 
(a)  City manager hearing on suspension or revocation. The city manager may submit written notice to a taxi company that the city manager will conduct a public hearing on whether to suspend or revoke the taxi company permit. The public hearing can occur no earlier than two days after written notice of the time and place of the public hearing was issued to the taxi company. During the public hearing, the city manager shall hear from any parties wishing to provide evidence as to whether any suspension or revocation is appropriate. After hearing from all interested parties, the city manager may suspend or revoke the taxi company permit if the city manager concludes that provisions of this chapter have been violated, or that any holder of such a permit has failed to comply with the terms of such permit or the rules and regulations of the city council pertaining to the operation of the taxi company or taxicabs, or pertaining to the extent, character and quality of the service of the taxi company or taxicabs. After conducting the public hearing, the city manager shall provide written notice of the manager's determination of whether the company permit will be suspended or revoked, and shall state the grounds upon which any suspension or revocation is based. 
(b)  Appeal of suspension or revocation. If, after the completion of the procedures listed in subsection (a) of this section, the city manager determined to suspend or revoke the license, the license shall be suspended immediately upon issuance of written notice of the manager's determination to the taxi company. If an appeal of the determination is filed within ten calendar days, the city clerk shall set a time for hearing before the city council, and provide the permittee, and any other party requesting notice, written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. At the time set, the city council shall hear the permittee, city manager, and any other interested persons, and may either affirm, revise or overturn the city manager's order. The decision of the city council shall be final. If no appeal of the city manager decision is timely filed, then any order of revocation shall be effective immediately on the 11th day after issuance of written notice of the manager's determination to the taxi company. 
(c)  Immediate suspension. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) of this section, if the city manager determines that any of the provisions of this chapter have been violated and that there is an imminent threat to the public safety or welfare if the permittee were to continue to operate, the city manager may immediately suspend the taxi company permit, provided the city manager concurrently provides notice that the city manager will conduct a public hearing as outlined in subsection (a) of the section. Any suspension issued pursuant to this subsection shall remain in force unless the city manager revokes the suspension, the taxi company permit is revoked, or the city council takes actions as outlined in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.110), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.120. - Taxi company and taxi driver's permit; business license issuance. 
(a)  Business license authorized. Each taxi company or taxi driver's permit issued pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall entitle the holder thereof to obtain a license to engage in the business described in the taxi company or taxi driver's permit upon payment of the business license fees required by the licensing provisions of this Code, provided the holder of the permit complies with all other applicable provisions of law or ordinance. 
(b)  Business license required. No person shall be entitled to receive a business license to engage in the business described in the taxi company or taxi driver's permit without first having received any permit required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.120), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.130. - Authorized service only. 
    No carrier granted a taxi company permit under this chapter shall conduct any operation or engage in, furnish, or render any service other than the service authorized by its taxi company permit granted by the city council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.130), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.135. - Responsibility for independent contractors. 
    The carrier shall be responsible for all activities of any person operating a vehicle pursuant to the taxi company permit, even if that person is an independent contractor, or is operating pursuant to similar business arrangement. The carrier's permit may be revoked based upon the actions of any person operating pursuant to the taxi company permit. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.135), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.140. - Service availability. 
    Taxicab service shall be available by telephone or by engagement of the taxicab when standing at a stand or when properly hailed from the street or curb. Telephone calls for service shall be answered in a reasonable time. No driver shall work any shift which exceeds 12 hours and no driver shall work more than 12 hours in any 24-hour period. All shifts are to begin and end at the garage. When a taxicab of such carrier is standing in a stand, no carrier or driver of a taxicab shall refuse or neglect to transport any orderly person upon request anywhere in the city, and such service shall be rendered immediately upon request unless the driver is in physical danger. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.140), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.150. - Posting of customer service notice. 
    There shall be displayed in each taxicab, in a place easily read by passengers, a notice, in both English and Spanish, which informs passengers of their right to make customer service inquiries or complaints to the city. Said notice shall provide a telephone number of the appropriate city department. The form and content of the notice shall be approved by the city manager before it is posted in any taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.150), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.160. - Rates; establishment. 
    No rate or fare shall be placed in effect, charged, demanded or collected by any carrier for the transportation of passengers by vehicle covered by this chapter until the rate or fare has been established and authorized by city council and the city council, after a hearing upon its own motion, or upon application, or upon complaint, has found and determined the rate to be just, reasonable and nondiscriminatory, and not in violation of any provisions contained in this chapter or any other provision of law. In establishing and authorizing such rates or fares, the city council must take into account and give due and reasonable consideration to the cost of all comparable transportation services performed by all persons engaged in the transportation of persons for compensation in the city, whether by virtue of any franchise or permit granted by the city council or otherwise, including length of haul, any additional transportation service performed or to be performed, or of any accessory service and the value of facilities reasonably necessary to perform such transportation service. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.160), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.170. - Rates; enforcement. 
    Upon the granting of any permit to any carrier as provided by this chapter, a copy of the permit setting forth the rates established and authorized by the city council shall be transmitted by the city clerk to the chief of police, who shall, thereupon, be charged with the duty of enforcement of the rates and the applicable provisions of this Code and other ordinances pertaining to the operation of vehicles for hire. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.170), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.180. - Rates; display. 
    Every taxicab used or operated under this chapter shall, at all times, have displayed therein in a location and in a manner prescribed by the city manager, the rates to be charged for the taxicab service, which rates shall be clearly posted in a location and manner allowing for easy reading by the passengers. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.180), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.190. - Rates; discrimination prohibited. 
    No carrier, or any agent or employee thereof, or any driver or operator of any vehicle covered by this chapter, shall charge, collect, demand, receive, arrange, solicit or bargain for any amount of compensation other than the rates or fares established and authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.190), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.200. - Taximeters. 
(a)  Taximeter required. No carrier shall operate any taxicab in the city unless and until the taxicab is equipped with a taximeter of a type and design which has been approved by the city manager, and it shall be the duty of the carrier operating such taxicab, and also the driver thereof, to keep the meter operating at all times within such standard of accuracy as may be prescribed from time to time by the city manager. No passengers shall be carried in any such taxicab unless the taximeter is in operation, unless the taxicab is carrying multiple passengers and the rate schedule for this service is clearly posted for passenger viewing. This provision shall apply whether the taxicab is engaged for a trip entirely within the boundaries of the city or partially outside thereof, and the meter shall be kept operating continuously during the entire time that the vehicle is engaged in the transportation of passengers for compensation, regardless of the point of destination. 
(b)  Taximeter visibility. The taximeter shall be placed in each taxicab so that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged shall be well lighted and readily discernible to any passenger riding in such taxicab. 
(c)  Inspections of taximeters. Every taximeter used in the operation of taxicabs shall be subject to inspection at any time by the city, or any of its agents or employees. Upon discovery or notification of any inaccuracy of the taximeter, the operator thereof shall remove, or cause to be removed from service any vehicle equipped with said taximeter until the taximeter has been repaired and accurately adjusted. 
(d)  Testing of taximeters. Every taximeter shall be inspected and tested for accuracy by the carrier at least once a year. This inspection and testing may be completed as part of any company renewal application process. Upon the completion of such inspection and of any adjustments necessary to cause the taximeter to operate within the standards of accuracy approved by the city council, the carrier shall cause to be placed upon the meter an adhesive label having printed thereon the following: "The taximeter was inspected and tested on ________ (date), and found to comply with standard of accuracy prescribed by the city council of the City of Barstow." The date on which the inspection was made shall be stamped in the blank space provided for that purpose. No such label shall be removed except at the time a subsequent inspection is made. 
(e)  Taxicab availability. No driver of any taxicab, while carrying passengers, shall display the flag attached to the taximeter in such a position as to denote that the vehicle is not employed, or fail to throw the flag of the taximeter to a position indicating the vehicle is unemployed at the termination of each and every service. 
(f)  Charge calculations. All charges for taxicab service shall be calculated and indicated by a taximeter or a rate schedule for multiple passenger service, and at all times which the taxicab is engaged, the taximeter shall register charges for mileage or charges for waiting time. No taximeter shall be so operated as to cause any charge to be registered thereon except during the time while the taxicab is engaged by passengers. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.200), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.210. - Waiting time designated. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the term "waiting time" means the time consumed while the taxicab is not in motion at the direction of a passenger and also the time consumed while waiting for a passenger after having responded to a call; but no charge shall be made for the time consumed by the premature response to a call or for the first three minutes following timely arrival at any location in response to a call or for delays caused by the inefficiency of the taxicab or its driver. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.210), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.220. - Receipt on request. 
    No driver of any taxicab, upon receiving full payment for a fare as indicated by the taximeter, shall refuse to give a receipt upon the request of any passenger making such payment. When the taximeter is of the so-called receipt type, a receipt shall be offered the passenger upon receiving payment without a request being made for said receipt. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.220), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.230. - Refusal to pay fare. 
    No person shall refuse to pay the authorized fare of any of the vehicles mentioned in this chapter after having employed the same, and no person shall hire any vehicle defined in this chapter with intent to defraud the person, from whom it is hired or engaged, of the value of such service. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.230), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.240. - Use of entire vehicle. 
(a)  No soliciting additional passengers. When a vehicle is engaged, the person engaging the vehicle shall have the exclusive right to the full and complete use of the passenger compartment, and it shall be unlawful for the carrier or driver of the vehicle to solicit or carry additional passengers. 
(b)  Sharing taxicab. The driver of a taxicab may transport two or more passengers who voluntarily agree to share the vehicle from the same pickup point to one discharge point. A passenger who first engages a taxicab has the exclusive right to conveyance therein to a destination and the driver may not solicit additional passengers without the express permission of the first passenger. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.240), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.250. - Vehicle seat capacity. 
    The number of passengers which may be carried in any vehicle covered by this chapter shall be limited to the seating capacity of the vehicle as specified by the manufacturer. No person shall be carried in such vehicle who is required to share in any way the seating space occupied by another, nor shall any person be carried who is required to occupy a space in or on the vehicle which is not a seat. All seatbelts in taxicabs shall be operable. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.250), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.260. - Taxicab direct route. 
    Every driver of a taxicab who is engaged to carry passengers shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely and expeditiously to their destinations, unless otherwise directed by a passenger. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.260), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.270. - Discrimination by vehicle operators. 
(a)  Passenger discrimination prohibited. It is unlawful for any driver to refuse when the vehicle is in service and not otherwise engaged to transport any person who presents himself, or is presented for carriage, in an orderly manner and for a lawful purpose. 
(b)  Redlining prohibited. No vehicle subject to this chapter shall, as a matter of formal or informal policy, refuse to provide service to any neighborhood within the city without first submitting to the city a written explanation for such policy and obtaining city council approval. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.270), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.280. - Business location. 
    The owner or driver of any vehicle under this chapter shall conduct his business only from the established place of business set forth in the certificate of convenience and necessity. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.280), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.290. - Loading and cruising regulations. 
    No driver of a vehicle permitted to operate under this chapter, while driving such vehicle, shall cruise, loiter or stop on a public street for the purpose of soliciting passengers or seeking a place in a stand which is already occupied. However, employment may be accepted when such vehicles are hailed from the street or curb, while proceeding to a regularly assigned stand for taxicabs or a regularly established call station or to the carrier's principal place of business; provided that no driver shall accept passengers at any of the following places: 
(1)  In any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  At any regularly established bus stop. 
(3)  At any place in a street except alongside a curb. 
(4)  Alongside any curb opposite a regularly established and marked traffic safety zone. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.290), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.300. - Inspection of vehicles. 
(a)  Vehicle inspection by chief of police. No vehicle may be placed into service unless the chief of police has caused the inspection of the vehicle and determines that there is no evidence that the vehicle does not comply with the requirements of this Code. 
(b)  Vehicles maintenance required. Vehicles shall at all times be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and in good state of repair and shall be subject to constant inspection by the chief of police. 
(c)  Quarterly mechanical reports. Quarterly, or more often as may be required by the city manager, the owner shall provide to the police chief written proof acceptable to the chief of police that an independent professional automotive mechanic has declared the safety of each vehicle in operation. 
(d)  Vehicle retirement. If a vehicle, in the opinion of the chief of police, becomes unsafe or unserviceable, either from the standpoint of state of repair or obsolescence, or becomes undesirable for use by the public, the chief of police may require the vehicle to immediately be retired. No vehicle which has been retired shall be again operated in such service except with prior written approval of the chief of police. Such a decision of the chief of police is final and enforceable upon issuance. The vehicle owner may, within ten days of notice of the decision, appeal the decision to the city manager if the vehicle owner provides evidence that the chief of police's determination is incorrect. The mere filing of the appeal shall not cause the chief of police's determination to become unenforceable in the interim. The city manager shall consider the appeal during a public hearing to be started within 30 days of the appeal being filed, and the city manager shall send applicant at least ten days prior written notice of the time and place of the public hearing; the city manager shall issue a written determination within 15 days of the start of the public hearing. The city manager and applicant may mutually agree in writing to amend these deadlines. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.300), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.310. - Name or coloration. 
(a)  Picking color schemes. No taxi company permit shall be granted to any carrier to operate any vehicle covered by this chapter whose color scheme, name, trade name, monogram or insignia is in conflict with or in imitation of any color scheme, name, trade name, monogram or insignia used by any other carrier, and which is of such character and nature as to be misleading or deceptive to the public. 
(b)  Vehicles shall show color scheme. The exterior of vehicles operated as taxicabs under this chapter shall be clearly identified by the color schemes and insignias as approved by the city. The insignia shall also be clearly displayed on the interior of the vehicle in a manner clearly visible by the passenger. 
(c)  Picking new color scheme. No person may make or cause to be made any change whatever in the color scheme, name, trade name, monogram or insignia of any taxicab unless the approval of the city manager has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.310), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.320. - Identity lights. 
    Every taxicab shall be equipped with an identity light attached to the top of such taxicab. The identity light shall be constructed in one unit consisting of an illuminated plate or cylinder upon which shall be printed either the words "For Hire," "Taxi," the name of the carrier or the telephone number of the carrier. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.320), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.330. - Taxicab driver appearance. 
    Every taxicab driver, while on duty, shall wear clothes that are neat and clean and shall be well groomed at all times. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.330), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.340. - Taxi driver's permit and taxi driver's identification card. 
(a)  Taxi driver's permit and ID card required. No person shall drive, operate or lease a taxicab which is subject to this chapter without having first obtained a taxi driver's permit and taxi driver identification card issued pursuant to this chapter, nor may any carrier allow any person to drive, operate or lease a taxicab which is subject to this chapter without that person having first obtained a taxi driver's permit and taxi driver identification card issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Taxi driver's permit application contents. Applicants for a taxi driver's permit shall: 
(1)  Payment of fee. Deposit any fee required for the background investigation, fingerprinting, credit check, and other processing costs, and secure a receipt therefor. The fees to be deposited are to cover the expenses incurred and no refund shall be made for any reason. 
(2)  Application contents. Appear personally and file with the chief of police an application, in writing, upon forms to be approved by the chief of police, containing such information as the chief of police may require, and shall satisfy the chief of police that the deposit required in this chapter has been made. 
(c)  Temporary taxi driver's permit. When an applicant has applied for a taxi driver's permit and has paid the fee required for such permit, the chief of police shall, subject to the conditions contained in subsection (e) of this section, issue a temporary taxi driver's permit for a period of up to 90 days. Such temporary taxi driver's permit shall have written or printed thereon the expiration date. 
(d)  Taxi driver identification card. If the police chief issues a temporary taxi driver's permit or taxi driver's permit, upon sufficient proof of identification to the city clerk, the city clerk shall promptly issue a taxi driver identification card upon receipt of payment for the fee to issue the card. The taxi driver identification card shall show the name and photograph of the taxi driver, the issuance and expiration dates of the taxi driver's permit, and the name of the applicable taxi company, and any other additional relevant information. 
(e)  Background check. The police department shall fingerprint each applicant for a taxi driver's permit. As soon as possible after the complete application was filed, the chief of police shall make an investigation regarding the applicant. The investigation shall include a criminal background check. Additionally, the applicant must pass the drug test required by section 5.24.350 prior to issuance of a taxi driver's permit or a temporary taxi driver's permit. If satisfied that the operation by applicant of a vehicle authorized to be operated under the terms of this chapter will not be detrimental to the public health, peace, safety or welfare, the chief shall issue to applicant a taxi driver's permit in the manner provided in this section; otherwise he shall deny the application. 
(f)  Grounds for denial. No taxi driver's permit shall be issued to any such applicant who is under the age of 18 years, or who has failed to obtain a valid state Class C driver's license, failed the drug testing required by section 5.24.350, or for any of the reasons known to the chief of police which are grounds for revocation as set forth in section 5.24.360(a) (Cause for taxi driver's permit suspension). 
(g)  Issuance of permit. If the chief of police has determined that he will approve an application for a taxi driver's permit, the chief of police shall issue the taxi driver's permit to the applicant authorizing the applicant to drive, operate or be in the charge of any vehicle operated pursuant to the terms of this chapter. The taxi driver's permit shall be effective until the expiration date printed thereon unless suspended or revoked as provided elsewhere in this chapter. 
(h)  One-year expiration. Each taxi driver's permit issued as provided in this section shall expire one year from the date of the issuance of the permit. The taxi driver's permit may be renewed annually thereafter, provided that the permittee pays all applicable fees and submits to the requirements of subsection (e) of this section (Background check), including passing the drug test required by section 5.24.350 and that the chief of police finds no basis for denial of the permit. 
(i)  Grandfathering existing taxi driver's permits. Each individual who holds a taxi driver's permit on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may continue to use that taxi driver's permit until its expiration date. The taxi driver's permit may be renewed in the same manner as all other taxi driver's permits issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(j)  Employment required. All taxi driver's permits authorized to be issued under this section shall be effective only while the taxicab driver to whom the permit is issued is employed by, is leasing a vehicle as an independent driver from, or is otherwise authorized to operate a taxicab by a carrier holding a valid taxi company permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Upon the driver terminating his employment, his independent contractor status with a carrier, or a lease with a carrier, or otherwise ceasing to be a member or owner of a taxicab cooperative carrier authorized by this chapter, then the taxi driver's permit shall automatically be suspended and shall become effective again only when and if the taxicab driver again is reemployed by a carrier authorized by this chapter, otherwise assumes his independent driver status with a carrier authorized by this chapter, or assumes an ownership or membership interest in a taxicab cooperative carrier authorized by this chapter, during the term for which the taxi driver's permit or temporary taxi driver's permit was issued. 
(k)  Surrendering taxi driver's permit and taxi driver's identification card. All taxi driver's permits shall be returned to the chief of police by the driver upon suspension or revocation of the taxi driver's permit. A carrier shall notify the chief of police upon the termination of employment, the termination of independent ownership status or termination of any ownership or membership status with the carrier. Taxi driver identification cards shall be returned to the chief of police if the related taxi driver's permit is required to be returned to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.340), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.350. - Taxi driver's permit-Drug testing. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Controlled substance means those substances specified in part 40 (commencing with section 40.1) of title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as it exists on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or as it may be amended. 
    Negative test for alcohol means an alcohol screening test showing a breath alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 percent. 
(b)  Controlled substances prohibited. Drivers shall test negative for each of the controlled substances specified in part 40 (commencing with section 40.1) of title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as it exists on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or as it may be amended, before employment. Drivers shall test negative for these controlled substances and for alcohol prior to the issuance by the chief of police of a taxi driver's permit or renewed a taxi driver's permit. 
(c)  Testing and rehabilitation procedures. Testing procedures shall be substantially as required in part 40 (commencing with section 40.1) of title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as it exists on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or as it may be amended, except that the driver shall show a valid state driver's license at the time and place of testing, and except as provided otherwise in this section. Requirements for rehabilitation and for return-to-duty and follow-up testing and other requirements, except as provided otherwise in this section, shall be substantially as in part 382 (commencing with section 382.101) of title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as it exists on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or as it may be amended. 
(d)  Taxi company responsibilities. Each holder of a taxi company permit, or an applicant therefor, shall be responsible for ensuring that all persons employed by them as drivers, all applicants who have been offered positions of employment as drivers, all persons to whom vehicles are leased to be used as taxicabs and all persons otherwise entitled to drive a vehicle authorized to be operated within the city by a carrier holding a valid taxi company permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, have provided the chief of police with satisfactory proof of compliance with the drug and alcohol testing requirements contained in this section. 
(e)  Costs of testing. Taxicab companies approved to operate in the city shall be responsible for the cost of drug and alcohol testing of drivers employed by them. Self-employed independent drivers shall be responsible for compliance with, and shall pay all costs of, this program with regard to themselves. Employing taxicab carriers shall be responsible for compliance with, and shall pay all costs of, this program with respect to their employees and potential employees, except that a carrier may require employees who test positive to pay the costs of rehabilitation and of return-to-duty and follow-up testing. 
(f)  Reporting of test results. Test results shall be reported directly to the employing taxicab carrier, who shall, within five days of receipt of results, notify the chief of police of same. In the case of self-employed independent drivers, all test results shall be submitted by the testing facility to the chief of police, who shall notify the taxicab carrier company of record, of any positive results. 
(g)  Effect of positive test. The taxi driver's permit of any person convicted of illegally using, possessing, selling, or driving under the influence of, any controlled substance or alcohol, shall be subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  Drug tests from other jurisdictions. A drug test in any jurisdiction shall be accepted as meeting the requirements of this chapter. Any negative test result shall be accepted for one year as meeting a requirement for periodic taxi driver's permit renewal testing or any other periodic testing in any jurisdiction, if the driver has not tested positive subsequent to a negative result. However, an alternative negative result shall not be accepted as meeting the pre-employment testing requirement for any subsequent employment, or any testing requirements under the program, other than periodic testing. 
(i)  List of consortia. Upon the request of a driver applying for a permit, the chief of police shall provide the driver with a list of the consortia certified pursuant to part 382 (commencing with section 382.101) of title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations that the city knows offer tests in or near the jurisdiction. 
(j)  Confidential tests. All test results are confidential and shall not be released without the consent of the driver, except as authorized or required by law. 
(k)  Test results not admissible. No evidence derived from a positive test result pursuant to the program shall be admissible in a criminal prosecution concerning unlawful possession, sale or distribution of controlled substances. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.350), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.360. - Same-Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Cause for taxi driver's permit suspension. The chief of police shall summarily suspend any taxi driver's permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, pending the outcome of the public hearing described in subsection (c) of this section, which suspension shall become effective immediately upon issuance of written notice to the driver of the date of the public hearing, which hearing date shall be at least two days thereafter, provided the chief of police has knowledge that the holder thereof: 
(1)  Has been convicted of a misdemeanor violation of any provision of this chapter in the last five years. For the purposes of this subsection, a plea or verdict of guilty, a finding of guilty by a court, a plea of nolo contendere, or a forfeiture of bail is deemed a conviction; 
(2)  Has been convicted within the last seven years of a felony that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of a taxi driver, or the violation of any of the provisions of the state narcotic laws, or of assault, battery, or a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Has been convicted within the last five years of driving while under the influence of intoxicants or narcotics or reckless driving; 
(4)  Has a driving record which shows a negligent operator point count as specified in Vehicle Code §§ 12810 and 12810.5. For the purposes of this subsection, a plea or verdict of guilty, a finding of guilty by a court, a plea of nolo contendere, or a forfeiture of bail is deemed a conviction; 
(5)  Has had more than three chargeable vehicle accidents within the last three years or more than one such accident within the last year; or 
(6)  Has tested positive for alcohol or controlled substances as provided in section 5.24.350 (Taxi driver's permit-Drug testing) and has not provided the chief of police with satisfactory proof of compliance with the drug and alcohol rehabilitation requirements contained in section 5.24.350. 
(b)  Hearing. 
(1)  Conduct of hearing. During the public hearing, the chief of police shall hear from any parties wishing to provide evidence as to whether any suspension or revocation is appropriate. After hearing from all interested parties, the chief of police may suspend or revoke the taxi driver's permit if the chief of police finds that the driver's license holder has engaged in any of the prohibited actions listed in subsection (a) of this section. The chief of police shall reinstate the suspended driver's license if he finds that no portion of subsection (a) of this section was violated. 
(2)  Mitigating circumstances. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section and section 5.24.340 (Taxi driver's permit and taxi driver's identification card), the chief of police may, using his sound discretion, take into account any mitigating circumstances concerning any of the criminal convictions, moving violations and accidents enumerated therein, in deciding whether the applicant for a taxi driver's permit is a competent person to operate a taxicab under the provisions of this chapter, and in issuing, revoking or suspending the taxi driver's permit. In utilizing his discretion, the chief of police shall take into account the following factors: 
a.  The severity of the crime in question. 
b.  The extent of the applicant's prior criminal record. 
c.  The nature of and circumstances surrounding the crime in relation to the type of permit sought by the applicant. 
In utilizing that discretion, the chief of police may opt to downgrade a revocation to suspension, or to waive the revocation requirements entirely. 
(3)  Written findings. After conducting the public hearing, the chief of police shall provide written notice of his determination of whether the company permit will be suspended, revoked, or reinstated, and shall state the grounds upon which any such action is based. 
(c)  Appeal of revocation or suspension. If the chief of police determines to suspend or revoke the license, the license shall be suspended immediately upon issuance of written notice of the city manager's determination to the driver. If an appeal of the determination is filed within ten calendar days of the issuance of the written notice, the city manager shall set a time for hearing and provide the licensee and any other party requesting notice, written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. At the time set, the city manager shall hear the permittee, and any other interested persons, and may either affirm, revise or overturn the chief of police's order. The decision of the city manager shall be final. If no appeal of the chief of police decision is timely filed, then any order of revocation shall be effective immediately on the 11th day after issuance of written notice of the chief of police's decision to the licensee. 
(d)  One-year moratorium. Any driver whose taxi driver's permit is revoked pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be reinstated or granted a new permit before the expiration of one year from the effective date of any such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.360), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.370. - Taxi driver's permit and taxi driver's identification card in vehicle. 
    No driver shall operate or be in charge of any vehicle without having in his immediate possession a valid taxi driver's permit and his most recently issued taxi driver's identification card. Upon the request of any police officer or passenger, the driver shall immediately make both such documents available to the requesting party. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.370), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.380. - Misuse of taxi driver's permit or taxi driver's identification card. 
    No driver operating or in charge of any vehicle covered by this chapter shall display upon his person a taxi driver's permit or taxi driver's identification card issued to another or use for the purpose of operating such vehicle a taxi driver's permit or taxi driver's identification card issued to another, nor shall a driver provide the taxi driver's permit or taxi driver's identification card of another person in response to a request of a police officer or passenger to see the required taxi driver's permit or taxi driver's identification card. No person may forge any such document, or display, use, or otherwise induce people to rely on permits or cards. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.380), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.410. - Taxi stands. 
(a)  Standing generally prohibited. No carrier or driver of any vehicle operated pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall stand any such vehicle while awaiting employment at any place upon any portion of the street of the city other than at a stand designated by the city council for the nonexclusive use of such vehicles. 
(b)  Stand designation. Upon recommendation of the planning commission, the city council may, by resolution, locate and designate taxicab or vehicle-for-hire stands. 
(c)  Land owner approval required. Before any designation of private stands is made, the written consent thereto must be obtained of the tenant of the ground floor fronting space where such stand is to be located, or in the event the ground floor is not occupied, the written consent thereto of the owner of the building or land must first be obtained. 
(d)  Designation of open or limited use stands. Open stands may be authorized and designated by action of the city council to be open to any vehicle for hire for which a certificate has been issued. The city council may designate stands for specific vehicles for hire and shall state which vehicles and which owners are entitled to use those stands. It is unlawful for the owner or driver of any other vehicle for hire, other than the permittee, to use a stand designated specifically for such individual. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.410), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.420. - Emergency or temporary service. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this chapter, whenever, by reason of strikes, lockouts, public disaster, or other cause beyond the control of the city, there is a substantial reduction in public transportation facilities available for mass transportation in the city or if, by reason of special, temporary circumstances within the city which require increased transportation facilities and the presently authorized providers are unable to meet the increased demand for such services and the city council determines that, by reason thereof, the public convenience and necessity require augmentation of the then-operating transportation facilities, the city council may grant special, temporary revocable permits to carriers other than those permitted under the terms of this chapter to operate their vehicles. Such special and limited operations shall be conducted as authorized by the city council, and shall be governed by all applicable provisions as to rates, cruising, loading, operation of meters or passenger limits in taxicabs as may be provided by the city council and contained in such special permits. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.420), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.430. - Notice method. 
    Whenever a notice is required to be given, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically made in this chapter, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified, or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records, or other records pertaining to the matter to which the notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit with the post office. Proof of giving such notice may be made by an affidavit of any person of at least 18 years of age, which affidavit shows service in conformity with this chapter or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.430), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 5.24.440. - Enforcement. 
    Action taken by the city to revoke and/or suspend any permits shall not preclude any other enforcement actions also authorized by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 892-2012, § 1(5.24.440), 6-18-2012) 
CHAPTER 5.27. - ALARM SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Alarm Company Act, Business and Professions Code § 7590 et seq.; local authority of cities to require that alarm system companies obtain business permits, require alarm agents and operators register with the city their name and state issued identification card, regulate false alarm activations and responses, and require owners of alarm systems to obtain a permit to operate the system, Business and Professions Code § 7592.8. 

Sec. 5.27.010. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions, as may be amended time to time by state statute, shall apply, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means any device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on premises or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act, which device, when actuated, emits a sound beyond the business premises or residential unit or dwelling protected by such device or transmits a signal or message to another location. 
    False alarm means an activated alarm or alarm signal from any alarm system which is responded to within the city by the police department, but for which no emergency situation exists or where there is no evidence to indicate that there was an emergency situation as determined by the responding officer. 
(Code 1969, § 5.27.010; Ord. No. 696, § 1(part), 1994; Ord. No. 736, § 1, 1997; Ord. No. 955-2017 , 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 5.27.020. - Response service charges. 
    A service charge which is established by resolution of the city council in order to defray costs incurred in providing law enforcement services in response to a false alarm shall be paid to the city of each person who possesses premises that contain an active alarm system service, for each police response made to those premises generated by a false alarm as follows: 
(1)  First response within a calendar year, verbal warning only. 
(2)  Second response within a calendar year, written warning. 
(3)  Third response within a calendar year, $50.00 charge. 
(4)  Fourth response within a calendar year, $75.00 charge. 
(5)  Fifth response within a calendar year, $100.00 charge. 
(6)  Sixth response and any subsequent responses may result in the continual fine of $100.00. 
(Code 1969, § 5.27.020; Ord. No. 696, § 1(part), 1994; Ord. No. 736, § 2, 1997; Ord. No. 769, § 1, 2001; Ord. No. 955-2017 , 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 5.27.030. - Alarm permit fee. 
(a)  Any person, business or firm who possesses an alarm system shall pay an initial alarm permit fee and an annual renewal fee to the city as per the city's adopted fee schedule. 
(b)  Residential alarm users who are disabled, and being the principal occupant of the premises wherein no business is conducted, will be exempt from payment of an alarm permit fee, but will be required to obtain a permit within 60 days after the need for such permit arises. 
(Code 1969, § 5.27.030; Ord. No. 696, § 1(part), 1994; Ord. No. 736, § 3, 1997; Ord. No. 955-2017 , 12-18-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 955-2017 , adopted December 18, 2017, changed the title of § 5.27.030 from 'alarm licensing fee' to 'alarm permit fee,' as herein set out. 
Sec. 5.27.040. - Waiver for special circumstances. 
    Where practical difficulties make it impossible or extremely difficult to comply with this chapter, the city manager or his authorized representative may issue a waiver of any service charge to be billed, subject to such terms and conditions as he may deem necessary to protect the public health and safety so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, the public health and safety protected and substantial justice done. 
(Code 1969, § 5.27.040; Ord. No. 696, § 1(part), 1994; Ord. No. 736, § 4, 1997; Ord. No. 955-2017 , 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 5.27.050. - Alarm permit fee and response service charge a debt. 
(a)  The alarm permit fee and the alarm response service charge shall be a civil debt owing the city from the owner, occupant or person in possession, charge or control of the location of the alarm unit. 
(b)  If an invoice for the service charge is unpaid 60 days after mailing, a penalty of ten percent shall be charged, and an additional one and one-half percent per month shall be charged until the charges and penalties are paid in full. 
(c)  If court action is taken to enforce nonpayment of charges, the user or property owner shall pay all reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city. 
(Code 1969, § 5.27.050; Ord. No. 696, § 1(part), 1994; Ord. No. 699, § 1(part), 1994; Ord. No. 736, § 5, 1997; Ord. No. 955-2017 , 12-18-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 955-2017 , adopted December 18, 2017, changed the title of § 5.27.050 from 'alarm license fee and response service charge a debt' to 'alarm permit fee and response service charge a debt,' as herein set out. 
Sec. 5.27.060. - Collection procedure for delinquent accounts; creation of lien. 
    Any charges authorized pursuant to this chapter which remain unpaid after the delinquent date set forth in section 5.27.050 may be collected thereafter by the city as provided in this section: 
(1)  City council shall cause a report of delinquent charges to be prepared periodically. The city council shall fix a time, date and place for hearing and report and any objections or protests thereto. 
(2)  The city council shall cause notice of hearing to be mailed to the property owners listed on the report not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(3)  At the hearing, the city council shall hear any objections or protests of property owners liable to be assessed for delinquent charges. The city council may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed. 
(4)  The delinquent charges set forth in the report, as confirmed, shall constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of land, and are a lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent charges plus administrative costs. A certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the city clerk, or auditor appointed by the city council, for amounts of the respective parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll. The lien created attaches upon recordation, in the office of the county recorder, of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of city ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment. 
(Code 1969, § 5.27.060; Ord. No. 696, § 1(part), 1994; Ord. No. 736, § 6, 1997; Ord. No. 955-2017 , 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 5.27.070. - Service requirement. 
    Any person, business, or firm who installs or otherwise provides an alarm system within the city must possess a current city business license and shall notify all of its subscribers of the provisions of this chapter which impose a service charge for false police alarms. 
    Property owners who self-install alarm system(s) within their own residence(s) and/or business(es) are exempt from obtaining a city business license for the purpose of such installation; however they are required to obtain an alarm permit and are subject to service charge for false police alarms. 
(Code 1969, § 5.27.070; Ord. No. 696, § 1(part), 1994; Ord. No. 699, § 1(part), 1994; Ord. No. 736, § 7, 1997; Ord. No. 955-2017 , 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 5.27.080. - Notification and assignment. 
    It is the responsibility, in the event any person, business, or firm who possesses an alarm system and decides to terminate or move location of said system, to notify the city police department of that change. Any other respondent change that may explicate any information for an immediate response must also be reported. Ownership is nontransferable and coverage non-assignable, therefore, new users of said system must inform city police department of the latest information to facilitate the best possible response time by means of a new application for alarm permit. 
(Code 1969, § 5.27.080; Ord. No. 699, § 2, 1994; Ord. No. 736, § 8, 1997; Ord. No. 955-2017 , 12-18-2017) 
CHAPTER 5.36. - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Pawnbroker regulations, Financial Code § 21000 et seq.; secondhand dealer regulations, Business and Professions Code § 21640 et seq. 

Sec. 5.36.010. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Pawnbroker includes every person, firm or corporation, other than banks, trust companies or bond brokers, who may otherwise be regulated by law and authorized to deal in commercial papers, shares of stock, bonds and other certificates of value, who keeps a loan or pawn office, or engages in or carries on the business of receiving jewelry, precious stones, valuables, firearms, clothing or personal property, or any other articles, in pledge for or as security or in pawn for its repayment of monies, and exacts an interest for such loans. 
    Secondhand dealer includes every person who engages in or conducts the business of buying, selling or exchanging, whether as a separate business or in connection with other businesses, secondhand or rebuilt typewriters, adding or calculating machines, scales, clothing, tools, surgical, dental or drawing instruments, furniture, household furnishings, motorcycles or automobile accessories, secondhand bicycles, bicycle accessories, firearms, musical instruments, tools, or any other secondhand articles or things, excepting secondhand jewelry dealers or secondhand automobile dealers. 
    Secondhand jewelry dealer includes every person who engages in or conducts the business of buying, selling or exchanging old gold, old silver, platinum or articles of platinum, silverware, secondhand jewelry or other precious metals or stones. 
(Code 1969, § 5.36.010; Ord. No. 130, § 1, 1956) 
Sec. 5.36.020. - Permit required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in, or carry on, or conduct, or to permit to be carried on, engaged in or conducted, within the city, the business of any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or in connection with any other business unless there exists a valid permit therefor. The application for such permit shall set forth the exact nature of the business to be carried on and shall contain the names of all members of the firm or partnership. At the time of filing such application, the applicant and all persons directly or indirectly interested in the permit if granted, including all members of any firm or partnership, shall be fingerprinted by the police department and if any such person is found to have a prior criminal record of committing any felony, theft, obtaining money or property by false pretenses, embezzlement or violating any of the provisions of these chapters, the application for such permit shall be denied. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for any business enumerated in subsection (a) of this section if the applicant therefor is under the age of 21 years, or an alien, nor, if the applicant is a firm, partnership, or corporation, if any member of the firm, partnership or corporation, is under the age of 21 years or an alien. 
(c)  A permit issued under this chapter shall be valid and current for a term of two years unless revoked sooner. 
(Code 1969, § 5.36.020; Ord. No. 130, § 2(1), (2), 1956) 
Sec. 5.36.030. - Transaction record required. 
(a)  Every person managing, maintaining or conducting the business of any pawnbroker, secondhand jewelry dealer, or secondhand dealer in the city shall keep, or cause to be kept at the store or place of business, a record in which shall be legibly entered in English, at the time of purchase, sale, exchange, pledge, pawn or other transfer of possession of any article, or loan thereof, information regarding the article, to include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The name and current address of the intended seller or pledger of the property. 
(2)  The identification of the intended seller or pledger. The identification of the seller or pledger of the property shall be verified by the person taking the information. The verification shall be valid if the person taking the information reasonably relies on any one of the following documents, provided that the document is currently valid or has been issued within five years and contains a photograph or description, or both, of the person named on it, and, where applicable, is signed by the person, and bears a serial or other identifying number: 
a.  A passport of the United States. 
b.  A driver's license issued by any state or Canada. 
c.  An identification card issued by any state. 
d.  An identification card issued by the United States. 
e.  A passport from any other country in addition to another item of identification bearing an address. 
f.  A matricula consular in addition to another item of identification bearing an address. 
(3)  A complete and reasonably accurate description of serialized property, including, but not limited to, the following: serial number and other identifying marks or symbols, owner-applied numbers, manufacturer's named brand, and model name or number. Watches need not be disassembled when special skill or special tools are required to obtain the required information, unless specifically requested to do so by a peace officer. A special tool does not include a penknife, caseknife, or similar instrument and disassembling a watch with a penknife, caseknife, or similar instrument does not constitute a special skill. In all instances where the required information may be obtained by removal of a watchband, then the watchband shall be removed. The cost associated with opening the watch shall be borne by the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or customer. 
(4)  A complete and reasonably accurate description of nonserialized property, including, but not limited to, the following: size, color, material, manufacturer's pattern name (when known), owner-applied numbers and personalized inscriptions, and other identifying marks or symbols. Watches need not be disassembled when special skill or special tools are required to obtain the required information, unless specifically requested to do so by a peace officer. A special tool does not include a penknife, caseknife, or similar instrument and disassembling a watch with a penknife, caseknife, or similar instrument does not constitute a special skill. In all instances where the required information may be obtained by removal of a watchband, then the watchband shall be removed. The cost associated with opening the watch shall be borne by the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or customer. 
(5)  A certification by the intended seller or pledger that he is the owner of the property or has the authority of the owner to sell or pledge the property. 
(6)  A certification by the intended seller or pledger that to his knowledge and belief the information is true and complete. 
(7)  A legible fingerprint taken from the intended seller or pledger, as prescribed by the department of justice. This requirement does not apply to a coin dealer, unless required pursuant to local regulation. 
(b)  The record of transactions required by the provisions contained within subsection (a) of this section shall be open for inspection by the police department at any time during business hours; and the police department shall also have the right to thoroughly inspect the premises, store or place where the business so recorded is conducted at any time in search of any lost or stolen property, or to compare the entry kept in such record with the articles located on such premises or place of business. All persons in charge of such business shall each day, excepting Sundays and holidays, furnish or cause to be furnished to the chief of police at 9:00 a.m., a legible and complete copy of such record, to be permanently filed in the offices of the police department which shall be open for inspection only to the police department of the city or upon order of the court duly made for that purpose. The reports shall be made upon forms approved by the chief of police. 
(c)  The record of transactions for handguns and firearms shall also adhere to the reporting requirements for handguns and firearms prescribed under current state and federal law. 
(Code 1969, § 5.36.030; Ord. No. 130, § 2(3), (4), 1956) 
State Law reference- Firearm transaction record defined, Penal Code § 16550; reporting requirements for the delivery of firearms, Penal Code §§ 26700--26915; recordkeeping for the sale, lease or transfer of firearms, Penal Code § 28100 et seq. 
Sec. 5.36.040. - Holding period. 
    All articles purchased, received and exchanged, pledged, pawned or otherwise taken into possession by any person maintaining or operating the business of pawnbroker, secondhand jewelry dealer, or secondhand dealer or the agent thereof, the retention of which is not otherwise provided for by law, shall, except as hereinafter provided or otherwise provided, be held for a period of 30 days before being placed on exhibition, sold, exchanged, removed from the place of business where they were received, delivered to any person or otherwise disposed of; provided, however, that any such article may be delivered or returned, at any time, to the true owner thereof or his authorized agent; provided, further, any furniture, household furnishings, files, desks, chairs, or other office equipment need not be held for more than five days; and provided, further, the following named articles: watches, firearms, cameras, projectors, table model and portable radios, electric drills, sanders, buffers, check protectors, surveyors' instruments, microscopes, binoculars, field glasses, electric motors, lenses and musical instruments other than pianos, shall be held for a period of at least 60 days. 
(Code 1969, § 5.36.040; Ord. No. 130, § 2(5), 1956) 
Sec. 5.36.050. - Purchase from minor prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person maintaining or conducting the business of pawnbroker, secondhand jewelry dealer, or secondhand dealer, or any agent or employee thereof, to purchase or take any goods or articles or thing offered to him by any person less than 18 years of age, or knowingly purchase or take any such things from any servant or apprentice without first ascertaining that such article or thing is the property of the person delivering the same, or that such servant or apprentice has the authority from the owner to deliver or sell such property. 
(Code 1969, § 5.36.050; Ord. No. 130, § 2(6), 1956) 
Sec. 5.36.060. - Operating hours. 
    It is unlawful for any person conducting or maintaining the business of pawnbroker, secondhand jewelry dealer or secondhand dealer, or any agent or employee thereof, to keep, or cause to be kept, such place of business open on January 1, May 30, July 4, or December 25 of each year, or on any other day except during the regular business hours retail merchants in the city observe; provided, however, that on Friday, Saturday and the day preceding the aforesaid holidays, such business may be kept open until 10:00 p.m. Any person engaged in conducting any business other than those hereinabove mentioned on the same premises in such business, or in conjunction with the same, shall, notwithstanding, close the place of such other business at the same time and manner as herein provided. 
(Code 1969, § 5.36.060; Ord. No. 130, § 2(7), 1956) 
Sec. 5.36.070. - Receipt book requirements. 
    Every person managing, maintaining or conducting the business of a pawnbroker in the city shall keep or cause to be kept, at the store or place of business, receipt books as hereinafter described. Such books shall be kept in addition to the record of transaction, required by section 5.36.030(a), and consist of duplicate sheets of not less than four by seven inches in size, and bearing consecutive numbers, one of each duplicate pages shall be perforated to enable its removal. One of the aforesaid books shall be kept for the recording of, and the receipting for, sales, and there shall be printed at the top of the perforated sheet, in colored type, not less than three-eighths of an inch in height, the following words: "This is a pledge and not a sale." 
(Code 1969, § 5.36.070; Ord. No. 130, § 2(8), 1956) 
Sec. 5.36.080. - Record and receipt procedure. 
    It is unlawful for pawnbrokers to make any purchase, exchange, pledge, pawn or other transfer of possession of any article unless the same is recorded on one of the record and receipt books required by the provisions of section 5.36.070, setting forth the name and address of the pawnbroker, a description, in English, of the article involved in such transaction, the date of the sale, the name of the customer with whom such transaction is made, the rate of interest charged, if any, the term of redemption, if any, and the same shall be signed by the pawnbroker or his agent making such transaction. The perforated sheet, which shall be the duplicate shall, after being filled out as herein provided, be delivered to the person with whom the transaction is made. The original thereof shall be kept by the pawnbroker for a period of at least two years next following the date of the transaction and shall, during such time, be available at all times during business hours for inspection by the police department. Any alteration of the original sheet shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 5.36.080; Ord. No. 130, § 2(9), 1956) 
Sec. 5.36.090. - Exempt items. 
    Transactions involving coins, monetized bullion, or commercial-grade ingots of gold, silver, or other precious metals must adhere to the holding, reporting, or identification requirements prescribed by state and federal law, but are exempt from those requirements as described in this chapter. 
CHAPTER 5.40. - SIDEWALK VENDING PERMIT 

Sec. 5.40.010. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Food means any type of edible substance or beverage. 
    Roaming sidewalk vendor means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction. 
    Sidewalk vendor means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance, or from one's person, upon a public sidewalk or other paved public pedestrian path. 
    Stationary sidewalk vendor means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location. 
(Ord. No. 959-2018U , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 5.40.020. - Sidewalk vending permits. 
(a)  Only sidewalk vendors with valid sidewalk vending permits issued by the community development department may vend upon the city's public sidewalk or other paved public pedestrian path. 
(b)  A sidewalk vending permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked or abandoned as set forth in this chapter. A sidewalk vending permit may be revoked for a violation of this chapter, pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 5.04.060. 
(c)  To apply for a sidewalk vending permit or a renewal of a sidewalk vending permit, the applicant must provide: 
(1)  A completed application form containing: 
(A)  Their name and mailing address; 
(B)  Description of the food or merchandise offered for sale or exchange; 
(C)  If the sidewalk vendor is an agent of an individual, company, partnership, or corporation, the name and business address of the principal and any owners of the company, partnership, or corporation; and 
(D)  Certification that the information is true to his or her knowledge and belief. 
(2)  A copy of a California's driver's license or identification number, an individual taxpayer identification number, or a social security number. Such information is not a public record and will remain confidential as required by Government Code Section 51038(c)(4). 
(3)  A copy of a valid California Department of Tax and Fee Administration seller's permit, as required. 
(4)  A copy of a valid mobile food permit issued by the San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health Services, as required. 
(d)  To ensure the safety of residents and the merchantability of products sold by vendors without a fixed place of business, the city requires all sidewalk vending applicants to undergo a fingerprinting background check and to submit the results to the city as an attachment to their application. 
(e)  The sidewalk vending permit application shall require the applicant to agree, in writing, to comply with all the provisions of this chapter and all applicable provisions of the Barstow Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 959-2018U , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 5.40.030. - General regulations. 
(a)  To maintain accessibility standards for the city's disabled residents, every sidewalk vendor operating on any sidewalk or public paved pedestrian path must ensure that no obstruction is placed in the sidewalk or public paved pedestrian path that would reduce the width of the sidewalk to less than 48 inches, exclusive of the top of the curb. 
(b)  To prevent food-borne illness and protect the health and safety of the city's residents, every sidewalk vendor selling any food or beverage is required to wear a hairnet and food service gloves. 
(c)  To prevent dangerous distractions and promote the general welfare of the city's residents, sidewalk vendors may not emit any loud, unnecessary and unusual noises exceeding the ambient noise level at the property line of any property by more than five decibels. 
(d)  A sidewalk vending permit does not provide an exclusive right to operate within any specific portion of the public sidewalk or paved pedestrian path. 
(e)  No equipment or objects used for sidewalk vending purposes may be left or maintained in public spaces or in any portion of the public right-of-way from 10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. Any equipment or objects left overnight in public spaces or in any portion of the public right-of-way will be considered discarded and may be seized or disposed of by the city. 
(f)  To facilitate the enforcement of this chapter, every sidewalk vendor must display their city-issued sidewalk vending permit on the street-side portion of their pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance when operating in the public sidewalk or paved pedestrian path. 
(g)  To prevent unintended rolling or slipping, a sidewalk vendor is prohibited from operating a pushcart, pedal-driven cart, wagon, or other non-motorized conveyance on a public sidewalk or paved pedestrian path with a slope greater than five percent. 
(h)  No sidewalk vendor shall obstruct access to or from any business, entrance, public water fountain or other public facility, adjacent to the public sidewalk or paved pedestrian path. 
(Ord. No. 959-2018U , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 5.40.040. - Specific regulations. 
(a)  Sidewalk vending hours' limitations in areas zoned for nonresidential use will be as restrictive as any limitations on hours of operation imposed on other businesses or uses on the same street, excluding those permitted to operate 24 hours. 
(b)  Sidewalk vending is limited to the hours of 9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m. for areas that are exclusively residential. 
(c)  Stationary sidewalk vendors are prohibited from operating in areas that are exclusively residential. Sidewalk vendors shall not leave their equipment or objects used for sidewalk vending purposes unattended or stored or maintained on any part of the sidewalk, public property or public right-of-way after vending has ceased for the day, and in no event, between the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. in any residential area. Any equipment or objects left overnight in public spaces or in any portion of the public right-of-way will be considered discarded and may be seized or disposed of by the city. 
(d)  A stationary sidewalk vendor is prohibited from operating in a city park if the city has entered into exclusive agreements for the sale of food or merchandise by one or more concessionaires for that city park. 
(e)  A sidewalk vendor is prohibited from operating within 500 feet of a permitted certified farmers' market, a permitted swap meet, or any area subject to a temporary use permit for the duration of the permit. 
(f)  A sidewalk vendor shall maintain a distance of 50 feet from any other sidewalk vendor. 
(g)  A sidewalk vendor shall maintain a minimum distance of 25 feet from any street intersection, fire hydrant or automated teller machine. 
(h)  A sidewalk vendor shall not engage in the selling of alcohol, marijuana, adult entertainment material as defined by section 19.26.020, tobacco products, products that contain nicotine or any product used to smoke/vape nicotine or marijuana. 
(Ord. No. 959-2018U , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 5.40.050. - Administrative citation. 
(a)  Every person vending without a sidewalk vending permit is guilty of a violation punishable by an administrative citation pursuant to the procedures set forth in chapter 1A in an amount not to exceed: 
(1)  Two hundred fifty dollars for a first violation; and 
(2)  Five hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the first violation; and 
(3)  One thousand dollars for each additional violation within one year of the first violation. 
(b)  Every person violating any other provision of this chapter is guilty of a code violation punishable by an administrative citation not to exceed: 
(1)  One hundred dollars for a first violation; or 
(2)  Two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the first violation; or 
(3)  Five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year of the first violation. 
(c)  Failure to pay an administrative fine is not punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor. Additional fines, fees, assessments, or any other financial conditions beyond those authorized will not be assessed. However, the city may levy a lien on the violator's real or personal property, including the vehicle used for vending purposes. 
(d)  A violation of this chapter constitutes a separate and distinct violation for each day that it exists and each such violation may be subject to the maximum fine permitted under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 959-2018U , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 5.40.060. - Ability-to-pay determination. 
(a)  In addition to the applicable procedures set forth in section 6.30.030, any fine issued under section 5.40.050 will be accompanied with a notice of and instruction regarding the right to request an ability-to-pay determination. 
(b)  If the requestor is receiving public benefits under Government Code Section 68632(a), or has a monthly income which is 125 percent or less than the current poverty guidelines updated periodically in the Federal Register by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, the public works director will limit the total amount of the requestor's administrative fine to 20 percent of the total. 
(Ord. No. 959-2018U , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
CHAPTER 5.60. - CABLE, VIDEO AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary set forth in this chapter, chapter 5.60, entitled "Cable Communications," which was previously codified in title 5 of the municipal code, will continue in full force and effect as an uncodified ordinance of the city. This uncodified ordinance will continue to be applicable to the existing cable television franchise agreement between the city and its franchised cable operator, Time Warner Entertainment-Advance/Newhouse partnership, or its duly authorized assignee. This uncodified ordinance is subject to repeal by the city council at such time as the franchised cable operator executes an amendment to the existing cable television franchise agreement, or executes a new cable television franchise agreement, the terms of which subject the franchised cable operator to chapter 5.60 of title 5 of the municipal code, as adopted by the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
State Law reference- Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service and Information Act, Government Code § 53054 et seq.; Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006, Public Utilities Code § 5800 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 5.60.010. - Title. 
    This chapter is known and may be cited as the "Cable, Video and Telecommunications Service Providers Ordinance" of the City of Barstow. 
(Code 1969, § 5.60.010; Ord. No. 766, § 2(part), 2000) 
Sec. 5.60.020. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The city council finds and determines as follows: 
(1)  The development of cable, video and telecommunications services and systems may provide significant benefits for, and have substantial impacts upon, the residents of the city. 
(2)  Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable, video and telecommunications services and systems, the public convenience, safety, and general welfare is best served by the city's exercise of its regulatory powers. 
(3)  This chapter adopts provisions that authorize the city to regulate cable, video and telecommunications service providers to the extent authorized by federal and state law, including, but not limited to, the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, and applicable state statutes and regulations. 
(4)  The cable, video and telecommunications services that are addressed in this chapter include services provided by cable television systems, open video systems, master antenna television systems, satellite master antenna television systems, direct broadcast satellite systems, multichannel multipoint distribution systems, local multipoint distribution systems, and other providers of video programming, whatever their technology, as well as voice and data, services provided by telephone corporations. 
(b)  The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide for the attainment of the following objectives: 
(1)  To enable the city to discharge its public trust in a manner consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition, and technological development. 
(2)  To authorize and to manage reasonable access to the city's public rights-of-way and public property for cable, video and telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis. 
(3)  To obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the city and its residents for authorizing the private use of the public rights-of-way and public property. 
(4)  To promote competition in cable, video and telecommunications services, minimize unnecessary local regulation of cable, video and telecommunications service providers, and encourage the delivery of advanced and competitive cable, video and telecommunications services on the broadest possible basis to local government and to the businesses, institutions, and residents of the city. 
(5)  To establish clear local guidelines, standards, and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of cable, video and telecommunications service providers. 
(6)  To encourage the deployment of advanced cable, video and telecommunications infrastructure that satisfies local needs, delivers enhanced government services, and provides informed consumer choices in an evolving cable, video and telecommunications marketplace. 
(Code 1969, § 5.60.020; Ord. No. 766, § 2(part), 2000) 
Sec. 5.60.030. - Defined terms and phrases. 
    Various terms and phrases used in this chapter are defined in section 5.60.170. 
(Code 1969, § 5.60.030; Ord. No. 766, § 2(part), 2000) 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 5.60.040. - Authority and findings. 
(a)  In accordance with applicable federal and state law, the city is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, reconstruct, operate, and maintain cable television systems within the city limits. 
(b)  The city council finds that the development of cable television and related telecommunications services may provide significant benefits for, and substantial impacts upon, the residents of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city council further finds that the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers to be exercised by the city. This article is intended to specify the means for providing to the public the best possible cable television and related telecommunications services, and every franchise issued in accordance with this article is intended to achieve this primary objective. It is the further intent of this article to adopt regulatory provisions that will enable the city to regulate cable television and related telecommunications services to the maximum extent authorized by federal and state law. 
(Code 1969, § 5.60.040; Ord. No. 766, § 2(part), 2000) 
Sec. 5.60.080. - Consumer protection and service standards. 
(a)  Operational standards. 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, the grantee must maintain the necessary facilities, equipment, and personnel to comply with the following consumer protection and service standards under normal operating conditions: 
a.  Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to ensure that telephone calls are answered before the fourth ring. Telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, may not exceed 30 seconds. Callers who must be transferred may not be required to wait more than 30 seconds before being connected to a service representative. 
b.  Under normal, operating conditions, a caller must receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. 
c.  Emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a 24-hour basis, including weekends and holidays. After normal business hours, the telephone calls may be answered by an answering service in accordance with the telephone answering standards set forth in subsections (a)(1)a and b of this section. Calls received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
d.  A conveniently-located local business and service or payment office open during normal business hours at least eight hours daily on weekdays, and at least four hours weekly on evenings or weekends, and adequately staffed with trained customer service representatives to accept subscriber payments and to respond to service requests, inquiries, and complaints. 
e.  An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunctions on a 24-hour per day basis. 
f.  A trained installation staff must provide service to any subscriber requiring a standard installation within seven days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. Standard installations are those that are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system, unless otherwise defined in the franchise agreement. 
g.  Appointments. 
1.  The grantee must schedule, within a specified four-hour time period Monday through Saturday (legal holidays excluded), all appointments with subscribers for installation of service, service calls, and other activities at the subscriber's location. The grantee may schedule installation and service calls outside of normal business hours for the convenience of the subscriber. The grantee may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
2.  If a grantee representative is delayed in keeping an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to honor the scheduled appointment, the subscriber must be contacted prior to the time of the scheduled appointment, and the appointment must be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time that is convenient for the subscriber. The grantee must use its best efforts to contact every customer within two weeks after an installation or repair work is completed to ensure that the customer is satisfied with the work. 
h.  Subscribers who have experienced one missed appointment due to the fault of the grantee will receive an installation free of charge if the appointment was for an installation. If an installation was to have been provided free of charge, and for all other appointments, the subscriber will receive one month of the subscribed-to service tier, free of charge. Subscribers also will be entitled to receive a free installation, or one month free service, as provided above, if the grantee fails to complete a standard installation within five days of receiving an installation request due to its fault, its failure to schedule an appointment within a specified four-hour time period, or its failure to notify the subscriber that the grantee's representative will be late for an appointment. Subscribers who have experienced two missed appointments due to the fault of the grantee will receive two months of the subscribed-to service tier, free of charge, in addition to the free installation or free month of service provided for the first missed appointment. 
i.  Upon a subscriber's request, the grantee will arrange for pickup or replacement of converters or other equipment provided by the grantee at the subscriber's address within 14 days after the request is made if the subscriber is mobility-limited. 
(2)  The standards of subsections (a)(1)a and c of this section must be met not less than 90 percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis. 
(b)  Service standards. 
(1)  The grantee will render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Except in emergency situations, scheduled interruptions will occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system, preferably between midnight and 6:00 a.m. Unless the scheduled interruption lasts for no more than two hours and occurs between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., in which event 24-hours prior notice must be given to the city, 48-hours prior notice must be given to subscribers. 
(2)  The grantee will maintain a repair force of technicians who will respond to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames: 
a.  For a system outage. Within two hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls or requests for service that by number identify a system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels, affecting five or more subscribers of the system. 
b.  For an isolated outage. Within 24 hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or picture for one or more channels. 
c.  For inferior signal quality. No later than the following business day, excluding Sundays and holidays, after a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality. 
(3)  The grantee will be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this subsection (b) when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. If a subscriber is not home when the technician arrives, the technician must leave written notification of arrival. 
(4)  The grantee may not charge for the repair or replacement of defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by the grantee to subscribers, unless the defect or malfunction was caused by the subscriber. 
(5)  The grantee must determine the nature of the problem within 24 hours after commencing work and resolve all cable system related problems within three business days, unless technically infeasible. 
(c)  Billing and information standards. 
(1)  Subscriber bills must be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations, including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills also must clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates, and credits. 
(2)  The first billing to a subscriber after a new installation or service change must be prorated based upon when the new or changed service commenced. Subscribers must not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure attributable to the grantee, including the failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber. 
(3)  In case of a billing dispute, the grantee must respond in writing to a written complaint from a subscriber within ten days after receiving the complaint at the office specified on the billing statement for receiving that complaint. 
(4)  The grantee must, upon request from the affected subscriber, provide credits or refunds to subscribers whose service has been interrupted for four or more hours. For each day that service has been interrupted for four hours or more, the credit must equal a pro rata share of the monthly billing for one full day. All credits for service must be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. For subscribers terminating service, refunds must be issued promptly, but no later than 30 days after the return of any grantee-supplied equipment. 
(5)  Subject to prior review by the city, the grantee must provide written information on each of the following matters at the time of the installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
a.  Products and services offered. 
b.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services. 
c.  Installation and service maintenance policies. 
d.  Instructions on the use of the cable service. 
e.  Channel positions of programming carried on the system. 
f.  Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the city's office designated for dealing with cable-related issues. 
g.  Consumer protection and service standards and penalties for noncompliance. 
(6)  Subscribers must be notified of any changes in rates, programming services, or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of those changes if the change is within the control of the grantee. In addition, the grantee must notify subscribers through announcements on the cable system and in writing 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the information required in subsection (c)(5) of this section. 
(7)  The grantee must maintain a public file containing all notices provided to subscribers under these consumer protection and service standards and all promotional offers made by grantee to subscribers. These documents must be maintained for a minimum period of four years. 
(d)  Verification of compliance with standards. 
(1)  Upon 15 days prior written notice, the city may require the grantee to provide a written report demonstrating its compliance with any of the consumer service standards specified in this section. The grantee must provide sufficient documentation to enable the city to verify compliance. 
(2)  A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the consumer protection and service standards of this section, after the grantee's receipt of written notice and an opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement. 
(e)  Subscriber complaints and disputes. 
(1)  The grantee must establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon, and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the city. The written procedures must prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint, either orally or in writing, specifying the subscriber's grounds for dissatisfaction. The grantee must file a copy of these procedures with the city. These procedures must include a requirement that the grantee respond in writing to any written complaint from a subscriber within ten days after receiving the complaint at the office specified on the billing statement for receiving that complaint. 
(2)  The city has the right to review the grantee's response to subscriber complaints in order to determine the grantee's compliance with the franchise requirements. 
(3)  All subscribers have the right to continue receiving service so long as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. If the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or if the city gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, the grantee must act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive service while the franchise remains in force. 
(4)  Upon a change of control of the grantee, or if a new operator acquires the cable system, the original grantee must cooperate with the city, the new grantee, or the new operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During that transition period, the grantee is entitled to the revenues derived from its operation of the cable system. 
(f)  Disconnection/downgrades. 
(1)  A subscriber may terminate or downgrade service at any time, and the grantee must promptly comply with the subscriber's request within five days or at any later time requested by the subscriber. No period of notice prior to voluntary termination or downgrade of service may be required of subscribers. Grantee will impose no charges for the voluntary termination or downgrade of service unless a visit to the subscriber's premises is required to remove a converter box or other equipment or property owned by grantee. 
(2)  The grantee may disconnect a subscriber's service if the subscriber fails to pay a monthly fee or charge, but such disconnection must not occur prior to 45 days after the fee or charge is due, plus ten days prior written notice to the subscriber of the grantee's intent to disconnect service. If the subscriber pays all past due amounts, including late charges, before the scheduled disconnection date, the grantee may not disconnect service. If service is disconnected for nonpayment of past due fees or charges, the grantee must promptly reinstate service upon payment in full by the subscriber of all such fees and charges, including late charges. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (f)(2) of this section, the grantee may immediately disconnect service to a subscriber if the subscriber is damaging or destroying the grantee's cable system or equipment. In the event of disconnection on such grounds, the grantee will resume service to the subscriber upon receiving adequate assurances that the subscriber has ceased the practices or conduct that resulted in disconnection and has paid all proper fees and charges, including any amounts reasonably owed the grantee for the damage caused by the subscriber. 
(4)  The grantee may also disconnect service to a subscriber when it causes signal leakage exceeding federal limits. If service is disconnected, the grantee will immediately resume service without charge upon the satisfactory correction of the signal leakage problem. 
(5)  Upon termination of service to a subscriber, the grantee will remove its equipment from the subscriber's premises within 30 days. The equipment will be deemed abandoned if it is not removed within such time period unless the grantee has been denied access to the subscriber's premises. 
(g)  Changes in service. Except as otherwise provided by federal law, subscribers must not be required to pay any additional fee or charge, other than the regular service fee, in order to receive the services selected (such as upgrade or downgrade charges). No charge may be imposed for any service or product that the subscriber has not affirmatively selected. Payment of the regular monthly bill will not by itself constitute an affirmative selection. 
(h)  Deposits. The grantee may require a reasonable, nondiscriminatory deposit on equipment provided to subscribers. Such deposits must be placed in an interest-bearing account. The deposit must be returned, with interest earned to the date of repayment, within 30 days after the equipment is returned to the grantee. 
(i)  Parental control option. The grantee must provide parental control devices to all subscribers who desire to block the video or audio portion of any programming that the subscriber finds objectionable. Such devices will be provided at no charge to the subscriber, unless otherwise required by federal law or unless a converter box is required to be installed for the purpose of providing the parental control device. 
(j)  Additional requirements. 
(1)  If the grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days without the city's prior approval or subsequent ratification, the city may, at its sole option, operate the system or designate an operator until the grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city, or until a permanent operator is selected. If the city satisfies this obligation on behalf of the grantee, then during that time period the city is entitled to collect all revenues derived from the system, and the grantee will indemnify the city against any damages that the city may suffer as a result of the grantee's failure to operate the system. 
(2)  All officers, agents, and employees of the grantee, or of its contractors or subcontractors, who, in the normal course of work come into contact with members of the public, or who require entry onto subscribers' premises, must carry a photo-identification card in a form approved by the city. The grantee must account for all identification cards at all times. All vehicles of the grantee or its subcontractors must be clearly identified as vehicles engaged in providing services for the grantee. 
(3)  Additional standards relating to service, consumer protection, and response by the grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this section may be set forth in the franchise agreement or by separate ordinance, and the grantee must comply with those standards in the operation of the cable television system. A verified and continuing pattern of noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement, provided that the grantee receives written notice and an opportunity to cure before any penalty or other remedy is imposed. 
(k)  Penalties for noncompliance. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this subsection (k) is to authorize the imposition of penalties for the violation of the customer service standards established by this section in accordance with the Video Customer Service Act (Government Code § 53088 et seq.). These penalties are in addition to any other remedies provided by this chapter, the franchise agreement, or any other law, and the city has the discretion to elect the remedy that it will apply. The imposition of penalties authorized by this subsection will not prevent the city or any other affected party from exercising any other remedy to the extent permitted by law, including, but not limited to, any judicial remedy as provided in subsection (k)(2)d of this section. 
(2)  Administration and appeals. 
a.  The city manager or the city manager's designee is authorized to administer this subsection. Decisions by the city manager to assess penalties against the grantee must be in writing and must contain findings supporting the decisions. Decisions by the city manager are final, unless appealed to the city council. 
b.  If the grantee or any interested person is aggrieved by a decision of the city manager, the aggrieved party may, within ten days of the written decision, appeal that decision in writing to the city council. The appeal letter must be accompanied by the fee established by the city council for processing the appeal. The city council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the city manager. 
c.  Schedule of penalties. The following schedule of monetary penalties may be assessed against the grantee for the material breach of the provisions of the customer service standards set forth in this section, provided that the breach is within the reasonable control of the grantee: 
1.  The maximum penalty is $200.00 for each day of material breach, but not to exceed $600.00 for each occurrence of the material breach. 
2.  For a second material breach of the same nature within a 12-month period for which the city has provided notice and a penalty has been assessed, the maximum penalty is $400.00 for each day of the material breach, but not to exceed $1,200.00 for each occurrence of the material breach. 
3.  For a third material breach of the same nature within a 12-month period for which the city has provided notice and a penalty has been assessed, the maximum penalty is $1,000.00 for each day of the material breach, but not to exceed $3,000.00 for each occurrence of the material breach. 
4.  The maximum penalties referenced above may be increased by any additional amount authorized by state law. 
d.  Judicial remedy. This subsection does not preclude any affected party from pursuing any judicial remedy available to that party without regard to subsection (k) of this section. 
e.  Notification of breach. The city must give the grantee written notice of any alleged breach of the consumer service standards and allow the grantee at least 30 days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified breach. For the purpose of assessing penalties, a material breach is deemed to have occurred for each day, following the expiration of the period for cure specified herein, that any breach has not been remedied by the grantee, irrespective of the number of subscribers affected. 
(l)  Free service for noncompliance. Notwithstanding any other penalties or remedies provided by this section, the franchise agreement, or any other law, the grantee must provide the following months of free service to subscribers affected by the grantee's failure to comply with the specified consumer protection and service standard: 
(1)  One month free service. The grantee will provide one month of free service to each subscriber affected by the failure of the grantee to timely and satisfactorily comply with any of the following requirements: 
a.  The pickup or replacement of converters or other equipment within 14 days after subscriber request (section 5.60.080(a)(1)i); 
b.  48-hour notice of service interruption (section 5.60.080(b)(1)); 
c.  Response time for system outages and inferior signal quality (section 5.60.080(b)(2)); 
d.  Resolution of cable system related problems within three business days (section 5.60.080(b)(5)). One additional month of free service will be provided for each seven-day period that the problem remains unresolved; 
e.  Written response to billing complaints (section 5.60.080(c)(3)); 
f.  Credits and refunds (section 5.60.080(c)(4)); 
g.  Provision of all required information to subscribers (section 5.60.080(c)(5)); 
h.  Notification of rate, service, or channel changes (section 5.60.080(c)(6)); 
i.  Completion of termination or downgrade of service (section 5.60.080(f)(1)); 
j.  Provision of parental control devices (section 5.60.080(i)); 
(2)  Three months free service. The grantee will provide three months of free service to each subscriber affected by the grantee's disconnection of subscriber service without just cause, provided that grantee fails to restore service within four hours after the disconnection (section 5.60.080(f)(2)). 
(3)  Definition of free service. The free service required by subsection (l) of this section relates to the service tier subscribed to by the affected subscriber. 
(Code 1969, § 5.60.080; Ord. No. 766, § 2(part), 2000) 
ARTICLE IV. - OTHER VIDEO AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES AND SYSTEMS 

Sec. 5.60.130. - Other multichannel video programming distributors. 
    The term "cable system," as defined in federal law and as set forth in section 5.60.170, does not include a facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way. Consequently, the categories of multichannel video programming distributors identified below are not deemed to be "cable systems" and are therefore exempt from the city's franchise requirements and from certain other local regulatory provisions authorized by federal law, provided that their distribution or transmission facilities do not involve the use of the city's public rights-of-way. 
(1)  Multichannel multipoint distribution service (MMDS), also known as "wireless cable," which typically involves the transmission by an FCC-licensed operator of numerous broadcast stations from a central location using line-of-sight technology. 
(2)  Local multipoint distribution service (LMDS), another form of over-the-air wireless video service for which licenses are auctioned by the FCC, and which offers video programming, telephony, and data networking services. 
(3)  Direct broadcast satellite (DBS), also referred to as "direct-to-home satellite services," which involves the distribution or broadcasting of programming or services by satellite directly to the subscriber's premises without the use of ground receiving or distribution equipment, except at the subscriber's premises or in the uplink process to the satellite. Local regulation of direct-to-home satellite services is further proscribed by the following federal statutory provisions: 
a.  47 USC section 303(v) confers upon the FCC exclusive jurisdiction to regulate the provision of direct-to-home satellite services. 
b.  Section 602 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 states that a provider of direct-to-home satellite service is exempt from the collection or remittance, or both, of any tax or fee imposed by any local taxing jurisdiction on direct-to-home satellite service. The terms "tax" and "fee" are defined by federal statute to mean any local sales tax, local use tax, local intangible tax, local income tax, business license tax, utility tax, privilege tax, gross receipts tax, excise tax, franchise fees, local telecommunications tax, or any other tax, license, or fee that is imposed for the privilege of doing business, regulating, or raising revenue for a local taxing jurisdiction. 
(Code 1969, § 5.60.130; Ord. No. 766, § 2(part), 2000) 
Sec. 5.60.140. - Video providers; registration; customer service standards. 
(a)  Unless the customer protection and customer service obligations of a video provider, as that term is defined in section 5.60.170, are specified in a franchise, license, lease, or similar written agreement with the city, a video provider must comply with all applicable provisions of the following state statutes: 
(1)  The Cable Television and Video Customer Service and Information Act (Government Code § 53054 et seq.). 
(2)  The Video Customer Service Act (Government Code § 53088 et seq.). 
(b)  All video providers that are operating in the city on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or that intend to operate in the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, must register with the city; provided, however, that this registration requirement is not applicable to any video provider that has executed a franchise, license, lease or similar written agreement with the city. The registration form must include or be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  The video provider's name, address, and local telephone numbers. 
(2)  The names of the officers of the video provider. 
(3)  A copy of the video provider's written policies and procedures relating to customer service standards and the handling of customer complaints, as required by Government Code § 53054 et seq. These customer service standards must include, without limitation, standards regarding the following: 
a.  Installation, disconnection, service and repair obligations, employee identification, and service call response time and scheduling. 
b.  Customer telephone and office hours. 
c.  Procedures for billing, charges, refunds, and credits. 
d.  Procedures for termination of service. 
e.  Notice of the deletion of a programming service, the changing of channel assignments, or an increase in rates. 
f.  Complaint procedures and procedures for bill dispute resolution. 
g.  The video provider's written commitment to distribute annually to the city, and to its employees and customers, a notice describing the customer service standards specified in subsections (b)(3)a through f of this section. 
This annual notice must include the report of the video provider on its performance in meeting its customer service standards, as required by Government Code § 53055.2. 
(4)  In addition to the registration fee specified in subsection (b)(4) of this section, the written commitment of the video provider to pay to the city, when due, all costs and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in resolving any disputes between the video provider and its subscribers, which dispute resolution is mandated by Government Code § 53088.2(o). 
(c)  The city council may establish by ordinance a schedule of monetary penalties for the material breach by a video provider of its obligations under Government Code § 53088.2(a) through (s). As used herein, the term "material breach" means any substantial and repeated failure to comply with the consumer service standards set forth in Government Code § 53088.2. The provisions of that ordinance must be consistent with the provisions of Government Code § 53088.2. The schedule of monetary penalties may also impose a penalty, as authorized by Government Code § 53056(a), for the failure of a video provider to distribute the annual notice required by Government Code § 53055.1, which penalty may not exceed $500.00 for each year in which the notice is not distributed as required by state statute. 
(Code 1969, § 5.60.140; Ord. No. 766, § 2(part), 2000) 
Sec. 5.60.150. - Antennas for telecommunications services. 
    The siting and construction of antennas used in providing video and telecommunications services regulated by this chapter are subject to the provisions of chapter 19.30 (Conditional Uses). 
(Code 1969, § 5.60.150; Ord. No. 766, § 2(part), 2000) 
Sec. 5.60.160. - Telecommunications service provided by telephone corporations. 
(a)  The city council finds and determines as follows: 
(1)  The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 preempts and declares invalid all state rules that restrict entry or limit competition in both local and long-distance telephone service. 
(2)  The California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) is primarily responsible for the implementation of local telephone competition, and it issues certificates of public convenience and necessity to new entrants that are qualified to provide competitive local telephone exchange services and related telecommunications service, whether using their own facilities or the facilities or services provided by other authorized telephone corporations. 
(3)  Public Utilities Code § 234(a) defines a "telephone corporation" as every corporation or person owning, controlling, operating, or managing any telephone line for compensation within this state. 
(4)  Public Utilities Code § 616 provides that a telephone corporation may condemn any property necessary for the construction and maintenance of its telephone line. 
(5)  Public Utilities Code § 2902 authorizes municipal corporations to retain their powers of control to supervise and regulate the relationships between a public utility and the general public in matters affecting the health, convenience, and safety of the general public, including matters such as the use and repair of public streets by any public utility and the location of the poles, wires, mains, or conduits of any public utility on, under, or above any public streets. 
(6)  Public Utilities Code § 7901 authorizes telephone and telegraph corporations to construct telephone or telegraph lines along and upon any public road or highway, along or across any of the waters or lands within this state, and to erect poles, posts, piers, or abutments for supporting the insulators, wires, and other necessary fixtures of their lines, in such manner and at such points as not to incommode the public use of the road or highway or interrupt the navigation of the waters. 
(7)  Public Utilities Code § 7901.1 confirms the right of municipalities to exercise reasonable control as to the time, place, and manner in which roads, highways, and waterways are accessed, which control must be applied to all entities in an equivalent manner. Nothing in section 7901.1 adds to or subtracts from any existing authority that municipalities have with respect to the imposition of fees. 
(8)  Government Code § 50030 provides that any permit fee imposed by a city for the placement, installation, repair, or upgrading of telecommunications facilities, such as lines, poles, or antennas, by a telephone corporation that has obtained all required authorizations from the CPUC and the FCC to provide telecommunications services, must not exceed the reasonable costs of providing the service for which the fee is charged, and must not be levied for general revenue purposes. 
(b)  In recognition of and in compliance with the statutory authorizations and requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the following regulatory provisions are applicable to a telephone corporation that desires to provide telecommunications service by means of facilities that are proposed to be constructed within the city's public rights-of-way: 
(1)  The telephone corporation must apply for and obtain, as may be applicable, an excavation permit, an encroachment permit, or a building permit (ministerial permit). 
(2)  In addition to the information required by this Code in connection with an application for a ministerial permit, a telephone corporation must submit to the city the following supplemental information: 
a.  A copy of the certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the CPUC to the applicant, and a copy of the CPUC decision that authorizes the applicant to provide the telecommunications service for which the facilities are proposed to be constructed in the city's public rights-of-way. Any applicant that, prior to 1996, provided telecommunications service under administratively equivalent documentation issued by the CPUC may submit copies of that documentation in lieu of a certificate of public convenience and necessity. 
b.  If the applicant has obtained from the CPUC a certificate of public convenience and necessity to operate as a competitive local carrier, the following additional requirements are applicable: 
1.  As required by Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC, the applicant must establish that it has timely filed with the city a quarterly report that describes the type of construction and the location of each construction project proposed to be undertaken in the city during the calendar quarter in which the application is filed, so that the city can coordinate multiple projects, as may be necessary. 
2.  If the applicant's proposed construction project will extend beyond the utility rights-of-way into undisturbed areas or other rights-of-way, the applicant must establish that it has filed a petition with the CPUC to amend its certificate of public convenience and necessity and that the proposed construction project has been subjected to a full-scale environmental analysis by the CPUC, as required by decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC. 
3.  The applicant must inform the city whether its proposed construction project will be subject to any of the mitigation measures specified in the Negative Declaration "Competitive Local Carriers (CLCS) Projects for Local Exchange Communication Service throughout California" or to the Mitigation Monitoring Plan adopted in connection with decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC. The city's issuance of a ministerial permit will be conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with all applicable mitigation measures and monitoring requirements imposed by the CPUC upon telephone corporations that are designated as competitive local carriers. 
(c)  The city reserves all rights that it now possesses or may later acquire with respect to the regulation of any cable or telecommunications service that is provided, or proposed to be provided, by a telephone corporation, These reserved rights may relate, without limitation, to the imposition of reasonable conditions in addition to or different from those set forth in this section, the exaction of a fee or other form of consideration or compensation for use of public rights-of-way, and related matters; provided, however, that such regulatory rights and authority must be consistent with federal and state law that is applicable to cable or telecommunications services provided by telephone corporations. 
(d)  The city council finds and determines that numerous and repetitive excavations in the public rights-of-way diminish the useful life of the surface pavement and generally cause adverse negative impacts for local residents, local businesses, and vehicular and pedestrian traffic. The city council further finds and determines that the utility substructure in the public rights-of-way is subject to potential adverse negative impacts as a consequence of new economic and regulatory policies that foster increased competition between various utility service providers, including telephone corporations, and between other service providers, such as cable system operators. In order to mitigate these potential adverse negative impacts, the following policies are adopted: 
(1)  The city manager is directed to develop and to implement public rights-of-way policies and procedures that incorporate, to the extent reasonably feasible, the following requirements that are intended to encourage the shared use by utility and other service providers of existing facilities in the public rights-of-way: 
a.  A requirement that utility and other service providers requesting permits review information provided by the city that identifies the location of facilities, such as underground conduits, that are available for shared use, and the owners of those facilities. 
b.  A requirement that utility and other service providers requesting permits submit a written statement that describes in reasonable detail the efforts made to obtain from other utility service providers the right to use excess capacity within existing facilities, and to thereby avoid the construction of new facilities. 
c.  Annual map. 
1.  A requirement that utility and other service providers occupying the public rights-of-way submit annually to the city a map, which may be in a uniform electronic-data format to be specified by the city, that shows the location of their respective facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
2.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, an updated annual map need not be provided unless there are changes to the location of the service provider's facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
d.  Such additional requirements as will encourage utility and other service providers to share excess capacity within previously-constructed facilities and to coordinate the construction of new facilities so as to minimize the number of excavations in the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  The city manager is directed to ensure that all utility and other service providers, including telephone corporations and cable system operators, comply with all local design, construction, maintenance, and safety standards that are consistent with state and federal laws and regulations and that are contained within, or are related to, any permit that authorizes the construction of facilities within the public rights-of-way, including all applicable insurance provisions. 
(3)  Based upon the city's projected plans for street construction or renovation projects, the city manager is authorized to establish on a quarterly basis one or more construction time periods or windows for the installation of facilities within the public rights-of-way. Cable system operators, telephone corporations, and other utility service providers that submit applications for permits to construct facilities after a predetermined date may be required to delay such construction until the next quarterly window that is established by the city. 
(e)  The city council finds and determines that the installation in the public rights-of-way of numerous aboveground facilities by utility service providers, including telephone corporations, and other service providers, may create safety hazards and adverse visual impacts. Consequently, the public works department is authorized to impose reasonable conditions in order to mitigate those potential adverse impacts that may result, whether on an individual or a cumulative basis, from permitted aboveground facilities. Those conditions may include or relate to, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Prior to issuance of the requisite permits, all aboveground facilities proposed to be installed by a utility service or other service provider in the public rights-of-way must be clearly delineated on the plans when they are submitted for the city's review. 
(2)  The design and installation by qualified professionals of landscaping and barriers to minimize public view of aboveground facilities whose location has been approved by the city. 
(3)  The maintenance of all aboveground facilities in good condition, including compliance with the city's ordinances regarding graffiti removal. In this regard, a utility or other service provider may be required to affix to its aboveground facilities a coded label or marker that identifies the specific facility and sets forth a telephone number that may be called to report any damage, destruction, or graffiti vandalism involving that facility. 
(4)  The placement of aboveground facilities, such as overhead drops, as close as possible to other utility drops, consistent with all applicable electrical codes. 
(5)  Reasonable limitations upon the number of aboveground facilities that may be installed within a designated geographical area. 
(6)  Reasonable limitations upon the dimensions or volume, or both, of aboveground facilities. 
(7)  The specification of colors of aboveground facilities reasonably requested by the city to ensure that these facilities blend with the surrounding environment to the maximum extent possible. 
(8)  Such additional conditions regulating the time, place, and manner of installations of aboveground facilities as will reasonably mitigate potential safety hazards and adverse visual impacts attributable to these facilities. 
(f)  The city reserves all rights that it now possesses or may later acquire to adopt and implement city-wide requirements for the undergrounding of aboveground facilities, or any portion thereof, in a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory manner. To the extent authorized by law, all utility and other service providers will be required to comply with those requirements at their sole expense. 
(Code 1969, § 5.60.160; Ord. No. 766, § 2(part), 2000) 
ARTICLE V. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 5.60.170. - Defined terms and phrases. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, the words, terms, phrases, and their derivations set forth in this chapter have the meanings set forth below. 
    Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming services, and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of that video programming or other programming service. For the purposes of this definition, the term "video programming" means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station; and the term "other programming service" means information that a cable system operator makes available to all subscribers generally. 
    Cable system or cable communications system or cable television system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. The term "cable system" does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of title II of the Communications Act, except that such facility will be considered a cable system (other than for purposes specified in section 621(c) of the Communications Act) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
(4)  An open video system that complies with section 653 of the Communications Act; or 
(5)  Any facilities of an electric utility that are used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
    Cable system operator means any person or group of persons: 
(1)  Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system; or 
(2)  Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of that cable system. 
    _____ CFR section _____ means the Code of Federal Regulations. Thus, the citation of "47 CFR 80.1" refers to title 47, part 80, section 1, of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
    Communications Act means the Communications Act of 1934 (47 USC section 153 et seq.), as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
    FCC or Federal Communications Commission means the federal administrative agency, or any lawful successor, that is authorized to regulate telecommunications services and telecommunications service providers on a national level. 
    Franchise means an initial authorization, or the renewal of an initial authorization, granted by the city council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, agreement, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, or otherwise, that authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system or an open video system. 
    Franchise fee means any fee or assessment of any kind that is authorized by state or federal law to be imposed by the city on a grantee as compensation in the nature of rent for the grantee's use of the public rights-of-way. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
(1)  Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and grantees or their services); 
(2)  Capital costs that are required by the franchise to be incurred by a grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities; 
(3)  Costs or charges that are incidental to the award or enforcement of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or 
(4)  Any fee imposed under title 17, United States Code. 
    Franchise service area or service area means the entire geographic area of the city as it is now constituted, or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance or resolution granting a franchise, or in a franchise agreement. 
    Grantee means any person that is awarded a franchise in accordance with this chapter, and that person's lawful successor, transferee, or assignee. 
    Gross annual cable service revenues means the annual gross revenues derived from the grantee's operations of its cable television system to provide cable services within the city, excluding uncollected bad debt, refundable deposits, rebates or credits, and further excluding any sales, excise, or other taxes or charges that are required to be collected for direct pass-through to the local, state or federal government. Revenues identified and collected from subscribers as franchise fees may not be excluded from a grantee's gross annual cable service revenues. 
    Multichannel video programming distributor or video programming distributor means a person such as, but not limited to, a cable system operator, an open video system operator, a multichannel multipoint distribution service, a direct broadcast satellite service, or a television receive-only satellite program distributor, who makes available multiple channels of video programming for purchase by subscribers or customers. 
    Open video system means a facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, including video programming, and that is provided to multiple subscribers within the city, provided that the FCC has certified that such system is authorized to operate in the city and complies with 47 CFR 1500 et seq., entitled "Open Video Systems." 
    Open video system operator means any person or group of persons who provides cable service over an open video system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that open video system, or otherwise controls or is responsible for the management and operation of that open video system. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or governmental entity. 
    Public, educational or government access facilities or PEG access facilities means the total of the following: 
(1)  Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and 
(2)  Facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity. 
    Street or public right-of-way means each of the following that has been dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and is located within the city limits; streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way, and similar public property that the city from time to time authorizes to be included within the definition of a street. 
    Subscriber or customer or consumer means any person who, for any purpose, subscribes to the services provided by a multichannel video programming distributor and who pays the charges for those services. 
    Telecommunications means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
    Telecommunications equipment means equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications service provider to provide telecommunications service, including software that is integral to that equipment. 
    Telecommunications service means the offering of telecommunications directly to the public for a fee, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the equipment or facilities that are used. 
    Telecommunications service provider means any provider of telecommunications service. 
    _____ USC section _____ means the United States Code. Thus, the citation of "47 USC section 153" refers to title 47, section 153, of the United States Code. 
    Video programming provider means any person or group of persons who has the right under the federal copyright laws to select and to contract for the carriage of specific video programming on a cable system or an open video system. 
    Video provider. 
(1)  The term "video provider" means any person, company, or service that provides one or more channels of video programming to a residence, including a home, multifamily dwelling complex, congregate-living complex, condominium, apartment, or mobile home, where some fee is paid for that service, whether directly or as included in dues or rental charges, and whether or not public rights-of-way are used in the delivery of that video programming. 
(2)  The term "video provider" includes, without limitation, providers of cable television service, open video system service, master antenna television, satellite master antenna television, direct broadcast satellite, multipoint distribution services, and other providers of video programming, whatever their technology. 
(b)  Unless otherwise expressly stated, words, terms, and phrases not defined in this chapter will be given their meaning as used in title 47 of the United States Code, as amended, and, if not defined in that code, their meaning as used in title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
(Code 1969, § 5.60.170; Ord. No. 766, § 2(part), 2000) 
ARTICLE VI. - VIOLATIONS-SEVERABILITY 

Sec. 5.60.180. - Violations; enforcement. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided for in chapter 1.01. 
(b)  The misdemeanor penalty specified in subsection (a) of this section is not applicable to a violation of any provision of this chapter for which another sanction or penalty may be imposed under any franchise, license, lease, or similar written agreement between the city and a multichannel video programming distributor or telecommunications service provider. 
(c)  The city may initiate a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 5.60.180; Ord. No. 766, § 2(part), 2000) 
CHAPTER 5.65. - STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES 

Sec. 5.65.010. - Purpose and application of chapter. 
    This chapter is designed to regulate video service providers holding state video franchises and operating within the city. On January 1, 2007, the state became the sole authority with power to grant state video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 ("DIVCA"). Pursuant to DIVCA, the city shall receive a franchise fee from all state franchisees. DIVCA confirmed that the city may establish and enforce penalties, consistent with state law, against all state video franchise holders operating within the city for violations of customer service standards. DIVCA precludes the city from adopting its own standards and grants all authority to adopt customer service standards to the state. DIVCA leaves unchanged the city's authority to regulate the city's current cable franchises and any city cable franchise issued on or before January 1, 2008, until the expiration of any such franchise. 
(Ord. No. 928-2014, § 1(5.65.010), 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 5.65.020. - State video franchise fees. 
(a)  Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city shall pay a fee to the city equal to five percent of the gross revenues of that state video franchise holder. 
(b)  The term "gross revenue," for the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, shall have the definition set forth in Public Utilities Code § 5860. 
(Ord. No. 928-2014, § 1(5.65.020), 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 5.65.030. - Audit authority. 
    Not more than once annually, the city manager or his designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with section 5.65.020. 
(Ord. No. 928-2014, § 1(5.65.030), 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 5.65.040. - Customer service penalties. 
(a)  Any holder of a state video service franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service. 
(b)  The city will provide any holder of a state video franchise written notice of any material breach of applicable customer service and protection standards, and will allow the franchise holder at least 30 calendar days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. A material breach that is not remedied by the state video franchise holder within the remedy period shall subject the state video franchise holder to the following penalties to be imposed by the city: 
(1)  For the first occurrence of a material breach, a penalty of not more than $500.00 for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $1,500.00 for each occurrence of a material breach. 
(2)  For the second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a penalty of $1,000.00 for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $3,000.00 for each occurrence of the material breach. 
(3)  For a third or further violation of the same nature within 12 months, a penalty of $2,500.00 for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $7,500.00 for each occurrence of the material breach. 
(c)  Any notice and any penalty may be issued or imposed by the city manager, or the city manager's designee. Any notice shall be in writing. Notices shall be transmitted by United States Postal Service certified or registered mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid, or by private commercial delivery or courier service for same day or next business day delivery with delivery and receipt signature required. 
(d)  The state video service franchise holder may appeal any finding of material breach or imposition of penalties to the city council. Any appeal must be made within 30 calendar days of receipt by the state video service franchise holder of the finding of material breach or the imposition of penalties, and must be submitted in writing to the city clerk and the city manager in order to be placed on a city council agenda for consideration. Any appeal must contain a detailed explanation of why the applicant believes that the finding of material breach or the imposition of penalties was inconsistent with statutory requirements. 
(e)  The city and any state video service franchise holder may mutually agree to extend the time periods specified herein. Any such agreement shall be in writing and executed by the city manager, or the city manager's designee, and an authorized representative of the state video franchise holder. 
(f)  Any penalty imposed on the state video franchise holder shall be paid to the city. As provided for in Public Utilities Code § 5900(g), the city shall submit one-half of all penalties received from a state video franchise holder to the Digital Divide Account established in Public Utilities Code § 280.5. 
(Ord. No. 928-2014, § 1(5.65.040), 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 5.65.050. - Procedures for approval and appeal of denial of an encroachment permit. 
(a)  As provided for in Public Utilities Code § 5885, the city shall either approve or deny an application from a state video service franchise holder for an encroachment permit within 60 days of receiving a completed application. 
(b)  The term "encroachment permit" means any permit issued by the city relating to construction or operation of facilities relating to the provision of video service under a state video service franchise. 
(c)  An application for an encroachment permit is considered complete when the applicant has complied with all statutory requirements, including the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) of the Public Resources Code. 
(d)  Any city denial of an application for an encroachment permit shall be in writing and shall contain a detailed explanation of the reason for the denial. 
(e)  An applicant whose application for an encroachment permit has been denied may appeal the denial to the city council. Any appeal must be made within 14 calendar days of receipt by the state video service franchise holder of the denial, and must be submitted in writing to the city clerk and the city manager in order to be placed on the city council agenda for consideration. Any appeal must contain a detailed explanation of why the applicant believes that the denial was inconsistent with statutory requirements. 
(Ord. No. 928-2014, § 1(5.65.050), 10-6-2014) 
CHAPTER 5.70. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY FACILITIES SIGN RATES 

Sec. 5.70.010. - Outdoor sign defined. 
    The term "outdoor sign or outside sign," as used in this chapter, means any sign visible to passersby whether the same shall be located within or without buildings. 
(Code 1969, § 5.70.010; Ord. No. 586, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.70.020. - Room rates defined. 
    The term "room rates," as used in this chapter, means the rates at which rooms or other accommodations are rented to occupants. 
(Code 1969, § 5.70.020; Ord. No. 586, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.70.030. - Operator defined. 
    The term "operator," as used in this chapter, includes a manager or any person in charge of the operation of transient occupancy facilities as set forth hereinafter and like establishments. The term "operator" or "owner" includes natural persons, firms and corporations. 
(Code 1969, § 5.70.030; Ord. No. 586, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.70.040. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to operators and owners of hotels, motor hotels, lodges, motels, motor courts, and like establishments, and to such establishments which rent rooms or other facilities to transients by the day, week or month. 
(Code 1969, § 5.70.040; Ord. No. 586, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.70.050. - Outdoor posting of rates. 
    It is unlawful for any owner or operator of any establishment within the scope of this chapter, located within the city, to post or maintain posted on any outdoor or outside advertising sign pertaining to such establishment, any rates for accommodations in such establishment unless the sign shall have posted thereon the rates charged for all rooms, or other rental units or accommodations offered for rental, the number of rooms or other rental units offered for rental at each rate, and the number of persons accommodated at the rate posted. All posted rates and descriptive data required by this chapter shall be in type and material of the same size and prominence as the aforesaid data. This section shall not be held to be complied with by signs stating the rate per person or bearing the legend "and up." 
(Code 1969, § 5.70.050; Ord. No. 586, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.70.060. - Posting required in registration area. 
    It is unlawful for any owner or operator of any establishment within the scope of this chapter to post or maintain posted on outdoor or outside advertising signs rates for accommodations in any such establishment, unless there shall be posted prominently and conspicuously in the area where guests are normally registered, a list of all rooms or other rental units offered for rental by such establishment, and the rates charged for each room when occupied by one person or two persons, and the rate charged for each additional occupant. 
(Code 1969, § 5.70.060; Ord. No. 586, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.70.070. - False or misleading representations. 
    It is unlawful for any owner or operator of any establishment within the scope of this chapter to post or maintain outdoor or outside advertising signs in connection with any such establishment relating to rates which shall have thereon any untrue, misleading, false, or fraudulent representations. 
(Code 1969, § 5.70.070; Ord. No. 586, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.70.080. - Construction. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed so as to require establishments within the scope of this chapter to have outdoor or outside signs. This chapter, however, shall be liberally construed so as to prevent untrue, misleading, false, or fraudulent representations relating to rates being placed upon outdoor or outside signs pertaining to such establishments. 
(Code 1969, § 5.70.080; Ord. No. 586, § 1(part), 1988) 
Sec. 5.70.090. - Punishment for violations. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 or by imprisonment of not less than ten days nor more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1969, § 5.70.090; Ord. No. 586, § 1(part), 1988) 
CHAPTER 5.72. - DISCLOSURE UPON SALE OF REAL PROPERTY 

Sec. 5.72.010. - Disclosure of certain information required. 
    Prior to consummation of any sale of real property within the city, each seller or group of sellers shall notify the prospective buyer of the following items in connection with the sale: 
(1)  The existing zoning of the property. 
(2)  Any proposed plan by any governmental agency in which use of the property is an element. 
(3)  Whether each structure on the real property conforms to the applicable regulations and laws then in effect or whether the structures are nonconforming. 
(4)  All easements, rights-of-way or other limitations upon the use of the property then in existence. 
(5)  Any reimbursement agreement with the city as described in section 12.04.021. 
(Ord. No. 910-2013, § 4, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 5.72.020. - Certificate from city. 
    The seller of property shall obtain a certificate from the city certifying the existing zoning, any existing plan for use of the property, whether structures are conforming or nonconforming, and whether any reimbursement agreement with the city exists, upon application thereof and upon payment of a fee in the amount of $25.00 for each such certification. 
(Ord. No. 910-2013, § 4, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 5.72.030. - Compliance. 
    Proof of compliance with this chapter shall be in writing, signed by the buyer. Failure to comply with the terms of this chapter shall constitute prima facie evidence of failure to disclose material conditions in the inducement of a sale of real property. The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be recorded upon the official records of the county. 
(Ord. No. 910-2013, § 4, 7-15-2013) 
CHAPTER 5.80. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 5.80.010. - Intent. 
    The intent of this chapter is to provide regulation for the establishment and operation of yard sales that do not constitute a land use. 
(Code 1969, § 5.80.010; Ord. No. 607, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 5.80.020. - Purpose and authority. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations that will protect the general public health, safety and welfare under the authority granted to governments by the State Constitution. 
(Code 1969, § 5.80.020; Ord. No. 607, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 5.80.030. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the indicated meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Estate sale, garage sale, moving sale, patio sale, rummage sale, tag sale, yard sale are synonymous and mean any event which is advertised by any means at a residential location where members of the public may purchase identifiable or tangible items of personal property; provided, however, this definition shall not mean any event which constitutes a sales activity; wholesale or retail, by any business which has a current business license issued by the city. Items sold shall be limited to personal property owned by the occupant of the property. 
    Residential location means any location that has been zoned DR, DL, RS-6, RS-9, RS-16 or MHS, as defined in title 19 of this Code and specified in the city general plan. 
(Code 1969, § 5.80.030; Ord. No. 607, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 5.80.040. - Time limitation. 
    No yard sale shall be permitted for more than three consecutive days beginning each day no earlier than 9:00 a.m. and ending no later than 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1969, § 5.80.040; Ord. No. 607, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 5.80.050. - Frequency and location. 
    No sale shall be permitted at the same location more than four times in a calendar year. No more than four sales shall be conducted by any one person or organization at any location in a calendar year. A sale being one to three consecutive days in duration. Sales at the same location shall occur a minimum of 90 days apart. Yard sales shall be restricted to residential locations. No sale shall be permitted within five feet of a public right-of-way. 
(Code 1969, § 5.80.050; Ord. No. 607, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 5.80.060. - Signage. 
    One temporary sign not exceeding five square feet in area shall be permitted on site. No such signs shall be placed on private property off site, public property or in any public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, utility poles, sign poles, or trees. Posting signs earlier than one day prior to the sale or for more than one day after the sale shall be prohibited. The sign shall be removed within 24 hours of termination of the event. 
(Code 1969, § 5.80.060; Ord. No. 607, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 5.80.070. - Grounds for disallowing a yard sale. 
    The city manager or designated representative may prohibit a yard sale to commence or continue if it is determined that one or more of the following exist: 
(1)  The city determines that the proposed yard sale is in effect truly a commercial business activity subject to the business regulations of chapters 5.04, 5.08 and 5.12 of this Code and therefore also subject to the zoning regulations of title 19 of this Code. 
(2)  The time or size of the yard sale is reasonably likely to substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the event or route, or disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually subject to great traffic congestion. 
(3)  The concentration of persons and vehicles at the site of the yard sale is reasonably likely to prevent proper police, fire, or ambulance services to areas contiguous to the event. 
(4)  The location of the yard sale is reasonably likely to substantially interfere with any construction or maintenance work previously granted an encroachment permit. 
(5)  The proposed yard sale does not comply with the other requirements established in this chapter. 
(6)  Items sold do not belong to the individuals conducting the sale or are stolen or contraband items. 
(Code 1969, § 5.80.070; Ord. No. 607, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 5.80.080. - Yard sale privilege revocation. 
    Any yard sale may be disallowed and any subsequent yard sales disallowed within one year if the city manager or designated representative finds that conduct of the yard sale has created a public or private nuisance or has violated any provision of this chapter or other applicable law. 
(Code 1969, § 5.80.080; Ord. No. 607, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 5.80.090. - Temporary event permit. 
(a)  Certain proposed sales events may more appropriately be regulated by the temporary event permitting provisions specified in chapter 9.45. 
(b)  Whenever the city manager deems a temporary event permit to be necessary, the operator of the proposed sales event will be required to obtain such permit. 
(Code 1969, § 5.80.090; Ord. No. 607, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 5.80.100. - Violation; penalty. 
    Violation of any provision of this chapter shall subject the violator to suit for civil remedy or criminal penalty, or both. The criminal penalty for a first or second offense shall be punishable as an infraction. The criminal penalty for a third offense or more shall be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 5.80.100; Ord. No. 607, § 2(part), 1989) 
CHAPTER 5.84. - TOW SERVICE 

Sec. 5.84.010. - Tow service franchise program. 
    The chief of police of the city may establish a tow service franchise program and may, with the concurrence of the city manager, award a tow service franchise to one or more qualified companies. For purposes of this section, the term "qualified company" means a company determined by the chief of police and the city manager, in such officials' sole discretion, to be capable of providing satisfactory towing, emergency road and storage services. A tow service franchise shall not be awarded to any company that lacks a current city business license or that is not current in its utility payments to the city. 
(Code 1969, § 5.84.010; Ord. No. 759, § 2(part), 2000) 
Sec. 5.84.020. - Franchise agreement and fee. 
    Each recipient of a tow service franchise shall execute a tow service franchise agreement, which may be signed on behalf of the city by the chief of police and the city manager. Additionally, each recipient of a tow service franchise shall pay a tow service franchise fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 5.84.020; Ord. No. 759, § 2(part), 2000) 
Sec. 5.84.030. - Franchise term. 
    The term of each tow service franchise shall be one year. Nothing in this section shall preclude the chief of police, with the concurrence of the city manager, from earlier terminating a tow service for violation of the franchise agreement or any applicable law. 
(Code 1969, § 5.84.030; Ord. No. 759, § 2(part), 2000) 
CHAPTER 5.90. - RENTAL HOUSING 

Sec. 5.90.010. - Intent. 
    The intent of this chapter is to provide regulation for the rental housing business. 
(Code 1969, § 5.90.010; Ord. No. 765, § 2(part), 2000) 
Sec. 5.90.020. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Cooling system means an air conditioning or similar cooling device capable of maintaining a maximum room temperature of 78 degrees Fahrenheit at a point three feet above the floor in each room, other than a bathroom, of a rental housing unit. 
    Existing rental housing unit means a rental housing unit constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
    Newly constructed housing unit means a rental housing unit constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
    Rental housing unit means any single-family dwelling, apartment, condominium or similar structure used or offered for rent or lease. 
    Residential rental unit means and includes any dwelling unit occupied by persons other than the legal owner. 
(Code 1969, § 5.90.020; Ord. No. 765, § 2(part), 2000; Ord. No. 800, § 1, 2004; Ord. No. 765, § 2(part), 2000) 
Sec. 5.90.030. - Cooling system required. 
(a)  No person shall rent, lease, or offer for rent or lease any newly constructed rental housing unit unless such rental housing unit is equipped with a cooling system. 
(b)  No person shall rent, lease, or offer for rent or lease any existing rental housing unit equipped with a cooling system unless such cooling system is maintained throughout the term of the lease or tenancy. 
(c)  Nothing in this section is intended to establish, or shall be construed as establishing, strict liability for the inoperation of a cooling system arising from ordinary wear and tear provided that such cooling system is repaired within 14 calendar days of written notification of its inoperative status. 
(Code 1969, § 5.90.030; Ord. No. 765, § 2(part), 2000) 
Sec. 5.90.040. - Residential rental registration program. 
(a)  Purpose. This section establishes a residential rental unit registration program for the purpose of tracking ownership and outstanding sewer or trash debts of residential rental units within the city. It is intended as an aid in the preservation of the city's rental housing stock and is therefore in furtherance of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  New residential rental units. Each owner of property used as a residential rental unit shall complete a residential rental unit registration form within 15 days of the later of the following: 
(1)  Acquisition of such property; or 
(2)  Initial use of such property by that owner as a residential rental unit. 
(c)  Existing residential rental units. Each owner of property used as a residential rental unit on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall complete a residential rental unit registration form within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. 
(d)  Registration late fee. There will be no charge for residential rental units registered within time limits established by the ordinance codified in this chapter. If a property owner registers the residential rental unit after the time permitted by subsections (b), (c) and (f) of this section, a late fine of $25.00 per unit, per month shall be imposed. 
(e)  Procedure. 
(1)  Completed residential rental unit registration forms shall be filed with the city manager or his designee on a form provided by the city and shall include the following information: 
a.  The property owner name and, if not a natural person, the legal status of the entity and, if applicable, the state of formation or incorporation and the agent for service of process; 
b.  Contact information, including, current phone and mailing address, of person responsible for property; and 
c.  The date of acquisition of the property. 
(2)  The city manager or his designee shall approve a residential rental unit registration form unless: 
a.  The applicant has made one or more material misstatements in the application; or 
b.  There are unpaid utility charges currently owed the city for the property. In lieu of denying an application due to unpaid sewer or trash charges, the city manager or his designee may approve a residential rental unit registration form if the applicant submits a security deposit in an amount reasonably established by the city manager or his designee to ensure payment of charges for utility service to the property by the city. 
(f)  Registration renewal. Each property owner issued a residential rental unit registration form shall update the registration form within 30 days of any change in any information required by the city's application pursuant to subsection (e) of this section. 
(Code 1969, § 5.90.040; Ord. No. 800, § 2, 2004) 
CHAPTER 5.92. - MOTION PICTURES, TELEVISION AND PHOTOGRAPHIC PRODUCTION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform Film Permit Act, Government Code § 14999.30 et seq.; authority of any city to adopt ordinance or regulations governing issuance of commercial film permits, Government Code § 14999.36. 

Sec. 5.92.010. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Motion Pictures, Television and Photographic Production Ordinance" of the City of Barstow. 
(Code 1969, § 5.92.010; Ord. No. 861-2010, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 5.92.020. - Purpose and intent. 
    This chapter is to establish administrative rules and regulations for the review and issuance of filming permits for motion picture, television and photographic production in the city. The intent of this chapter is to facilitate and regulate the time, place and manner of such filming activity while protecting the residents and property owners from the potential adverse impacts of filming activities. 
(Code 1969, § 5.92.020; Ord. No. 861-2010, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 5.92.030. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City film permit means a permit issued by the city to allow the activities associated with filming activity, including the production, filming or videotaping of motion picture and television shows, programs, commercials and still photography. 
    City film permit coordinator means the director of community and economic development or his designee. 
    Family video means the filming or videotaping of motion pictures or taking of still photographs solely for private use. 
    Filming activity means all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, web based media, commercials and the taking of single or multiple photographs for sale or commercial use involving a cast and crew of ten or more individuals where the photographer sets up stationary equipment in any one location for longer than five consecutive minutes. Filming activity also includes filming of commercial radio station promotional events. 
    Filming location means actual property or properties that any filming activity for commercial motion picture or still photographic production is performed. 
    News media means the photographing, filming or videotaping for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned reporting of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest by reporters, photographers or camera operator in the employ of a newspaper, television station, news service, or similar entity. 
    Preparation (prep) means work days preceding filming activities. These activities may include set construction, or dressing, painting, landscaping or rigging for stunts and special effects. 
    Strike means work at a filming location that includes the removal of equipment at the end of filming activities. These activities may include, but are not limited to, set removal, re-painting, relandscaping, and unrigging from stunts and special effects. 
    Student films means motion picture, television, or still photography produced to satisfy a course or curriculum requirement at an educational institution. The student film maker must supply proof that he is currently enrolled in an educational institution. 
    Studio filming means a legally established commercial motion picture/television/still photography place of business where filming activity, whether motion or still, are regularly conducted inside a studio/stage upon the premises. 
(Code 1969, § 5.92.030; Ord. No. 861-2010, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 5.92.040. - Permit exemptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  News media. 
(2)  Family video. 
(3)  Studio filming. 
(Code 1969, § 5.92.040; Ord. No. 861-2010, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 5.92.050. - Permit required. 
    No person shall use any public or private property, building, facility or residence for the purpose of filming activity, including, but not limited to, producing or making motion pictures, television, or still photography without first applying for and receiving a city film permit from the city film permit coordinator pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 5.92.050; Ord. No. 861-2010, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 5.92.060. - Permit applications and issuance. 
(a)  City film permit application. Any person desiring a city film permit under the provisions of this chapter shall submit to the city film permit coordinator: 
(1)  A complete application for a city film permit on a form provided by the city. The form must be signed and accompanied by all required fees, deposits, indemnification agreement, and the insurance certificate required by this chapter and the city's administrative rules and regulations before the permit will be processed. Such complete application shall be submitted at least two working days prior to the date in which such person desires to conduct the activity for which a permit is required. If such activity interferes with traffic, including road closures, or involves potential public safety hazards, such as stunts, pyrotechnics or special effects, an application shall be submitted at least five working days prior to the date of the filming activity. 
(2)  Approval in the form of a petition, signature card, letter, consent form or email from a minimum of 75 percent of all property owners and/or tenants, over the age of 18, for each parcel located within 500 feet of the perimeter of the property on which the filming activity is to take place. Applications that fail to submit the minimum amount of consent required in this subsection shall require approval from the city council at the next available meeting. 
(3)  City film permit fee as established by city council resolution and other applicable deposits as described in section 5.92.100. 
(4)  Evidence of insurance as required in section 5.92.110(a). 
(5)  A fully executed indemnification agreement, on a form approved by the city attorney, as required in section 5.92.110(b). 
(6)  If determined to be necessary by the city film permit coordinator, written evidence of permits and/or conditions with other public agencies as may be required upon submission of an application for a city film permit. Requirements of these responsible agencies shall be requirements of this permit. Examples of such agencies include, but are not limited to, the state highway patrol, the county sheriff's department, Federal Aviation Administration, city fire protection district and the bureau of land management. 
(7)  Any other information as required by the city's administrative rules and regulations. 
(b)  City film permit issuance. 
(1)  The city film permit coordinator shall be responsible for the issuance of city film permits under this chapter, when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained, he finds that: 
a.  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and that no streets will be completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time; 
b.  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or city operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the city incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the applicant; and 
c.  At the determination of the city's public works department as well as the city police department, city fire protection district and the city engineer, as required, that the condition of such activity will not constitute a fire hazard or any other type of hazard and all proper safety precautions will be taken as determined by the departments director or their designee. 
(2)  The city film permit coordinator may impose any conditions found necessary to protect the public's health, safety and welfare. The permittee shall comply with any conditions or restrictions the city may impose as a condition to issuing a city film permit. No changes to such conditions shall be made without first obtaining the city film permit coordinator's prior written approval. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a city film permit shall be grounds for permit revocation by the city film permit coordinator. 
(3)  Following issuance of a city film permit, the permittee must notify residents within a 500-foot radius of the location of the proposed filming activity by distributing a fully completed filming location notification form, including the production company's contact telephone numbers, at least 24 hours prior to the first day of filming activity. Residential notification is not required for still photographic productions with cast and crew of less than ten people. 
(4)  The decision of the city film permit coordinator to issue, conditionally issue or not issue a city film permit shall be final unless appealed pursuant to section 5.92.080. 
(Code 1969, § 5.92.060; Ord. No. 861-2010, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 5.92.070. - Revocation of a city film permit. 
(a)  City film permits may be revoked by the city film permit coordinator for the following reasons: 
(1)  Misrepresentation on the city film permit application including but not limited to the type or manner of film production, the location of filming activity or the parameters or the need for stunts or special effects. 
(2)  Any violations of the Barstow Municipal Code, state or federal law, and/or the city's administrative rules and regulations for filming activity. 
(3)  Any violation of the conditions imposed on the city film permit. 
(b)  The city police and the city fire protection district are authorized to suspend any filming activity not authorized by the necessary permit or when permit conditions are violated or where the city's filming rules and regulations, laws or ordinances are violated. A written notice of suspension shall be provided to the permittee and the city film permit coordinator within 24 hours of the suspension. 
(c)  The decision of the city film permit coordinator to revoke a city film permit shall be final unless appealed pursuant to section 5.92.080. 
(Code 1969, § 5.92.070; Ord. No. 861-2010, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 5.92.080. - Appeal procedures. 
    The decision of the city film permit coordinator to issue, conditionally issue, not issue, or revoke a city film permit may be appealed in writing to the city manager within five working days of the decision. The appeal must include copies of all pertinent material necessary to support the permittee's position on appeal. Any actions of the city manager shall be final. 
(Code 1969, § 5.92.080; Ord. No. 861-2010, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 5.92.090. - Administrative rules and regulations. 
    The city film permit coordinator is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate administrative rules and regulations, subject to approval by resolution of the council, governing the time, place and manner of any filming activity within the city. The administrative rules and regulations shall be based upon the criteria set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 5.92.090; Ord. No. 861-2010, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 5.92.100. - Permit fees; costs. 
    Each application for a city film permit shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  A security deposit, in an amount established by city council resolution, to ensure cleanup and restoration of the site of the filming activity. The deposit, in full or part thereof, may be returned to the applicant upon completion of filming activity and inspection of the site by the city. 
(2)  A city film permit fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council to reimburse the city for staff time required to evaluate the application and establish conditions of approval and to monitor the activity. 
(3)  The city film permit fee and the security deposit shall not apply to or affect: 
a.  City produced or city-sponsored government or educational access productions; 
b.  Student films; and 
c.  Productions by charitable organizations that have been issued 501(c)(3) status by the Internal Revenue Service and are in good standing. 
(4)  If deemed necessary by the city film permit coordinator, additional police department, Code enforcement, a film monitor and/or other city services shall be provided for the purpose of protecting, assisting and regulating the proposed activity, at a cost billed to the permittee. The cost of providing such additional services shall be paid in advance to the city by the permittee. Additional city services will be provided/coordinated through the city film permit coordinator. 
(Code 1969, § 5.92.100; Ord. No. 861-2010, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 5.92.110. - Insurance and liability. 
    All applicants for a city film permit shall submit with a completed application for a city film permit, the following: 
(1)  Liability insurance. If filming activity will be conducted on public property, a certificate of insurance shall be submitted to the city film permit coordinator evidencing the following: 
a.  General liability with limits no less than $1,000,000.00; 
b.  Auto liability with limits no less than $1,000,000.00; 
c.  Workers' compensation coverage as required by law; and 
d.  Employer's liability with limits no less than $1,000,000.00. 
The general liability and auto liability policies shall name the city, its officers, employees, agents and volunteers as additional insured's to protect the city against any liability, or claims of liability related to or resulting from film production in the city. Such policies shall be provided by an insured permitted to do business in the state with an AM Best rating of at least V:12. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after 30 days written notice to the city. Such insurance shall be evidenced by the standard general liability special endorsement form mandated by the state film commission, which will remain on file with the city's risk manager. 
(2)  Indemnification agreement. The applicant must submit with its application for a city film permit an indemnification agreement, on a form approved by the city attorney, in which the applicant agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, employees and volunteers from all claims and liability arising from the filming activity or issuance of the city film permit. 
(Code 1969, § 5.92.110; Ord. No. 861-2010, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 5.92.120. - Enforcement of violations. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the Barstow Municipal Code to the contrary, any person who causes, permits, or suffers a violation of any provision of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any obligation or requirement of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor violation punishable in accordance with section 1.01.150 and is also subject to administrative citations in accordance with chapter 6.30. 
(b)  Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this chapter, or of any law or regulation referenced herein, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly. 
(c)  This chapter does not exclusively regulate filming activity in the city, and the remedies provided in this chapter are in addition to other applicable remedies and penalties authorized by the Barstow Municipal Code, or by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Code 1969, § 5.92.120; Ord. No. 861-2010, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Title 6 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city council to adopt ordinances and rules to protect and regulate health and sanitary matters in the city, Health and Safety Code § 101450. 

CHAPTER 6.20. - SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLES COLLECTION SERVICES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to acquire garbage disposal sites, Government Code § 38790; city collecting garbage fees may also collect delinquent fees or charges, Government Code § 38790.1; power of city to contract for collection and disposal of garbage and refuse, Public Resources Code § 49300. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6.20.010. - Title. 
    This chapter is known and may be cited as the "Solid Waste and Recyclables Collection Services Ordinance of the City of Barstow." 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.010; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.020. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the intent of the city council in adopting this chapter to set forth terms and conditions pursuant to which authorization may be granted by the city council to provide solid waste and recyclables collection services, and to promote the public health, welfare and safety of the community by establishing reasonable regulations relating to the storage, accumulation, collection and disposal of garbage, trash, rubbish, debris and other discarded matter, goods and material. No right of privacy is created through the enactment of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.020; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002; Ord. No. 816, § 1, 2006) 
Sec. 6.20.030. - Defined terms and phrases. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, the words, terms and phrases as defined in this section shall be construed as hereinafter set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
    AB 939 administrative fee means any fee adopted by the city council pursuant to Public Resources Code § 41901. 
    Authorized collector means a solid waste enterprise operating under the provisions of a franchise agreement approved by the city council. 
    Bin means a detachable container used in connection with commercial/industrial premises with a two to four cubic yard capacity, equipped with a lid, and designed for mechanical pick-up by collection vehicles. 
    Box, or roll-off or drop box means a wheeled or sledded container or compactor, generally seven to 40 cubic yards in size, suitable for the storage and collection of commercial or industrial solid waste or recyclables. 
    Bulky goods means oversized or overweight household articles placed curbside by a residential householder, which oversized or overweight household articles have weights, volumes or dimensions which cannot be accommodated by solid waste, recyclables, or green waste containers for residential premises, such as stoves, refrigerators, water heaters, washing machines, furniture, sofas, mattresses, box springs, large rugs and landscaping debris. 
    Collection means the operation of gathering together within the city, and transporting to the point of disposal or processing, any solid waste (including green waste) and recyclables. 
    Collection agreement means an agreement between the city and a solid waste enterprise, entered into pursuant to article II of this chapter, for the provision of solid waste and recyclables collection services in the city. 
    Collector means any solid waste enterprise: 
(1)  Who has been awarded a collection agreement to provide residential or commercial/industrial solid waste or recyclables collection services in the city; or 
(2)  Who has been issued a permit or nonexclusive contract to provide solid waste and recyclables collection services to state facilities. 
    Commercial/industrial business owner means any person, firm, corporation or other enterprise or organization holding or occupying, alone or with others, commercial/industrial premises, whether or not it is the holder of the title or the owner of record of the commercial/industrial premises. 
    Commercial/industrial premises means all occupied real property in the city, except property occupied by state or local governmental agencies which do not consent to their inclusion, and except residential premises as defined hereof, and shall include, without limitation, wholesale and retail establishments, restaurants and other food establishments, bars, stores, shops, offices, industrial establishments, manufacturing establishments, service stations, repair, research and development establishments, professional services, sports or recreational facilities, construction and demolition sites, a multiple unit residential complex that is not a residential premises, and any other commercial or industrial business facilities, structures, sites, or establishments in the city. 
    Construction site or demolition site means any real property in the city in, on or from which a building or structure is being fabricated, assembled, erected or demolished, and which produces construction or demolition solid waste which must be removed from the property, and requires the use of commercial solid waste containers. 
    Construction waste or demolition waste means any solid waste or debris generated as the result of construction or demolition, including, without limitation, discarded packaging or containers and waste construction materials, whether brought on site for fabrication or used in construction or resulting from demolition, excluding liquid waste and hazardous waste. 
    Container means any vessel, tank, receptacle, box or bin used for the purpose of holding solid waste or recyclables for collection. 
    Disposal means the complete operation of treating and disposing of solid waste after the collection thereof. 
    Franchise and administrative costs means the fee paid to the city by an authorized collector pursuant to the collection agreement, pursuant to section 6.20.060. 
    Green waste means that solid waste consisting of leaves, grass clippings, brush, branches and other forms of organic materials generated from landscapes or gardens, separated from other solid waste. The term "green waste" does not include stumps or branches exceeding four inches in diameter or four feet in length. 
    Hazardous waste. 
(1)  The term "hazardous waste" means a waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may do either of the following: 
a.  Cause or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness. 
b.  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
(2)  The term "hazardous waste" includes, without limitation, extremely hazardous waste, acutely hazardous waste, radioactive waste, and medical waste, and any other waste as may hereafter from time to time be designated as hazardous by the environmental protection agency (EPA) or other agency of the United States Government, or by the state legislature or any agency of the state empowered by law to classify or designate waste as hazardous, extremely hazardous or acutely hazardous. 
    Holiday means: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. The term "holiday" also means any other day recognized by resolution of the city council. 
    In the city or within the city means all of the territory within the corporate boundaries of the city as such boundaries exist on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or may thereafter exist by virtue of the annexation of territory to or detachment of territory from the boundaries of the city. 
    Landscaping debris means green waste that does not fit into a green waste container, and includes stumps or branches exceeding four inches in diameter or four feet in length. 
    Manure means the waste droppings from any animal. 
    Processing means the reduction, separation, recovery and conversion of solid waste. 
    Public agency means any governmental agency or department thereof, whether federal, state, or local. 
    Recyclables means those materials that are suitable for recycling, as determined by resolution of the city council, or as set forth in a collection agreement. 
    Recyclables container means a container which is provided to residential premises for use in collecting and moving recyclables to curbside for collection by the collector, or a container which is provided to commercial/industrial premises for use by the collector in collecting and moving recyclables. 
    Recycling means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. The term "recycling" does not include transformation as defined in Public Resources Code § 40201. 
    Residential householder means any persons holding or occupying residential premises in the city, whether or not the owner of the residential premises. 
    Residential owner means the owner of any residential premises within the city. 
    Residential premises means any residential dwelling unit within the city, except: 
(1)  Multiple unit residential complexes of three units or more; or 
(2)  Any multiple unit residential complex which, with the prior written approval of the city manager or designee, receives commercial bin service. 
    Resource recovery means any use of solid waste collected pursuant to this chapter, except for landfill disposal or transfer for landfill disposal. The term "resource recovery" includes, but is not limited to, transformation, composting, and multi-material recycling. 
    Solid waste means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, and semisolid wastes, including garbage, compostable materials, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other semisolid wastes. The term "solid waste" does not include hazardous waste or household hazardous waste, medical waste, radioactive waste, sewage, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, or restaurant grease and tallow. 
    Solid waste and recyclables collection services means the collection, storage, or transfer of solid waste (including green waste) and recyclables. 
    Solid waste container means any container permitted to be used for the purpose of holding solid waste for collection. 
    Solid waste enterprise means any individual, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated private organization, or private corporation regularly engaged in the business of providing solid waste and recyclables collection services. 
    Source separation means material which is separated and sorted by type of material as close to the point of origin as practical. 
    Special items means any bulky or heavy objects that require bin service and are not bulky goods, including, but not limited to, dirt, sod, brick, manure, waste from any poultry yard or stable, and construction and demolition waste. 
    Standard commercial/industrial solid waste container means a state-of-the-art bin or solid waste container used in connection with commercial/industrial premises with a one to six cubic yard capacity, designed for mechanical pick-up by collection vehicles and equipped with a lid, or where appropriate for the commercial/industrial premises being served, a 12 to 40 cubic yard roll-off box with lid or enclosed compactor, and shall include other types of containers suitable for the storage and collection of commercial/industrial solid waste if approved in writing by the city manager. 
    Standard residential green waste container means a standardized roll-away container with a locking lid, made of metal, hard rubber or plastic and having an approximate capacity of 95 gallons, and of a design, color and durability as approved by the city manager. 
    Standard residential recycling container means a standardized roll-away container with a locking lid, made of metal, hard rubber or plastic and having an approximate capacity of 95 gallons, and of a design, color and durability as approved by the city manager. 
    Standard residential solid waste container means a standardized roll-away container with a locking lid, made of metal, hard rubber or plastic and having an approximate capacity of either 65 or 95 gallons, and of a design, color and durability as approved by the city manager. 
    Treated wood waste means wood that has been treated with a chemical preservative registered pursuant to the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act for the purpose of protecting the wood against attacks from insects, microorganisms, fungi, and other environmental conditions that can lead to decay of the wood. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to preclude the city and any enterprise from incorporating into any agreement for exclusive services definitions relating to their respective contractual rights and obligations which may differ from or augment those set forth herein. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.030; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002; Ord. No. 816, §§ 2-5, 2006) 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 6.20.040. - Authorization by city council; contract requirement. 
(a)  The city council may authorize, by contract, one or more solid waste enterprises to provide solid waste and recyclables collection services for residential and commercial/industrial users or customers. In the sole discretion of the city council, the solid waste and recyclables collection services may be authorized on an exclusive or nonexclusive basis, and with or without competitive bidding, and may relate to any class or type of solid waste within all or any part of the territory of the city. 
(b)  No person shall collect or dispose of solid waste or recyclables in the city unless that person has entered into a collection agreement with the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, and irrespective of any permit issued by any other governmental agency authorizing collection of solid waste or recyclables. Any such collection agreement shall be in addition to any business license or permit otherwise required by this Code. Collectors operating in the city on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter under a permit or a nonexclusive collection agreement may continue to operate only until the rights thereunder are terminated or revoked, or until such rights expire pursuant to the provisions Public Resources Code § 49520. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.040; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.050. - Contents. 
    The terms and provisions of any collection agreement for solid waste and recyclables collection services may relate to or include, without limitation, the following subject matters: 
(1)  The nature, scope and duration of the agreement. 
(2)  The collection schedule, including the frequency, days and hours of collection. 
(3)  The applicable collector fee, including the amount, method of computation, and time for payment. 
(4)  The applicable rates, fees and charges for regular, special and emergency collection services, including the method of setting and adjusting same, and the responsibility for billing and collecting same. 
(5)  Collection vehicles, including the permissible size and color, and any required identification, safety equipment, maintenance, inspection, and operational requirements. 
(6)  The receipt, processing and reporting of customer inquiries and complaints. 
(7)  The collection of solid waste from publicly owned property and facilities. 
(8)  Performance standards for the collector's personnel and equipment. 
(9)  Solid waste, recyclables, and green waste containers, including size, repair or replacement, handling, placement, obligations of the collector to provide, and permissible charges therefor. 
(10)  Standards and procedures for periodic performance reviews by the city. 
(11)  Noise attenuation policies and procedures. 
(12)  The maintenance by the collector of an office for the conduct of business. 
(13)  Policies and procedures relating to the noncollection of solid waste, the collection of recyclables, the composting of green waste and resource recovery. 
(14)  Requirements relating to comprehensive liability insurance and workers' compensation insurance. 
(15)  Requirements relating to the dissemination of information to the public concerning regular and special solid waste and recyclables collection services, including green waste services. 
(16)  Actions or omissions constituting breaches or defaults, and the imposition of applicable penalties, liquidated damages, and other remedies, including suspension, revocation or termination. 
(17)  Requirements relating to performance bonds and to indemnification. 
(18)  Requirements relating to affirmative action programs. 
(19)  Requirements relating to recordkeeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits, and inspection of records. 
(20)  Requirements relating to the assignment, transfer and renewal of the agreement. 
(21)  Requirements relating to compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws, rules or regulations pertaining to solid waste and recyclables collection services, and to the implementation of state-mandated programs, including, without limitation, the city's source reduction and recycling element and the city's household hazardous waste element. 
(22)  Such additional requirements, conditions, policies and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the collection agreement and which will, in the judgment and discretion of the city council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.050; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.060. - Collector fee. 
    Each collector shall pay a collector fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council or established in the applicable collection agreement. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.060; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.070. - AB 939 administrative fee. 
    The city shall be responsible for collecting any AB 939 administrative fee adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.070; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.080. - Resolution of conflicts. 
    In the event of any conflict between the provisions of a collection agreement which is authorized and approved by the city council and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the collection agreement shall control. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.080; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.090. - Permits and licenses. 
    Every collector shall obtain and maintain at all times during the collector's operations a business license issued by the city, and all applicable permits and licenses required by any public agency having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.090; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.100. - Transfer of collection agreement. 
    No permit or collection agreement which is authorized by, subject to, or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred, delegated, sublet, subcontracted to or assigned to another person without the prior approval of the city council. This restriction includes the transfer of ownership or the majority of the ownership or control in the collector, and the transfer of a majority of stock in collector to another person. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.100; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.110. - Revocation of permit or collection agreement. 
    After a hearing, as provided in this chapter, the city manager may revoke or suspend any collection permit or collection agreement for violation of a provision of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance, or regulation of any public agency. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.110; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.120. - Interim suspension. 
    The city manager, without a hearing, may suspend a collection agreement or a permit for not more than 60 days, if the city manager finds that continued operation by the collector will constitute a threat to the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.120; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.130. - Notice of hearing; revocation. 
    The city manager shall mail notice of a hearing to revoke a collection permit or collection agreement to the collector not less than 15 days prior to such hearing. In the event of the revocation of a collection agreement or a permit, the city manager shall notify the collector in writing of the reasons therefor. Notification may be made in person or by mail. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.130; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.140. - Appeals. 
    Within 15 calendar days after notice by the city manager of revocation of a collection permit or collection agreement has been sent to the collector, the collector may file with the city clerk an appeal of such decision to the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.140; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.150. - Council action. 
    The city council may either affirm the action of the city manager, send the matter back to the city manager for further consideration, or set the matter for hearing by the city council. If the city council sets the matter for hearing, it shall base its action upon the standards delineated in section 6.20.110. Notice of such hearing shall be sent to the collector not less than 15 days prior to the hearing. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.150; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
ARTICLE III. - RATES 

Sec. 6.20.160. - Rates, fees and charges. 
    The city council may, by resolution or an approved collection agreement, place a limit on the rates, fees, and charges (collectively, fees) collectors may charge to residential owners and to commercial/industrial business owners for the collection of solid waste and recyclables. No collector shall charge any fee which is greater than the maximum permitted by the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.160; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.170. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6.20.180. - Collection fees. 
(a)  Every owner of property where any refuse accumulates shall pay, or cause to be paid, a fee in such amounts and in such manner as shall be established or required by resolution of the city council for the service of having such refuse collected and removed from the place or premises. In the case of residential and commercial rental units, the property owner of record shall be responsible for the fees established by resolution. 
(b)  Nothing in this section is intended to prevent an arrangement under which payments of garbage collection fees are made by a tenant, or any agent, in behalf of the owner. However, any such arrangement will not affect the property owner's obligation to the city. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specified by the city manager or designated representative, all fees for residential and commercial service shall be billed to the property owner of record. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.180; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002; Ord. No. 816, § 7, 2006) 
Sec. 6.20.190. - Fees to be based on types of occupancies; types of occupancies defined. 
    The fees to be paid for the service of having refuse and swill collected and removed by occupants or other persons having charge or control of any place or premises in the city shall be based on the type of occupancy and use of the place or premises in the city. The different occupancies and uses are defined as follows: 
(1)  Commercial use. Premises upon which is located any type of business requiring a business license under the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Residential use. Premises upon which is located only one or more dwelling units. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.190; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002; Ord. No. 816, § 8, 2006) 
Sec. 6.20.200. - Garbage collection fee a debt. 
(a)  The garbage collection fee, including any applicable penalties and collection costs, shall be a civil debt owing the city from the owner of a residential or commercial unit subject to the fee. 
(b)  If an invoice for the garbage collection fee charged by a collector pursuant to this chapter is unpaid 90 days after mailing to the property owner, a penalty of ten percent shall be charged, and an additional 11/2 percent per month shall be charged until the charges, penalties, and all collection costs are paid in full. 
(c)  If court action is taken to enforce nonpayment of charges, the property owner shall pay all reasonable attorney's fees and costs incurred by the city. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.200; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002; Ord. No. 851-2009, § 1, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 6.20.210. - Collection procedure for delinquent accounts; creation of lien. 
(a)  Any fees authorized pursuant to this chapter which remain unpaid after the delinquent date as set forth in section 6.20.200 may be collected thereafter by the city as provided in this section. 
(b)  The city council shall cause a report of delinquent utility fees to be prepared periodically. The council shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the report and any objections or protests thereto. 
(c)  The city council shall cause notice of hearing to be mailed to the landowners listed on the report not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(d)  At the hearing, the city council shall hear any objections or protests of landowners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees. The city council may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed. 
(e)  The delinquent fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of land, and are a lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees, penalties and costs incurred by the city as authorized by this chapter. A certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the city clerk, or auditor appointed by the city council, for amounts of the respective parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll. The lien created attaches upon recordation, in the office of the county recorder, of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of city ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.210; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002; Ord. No. 851-2009, § 2, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 6.20.220. - Special permits in hardship cases. 
    Where practical difficulties make it impossible or extremely difficult to carry out the strict letter of this chapter with respect to any particular premises, the city manager may issue special written permits authorizing variations from the provision of this chapter subject to such terms and conditions as he may deem necessary to protect the public health and safety so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public health and safety secured and substantial justice done. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.220; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLES 

Sec. 6.20.230. - Generally. 
    No person may operate any vehicle for the collection of solid waste or recyclables other than a collector who has a valid business license and a collection agreement or permit and who has paid all required license, collection agreement, permit or other city charges. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.230; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.240. - Vehicle standards. 
    Any vehicle utilized for the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste or recyclables shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Each vehicle shall be constructed and used so that no solid waste, recyclables, oil, grease, or other substance will blow, fall or leak out of the vehicle. 
(2)  A broom and shovel shall be carried on each vehicle at all times. 
(3)  Each vehicle shall comply with all applicable statutes, laws, or ordinances of any public agency. 
(4)  Routine inspections by the state highway patrol shall be conducted annually and certificates for the inspection shall be filed annually with the city manager. 
(5)  All vehicles shall at all times be kept clean and sanitary, in good repair and well and uniformly painted to the satisfaction of the city manager. 
(6)  Each vehicle shall be equipped with watertight bodies fitted with closefitting metal covers. 
(7)  The collector's name or firm name and telephone number shall be printed or painted in legible letters four to six inches in height in plain sight on both sides of all of collector's vehicles used in the city. 
(8)  All equipment shall be maintained at all times in a manner to prevent unnecessary noise during its operation. 
(9)  As the collector replaces existing equipment, the type and make of the new equipment shall be subject to prior approval by the city manager which shall not be withheld without a justifiable reason. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.240; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.250. - Operation of equipment. 
    All persons operating equipment for the collection or transportation of solid waste or recyclables shall do so in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws and ordinances. Such vehicles shall not be operated in a manner which results in undue interference with normal traffic flows. No such vehicle shall be parked or left unattended on the public streets. No such vehicle shall be parked overnight on a public street or thoroughfare in the city. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.250; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.260. - Compliance with vehicle standards. 
    Any vehicle used in the collection or transportation of solid waste or recyclables in the city shall, at all times, be maintained in accordance with all the standards set forth in section 6.20.190. The use of a vehicle which fails to comply with each of the standards set forth in section 6.20.190 is prohibited. A collector shall immediately remove any vehicle from collection service which fails, at any time, to conform to any of the standards recited in section 6.20.190 and shall not use that vehicle until it is repaired. Should the city manager give notification at any time to a collector that any of the collector's vehicles are not in compliance with the standards of this chapter, the vehicle shall be immediately removed from service by the collector. The vehicle shall not again be utilized in the city until it has been inspected and approved by the city manager. The collector shall maintain its regular collection schedule regardless of the repair of any vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.260; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
ARTICLE V. - EXCLUSIONS 

Sec. 6.20.270. - Residential householder exclusion. 
    No provision of this chapter shall prevent residential householders from collecting and disposing of occasional loads of solid waste generated in or on their residential premises, or from composting green waste, or from selling or disposing of recyclables generated in or on their residential premises. However, no residential householder shall employ or engage any solid waste enterprise, other than the authorized collector, to haul or transport such materials to a transfer station or landfill. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.270; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.280. - Gardener's exclusion. 
    No provisions of this chapter shall prevent a gardener, tree trimmer or person engaged in a similar trade from collecting and disposing of grass cuttings, prunings, and similar material not containing other solid waste when incidental to providing such gardening, tree trimming, or similar services. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.280; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.290. - Commercial/industrial exclusions. 
(a)  Source separated recyclables. 
(1)  No provision of this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial business owner from selling to a buyer, for a monetary or other valuable consideration, any source separated recyclables, including, without limitation, any saleable scrap, discard, reject, byproduct, ferrous or nonferrous metal, wornout or defective part, junk, pallet, packaging material, paper or other similar item generated in, on or by a commercial/industrial premises or business, and no longer useful to such commercial/industrial business but having market value, whether such buyer is a recycler, junk dealer, or other enterprise engaged in the business of buying and marketing such materials in the stream of commerce; so long as such buyer is not engaged in the business of collecting solid waste for a fee or other charge or consideration, and that no such materials are transported for disposition to a landfill or transfer station (as defined in Public Resources Code § 40200). The term "source separated recyclables," within the meaning of this section, shall mean recyclables separated on the commercial/industrial premises from solid waste for the purpose of sale, not mixed with or containing more than incidental or minimal solid waste, and having a market value. However, those businesses which collect and market recyclable material within the city shall provide a quarterly report which contains the type and volume of material which was recycled. These quarterly reports will be provided to the city manager on April 10, July 10, October 10 and January 10. 
(2)  No provision of this chapter shall prevent a recycler, junk dealer or other enterprise engaged in the business of buying and marketing such materials in the stream of commerce and which is not engaged in the business of collecting solid waste or providing solid waste collection services for a fee or other charge, or consideration, from buying any materials referenced in this subsection for a monetary or other valuable consideration, and which buys such materials for marketing and not for disposition in a landfill or transfer station (as defined in Public Resources Code § 40200); nor shall any provision of this chapter prevent such recycler, junk dealer or enterprise which buys such materials from removing and transporting such materials to a destination for marketing in the stream of commerce. No such buyer shall buy or transport such materials without prior authorization from the city, as required by this Code, whether in the form of a business license, a business permit, or a nonexclusive collection agreement. 
(b)  In-house recycling programs. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial business which has its own recycling or resource recovery program for recyclables generated by such business and not utilizing a solid waste enterprise which provides collection services for a fee, service charge, or other consideration, from continuing such recycling or resource recovery program, and the recyclables included in such program are excepted from any collection agreement entered into by the city. Again, in order to comply with AB 939, quarterly reports are required to be submitted to the city manager identifying the type and volume of materials recycled. Such reports are due on April 10, July 10, October 10 and January 10. 
(c)  Renovation, rebuilding, repairs. No provision of this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial business owner from arranging for any worn, spent, or defective equipment, or part thereof, used in such commercial/industrial business and requiring renovation, rebuilding, recharging, regeneration or repair, to be picked up, renovated, rebuilt, recharged, regenerated or otherwise restored and repaired and returned to such commercial/industrial business owner; nor shall any provision of this chapter prevent any person engaged in the business of renovating, rebuilding, recharging, regenerating, or otherwise restoring or repairing such equipment or part thereof, from transporting the same from or returning it to the commercial/industrial business, or from removing, transporting or disposing of any such equipment, or part thereof, replaced in connection with an equipment repair or service contract. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.290; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.300. - Contractors' exclusions. 
    No provision of this chapter shall prevent a licensed contractor having a contract for the demolition or reconstruction of a building, structure, pavement, or concrete installation from marketing any saleable items salvaged from such demolition or reconstruction, or from causing such salvageable items or demolition waste to be removed and transported from the premises on which such waste is generated, pursuant to the provisions of the demolition or construction contract. If a subcontractor is to be engaged to remove such demolition waste, the authorized collector shall have the right of first refusal to provide such services. If the authorized collector cannot guarantee that such services will be provided within a period of 24 hours, for a per bin charge that does not exceed the maximum permitted by the collection agreement, the city manager may authorize the licensed contractor or the owner of the premises to utilize the services of another duly authorized solid waste enterprise. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.300; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.310. - Document destruction service. 
    No provision of this chapter shall prevent any person engaged in the business of destroying or disposing of secret, confidential, or sensitive documents from transporting or disposing of such documents by shredding, lumping, incinerating, or other means, as a part of such document destruction or disposal service. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.310; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.320. - Self-haul exclusion. 
    No residential householder or commercial/industrial business owner shall employ or engage any solid waste enterprise, other than an authorized collector, to haul or transport such materials to a transfer station or landfill. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.320; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.330. - General requirements. 
(a)  In all cases where the right to an exclusion pursuant to sections 6.22.220 through 6.20.270 of this chapter is exercised, disposal shall be made at a disposal or processing facility, which meets all applicable regulatory requirements. Any such disposal by a person exempted under this section shall not relieve such person from any obligation or liability imposed by this chapter or any other city ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation for the payment of the minimum solid waste and recyclables collection rates imposed by the authorized collector pursuant to this chapter, or of any other applicable rates or fees. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, an owner of vacant property which does not generate any solid waste may request an exemption from the mandatory service requirement of section 6.20.340 for the period of time the property is vacant, pursuant to the procedure set forth in subsection (1)-(3) below. For the purposes of this subsection, "vacant property" means any property that is (a) undeveloped, or (b) unoccupied by any person for a period of at least 60 days preceding the request for exemption. Unauthorized occupancy is not sufficient to relieve the property owner from the mandatory service requirement. 
(1)  An owner seeking an exemption for vacant property shall submit a written request for the exemption to the city manager or his or her designee. The owner of the property shall have the burden of demonstrating with sufficient evidence that the property is a "vacant property." Examples of proof include, but are not limited to, a copy of the utility or water bill showing that the property has used less than 200 kw hours of electricity or less than 2 CCF of water during the period for which an exemption is sought, or other proof of vacancy as the city manager may require. 
(2)  If the exemption is granted, the city manager or designee shall provide written notice to both the owner and the city's authorized collector, which shall state that the exemption shall only be effective for the period of time for which the vacancy was established. 
(3)  An exemption may be granted for a maximum period of one year upon proof that the property has been a vacant property for a period of 12 months preceding the date of request. If an exemption is granted for 12 months, the trash and recycle containers will be removed from the property. 
(4)  Thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the 12-month exemption, a notice will be sent to the property owner. Collection service will resume unless the owner requests a new exemption for a vacant property following the procedures set forth in subsection (b)(1)-(3) above; however, a property owner whose property has already been established as vacant for the preceding 12-month period may request and receive a new 12-month exemption for the following 12-month period. 
(5)  Nothing in this subsection shall relieve a person from the payment of the solid waste and recyclables collection rates imposed for use of the services provided by the authorized collector if and when the property is no longer vacant. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.330; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002; Ord. No. 943-2015 , § 1, 12-21-2015) 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 6.20.340. - Mandatory service. 
(a)  All solid waste and recyclables collected from residential or commercial/industrial premises for a fee, service charge or other consideration, shall be collected by an authorized collector, subject to the exclusions set forth in article V of this chapter. Recycling is mandatory for all residential and commercial/industrial property. 
(b)  No person, firm, corporation or solid waste enterprise, other than an authorized collector, shall negotiate or contract for, undertake to receive, collect or transport solid waste or recyclables from within the city for a fee, service charge or other consideration therefor, except as specifically provided herein. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each residential householder and commercial/industrial business owner shall utilize the services of the authorized collector for the collection of solid waste and recyclables from the residential or commercial/industrial premises held or occupied by such householder or owner and shall pay for such services the fees set by the collector and authorized by the city council. No residential householder or commercial/industrial business owner shall enter into an agreement for solid waste and recyclables collection services with any person, firm, or corporation other than the authorized collector, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, any solid waste, or recyclable materials or abandoned vehicle parts, or allow any collection of same to remain, in or upon any public right-of-way or upon any premises whatsoever except an approved disposal area. It is unlawful to dispose of solid waste in a container owned or rented by a person other than the generator of such solid waste, without permission from the owner or renter of the container to deposit solid waste in the container. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.340; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.350. - Litter. 
(a)  Any person who deposits or causes to be deposited any solid waste or recyclables on any public property, including the public right-of-way, or on private property within public view, except in a container provided therefore as herein specified, shall immediately clean up, contain, collect and remove same. 
(b)  This includes any indiscriminate placed advertising fliers, door-knob hangers, and trade type newspapers which create litter within the city. 
(c)  Destroying, scattering or collecting recyclables without the consent of the owner is unlawful. It is unlawful for any person to burn, break, destroy, scatter, collect or take any recyclable materials without the consent of the owner of such materials. Consent to collection of such materials may be either oral or written, or may be manifested by a practice or arrangement between the owner and donees, whereby recyclable materials are placed in a particular place, area or distinctive container, for regular collection by the donee. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.350; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
State Law reference- Unlawful dumping of waste matter, Penal Code § 374.3. 
Sec. 6.20.360. - Transfer of loads on public streets. 
    No person shall transfer solid waste or recyclables from one collection vehicle to another on any public street or road unless such transfer is essential to the method of operation and is approved by the city manager, or is necessary owing to mechanical failure or accidental damage to a vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.360; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.370. - Unauthorized removal from containers. 
    No person other than the authorized collector shall remove or tamper with, or remove any solid waste or recyclables from a container, other than the owner or occupant of the property served by such container, or an authorized employee of the city. This section shall not limit the rights or authority of any peace officer to inspect the contents of any trash container or to seize evidence of crimes from any trash container that has been placed for collection as required by this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.370; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002; Ord. No. 816, § 9, 2006) 
Sec. 6.20.380. - Hours of collection. 
(a)  In residential areas and commercial/industrial areas that are contiguous to residential premises, no collection or delivery/removal of containers shall be made between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m., Monday through Saturday, or at any time on Sunday. 
(b)  In commercial/industrial areas that are not contiguous to residential premises, no collection or delivery/removal of containers shall be made between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, or at any time on Sunday. 
(c)  The city manager may waive the requirements of this section when necessitated by conditions beyond the control of the collector. The city manager may require a collector to change hours of operation in residential or commercial/industrial areas if disruption occurs. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.380; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.390. - Resource recovery. 
    Every collector shall, at all times, comply with city policies and programs with regard to solid waste recovery, reduction of solid waste, and recycling. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.390; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.400. - Ownership. 
    At such time as the solid waste or recyclables are placed for collection at the usual place of collection, the solid waste and recyclables become the property of the city's authorized collector. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.400; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.410. - No burning, burial, or dumping of solid waste or recyclables. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful at any time for any person, including collectors, to burn any solid waste or recyclables within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful at any time for any person, including collectors, to bury or dump any solid waste or recyclables within the city. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.410; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.420. - Trespass. 
    No person authorized to collect or transport solid waste or recyclables shall enter on private property beyond the extent necessary to collect the solid waste or recyclables properly placed for collection, or beyond the extent necessary to provide any agreed upon special collection service. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.420; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.430. - Required monthly reports. 
    Each collector shall provide the city with monthly tonnage reports, which include the following: 
(1)  Total amount of solid waste, recyclables, and green waste removed from the city for the respective reporting month. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of each solid waste disposal and/or recycling facility used by the collector during the reporting month. 
(3)  The complaint log described in this section. 
(4)  Each report shall be signed by an officer of the collector. If the collector has more than one collection route, it shall submit a separate report for each collection route. Each report shall be received by the city by 5:00 p.m. on the 20th day of each month following each reporting month. 
(5)  Each collector shall maintain, and submit monthly, copies of waste disposal facility weight tickets/invoices which indicate the net amount of all waste disposed, transferred and/or recycled during each month that collection services are provided; an updated revised collection service identification list; report for the reporting month. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.430; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.440. - Annual report. 
    Every collector shall furnish an annual report to the city detailing the quantity and nature of all solid waste or recyclables removed from the city. Reports shall be delivered to the city on or before January 31 of each year, for the immediately preceding calendar year. This report shall also include permitted waste disposal facilities where the collector has disposed and/or transferred all solid waste removed from the city. This report is to also include a compilation of monthly tonnage reports and/or copies of tipping receipts. The report shall include a customer service identification list which identifies the name and address of each customer receiving collection service from the collector. The timely filing of a complete annual report is a condition of any permit or collection agreement awarded by the city. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.440; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.450. - Workers' compensation insurance. 
    Each collector shall at all times provide, at its own expense, workers' compensation insurance coverage for all employees. Each collector shall file and maintain certificates with the manager showing the insurance to be in full force and effect at all times the collector shall have a permit issued by the city. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.450; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.460. - Collector's liability insurance. 
    Each collector shall furnish the city a policy or certificate of comprehensive general and automobile liability insurance insuring the collector against bodily injury, property damage and automobile liability in amounts approved by the city council. The insurance shall provide that the coverage is primary and that any insurance maintained by the city shall be excess insurance, shall be procured from an insurer authorized to do business in the state, shall name the city and its officers, employees and agents as additional insured and shall not be canceled or modified without first giving to city 30 days' prior written notice. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.460; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.470. - City to be free from liability. 
    Any collector or person who collects, transports, or disposes of solid waste, recyclables, or green waste within the city shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city and its officers, employees, and agents against any and all claims, demands, losses, costs, expenses, obligations, liabilities, damages, recoveries, and deficiencies, including interest, penalties and reasonable attorneys fees, that the city shall incur or suffer, which arise, result from or relate to the collection, transportation, or disposal of solid waste, recyclables or green waste by that person. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.470; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.480. - Office for inquiries and complaints. 
(a)  Any collector with a collection agreement shall maintain an office at some fixed location and shall maintain a telephone at the office, listed in the current telephone directory in the firm name by which it conducts business in the city, and shall at all times during the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of each weekday have an employee or agent at that office to answer inquiries and receive complaints. The telephone number shall be a toll-free number from all portions of the city. 
(b)  The collector shall maintain at the office a written log of all complaints/inquiries received. Such log shall contain the date of inquiry/complaint, the callers name, address and telephone number, the nature of the complaint/inquiry, the action taken or the reason for nonaction, and the date such action was taken. All inquiries and complaints shall be promptly answered or responded to and/or dealt with to the satisfaction of the city. Such log of complaints and other records pertaining to solid waste and recyclables collection and disposal shall be open to the inspection of the city at all reasonable times and shall be maintained for a period of one year. Compliance with the requirements of this section are conditions to any permit or collection agreement which is awarded by the city. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.480; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.490. - Building contractors to leave area clean. 
    All owners, contractors and builders of structures shall, upon the completion of any such structure, gather up and haul away, at their sole cost and expense, all solid waste of every nature, description or kind, which has resulted from the building of such structure, including all lumber scraps, shingles, plaster, brick, stone, concrete and other building material, and shall place the lot and all nearby premises utilized in such construction in a sightly condition, and it shall be unlawful not to do so. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.490; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.500. - Accumulation of solid waste declared nuisance. 
    The accumulation of solid waste by any person beyond the period of one week or in any manner other than as specified in this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance pursuant to Government Code § 38771. The city council, pursuant to Government Code § 38773, shall, by separate ordinance, provide for the summary abatement of such nuisances. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.500; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.510. - Unauthorized containers. 
    No cardboard box or paper bag may be used as a container for solid waste (including green waste) or recyclables. Except as expressly authorized by this chapter, no person other than an authorized collector may place a container for the collection of solid waste (including green waste) or recyclables within the city. Any container placed in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and is subject to abatement pursuant to other provisions of the city Code. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.510; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
ARTICLE VII. - RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE, RECYCLING, AND GREEN WASTE COLLECTION 

Sec. 6.20.520. - Residential collection-Disposal. 
    All solid waste collected by a collector shall be disposed of by the collector in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations and the controlling permit or collection agreement. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.520; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.530. - Same-Frequency. 
    Unless otherwise approved by the city council, collection of solid waste and recyclables shall take place no less than once each calendar week, on the same day of the week. The authorized collector shall collect all solid waste and recyclables placed for collection in compliance with this chapter from each residential premises in accordance with a schedule which has been approved by the city manager. The schedule shall identify the routes and days of pick up for each collection district established within the city. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.530; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.540. - Same-Solid waste containers. 
    Subject to the prior approval of the city manager, the collector shall provide one standard residential solid waste container to each residential householder. No cardboard box, paper bag, or other similarly fragile container may be used as a container for solid waste. Except as expressly provided otherwise herein, and due to the automated collection in the city, only containers provided by the collector may be used for residential solid waste. Containers must have lids that are to be closed at all times, except when adding material. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.540; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.550. - Same-Recyclables containers. 
    Subject to the prior approval of the city manager, the collector shall provide one standard residential recycling container to each residential householder. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the collector shall provide additional recycling containers sufficient to accommodate the amount of recyclables generated by the residential premises. Except as expressly provided otherwise herein, only containers provided by the collector may be used for residential recyclables. Containers must be provided with a lid which is to remain closed at all times, except when adding material. Customers which refuse a recycling container from the collector will not be issued an extra trash container. An increased fee may be set by the city council through a resolution to accommodate those unwilling to recycle as mandated. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.550; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.560. - Same-Green waste containers. 
    Subject to the prior approval of the city manager, the collector shall provide one standard residential green waste container to each residential householder. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the collector shall provide additional standard residential green waste containers sufficient to accommodate the amount of green waste generated by the residential premises. Except as expressly provided otherwise herein, upon the commencement of automated collection in the city, only containers provided by the collector may be used for residential green waste. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.560; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.570. - Same-Placement and removal of containers. 
    Every residential householder shall place each approved container for collection at the curb in front of the premises, or at the curb at the side of the premises where the premises are adjacent to more than one street. No person shall place any such container for collection earlier than sunset of the day preceding the day designated for collection, and all containers and receptacles shall be removed from the place of collection prior to 10:00 p.m. of the day the containers have been emptied. Such containers shall be removed to a storage location which is not visible from any public right-of-way, excluding alleys. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.570; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.580. - Same-Care of containers. 
    Upon collection, all solid waste containers shall be replaced, by the collector, upright, where found, with the lids replaced, and all solid waste, recyclables, and green waste containers shall be replaced in an upright position, at the location where found by the collector. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.580; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.590. - Same-Special collection services. 
(a)  The authorized collector shall provide, upon request from a residential householder, special collection of solid waste, collection of bulky goods (including, but not limited to, white goods and bundled landscaping debris), and collection of special items at such rates as may be established by the collector and authorized by the city and at such times as may be agreed upon by the collector and the person requesting the service. If no agreement is reached, such special collections shall be provided as determined by the city manager. Such special collection may include carry-out service, or any other service beyond that required by this chapter or the applicable collection agreement. 
(b)  When a container is rejected by the collector, it will be affixed with a sticker that indicates the reason the container offered is being rejected for pickup. The label will identify measures the person offering the container for pickup must follow in order to have the container serviced by the collector. Subsequent violators of contamination of the recycling container, illegal materials in the trash container may be charged an extra handling fee as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.590; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
ARTICLE VIII. - COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL COLLECTION 

Sec. 6.20.600. - Commercial/industrial-Disposal and status of solid waste. 
    The authorized collector shall collect and dispose of all solid waste generated and presented for collection at each commercial/industrial premises in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Any such collection and disposal shall be in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations and any controlling permit or collection agreement between the collector and the city. All solid waste collected by a collector shall be the exclusive property of the collector. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.600; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.610. - Same-Frequency of collection. 
    The authorized collector shall collect solid waste from commercial/industrial premises not less than once per week. In no event shall such collection schedule permit the accumulation of solid waste in quantities detrimental to public health or safety. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.610; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.620. - Same-Containers. 
(a)  Every commercial/industrial business served by an authorized collector shall use the standard commercial/industrial solid waste, recyclables, or green waste containers provided by the authorized collector. Where a commercial/industrial business owner is served by an excepted collector, such excepted collector and business owner shall determine by private agreement who is to provide the container. 
(b)  Every collector which provides any container or other equipment used for the storage of commercial/industrial solid waste shall: 
(1)  Place and maintain on the outside of such container, bin or other equipment, in legible letters and numerals not less than one inch in height, the collector's business name and telephone number, in a color contrasting with the background color of the container; and 
(2)  Provide containers on casters or with hasps and locks upon request by the commercial/industrial business owner. All containers shall have lids which are to be kept closed at all times. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.620; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.630. - Same-Maintenance and placement of containers. 
    Solid waste, recyclables and green waste containers provided by the collector shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the collector. Containers which are not provided by the collector shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the commercial/industrial business owner. Every commercial/industrial business owner shall provide a solid waste container location on the commercial/industrial premises and shall keep the area in good repair, clean and free of solid waste outside of the container. Every collector shall remove any solid waste or litter that is spilled or deposited on the ground as a result of the collector's emptying of the container or other activities of the collector. This will include dumping the bin with the lids open and allowing the solid waste to fall onto the ground. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.630; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.640. - Same-Care of containers. 
    Upon collection of approved waste, recyclables, and green waste by the collector, all containers shall be replaced, upright, where found, with the lids closed. No person, other than the owner thereof, shall, in any manner, break, damage, roughly handle or destroy containers placed on the premises of a commercial/industrial business owner. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.640; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.650. - Same-Special circumstances. 
    If particular commercial/industrial business premises require collections at times, frequencies or in a manner such that the collector is unable to perform the collection in the normal course of business, or where unusual quantities of solid waste or special types of material are to be collected and disposed of, or where special methods of handling are required, or where the quantity of solid waste requires the use of multiple (more than three) containers, the collector and the commercial/industrial business owner may make arrangements for such collection on mutually agreeable terms. If the business owner and the collector do not agree as to the methods for the service provided for in this section, the city manager shall determine the method of service. If the collector is unable or unwilling to provide such service, the city manager may authorize the business owner to use another solid waste enterprise for such special service until the collector can provide such service in its normal course of business. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.650; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.660. - Separation of swill (grease and oil) from dry garbage by restaurants, etc. 
    Any restaurants and stores in which meats, fruits and vegetables are sold, cafes, hospitals, hotels and other public eating houses producing or having swill or grease/oil shall place all such swill in a suitable container apart from dry garbage so that such swill may be most conveniently collected by the agents or contractees of the city under such restrictions as the city council may, from time to time, impose upon any such restaurants and stores in which meats, fruits and vegetables are sold, cafes, hospitals, hotels and other public eating houses. At no time is it authorized or permitted for those businesses generating grease, fats and oils to discharge into the sewer system. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.660; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
Sec. 6.20.665. - Separation of treated wood waste. 
    All treated wood waste will be separated by the generator from other wood waste and managed for alternative disposal in accordance with all applicable regulations, laws and policies. Treated wood waste is generated by numerous entities including construction firms, homeowners, utilities, and farmers. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.665; Ord. No. 816, § 10, 2006) 
Sec. 6.20.670. - Violations; misdemeanors and infractions. 
    Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall make the person violating its provisions subject to administrative and/or civil citations, fines and penalties in accordance with section 1.01.150. 
(Code 1969, § 6.20.670; Ord. No. 782, § 3(part), 2002) 
CHAPTER 6.21. - REFUSE AND RECYCLING ENCLOSURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, Public Resources Code § 40050 et seq. 

Sec. 6.21.010. - Purpose. 
(a)  As required by the Integrated Waste Management Act (AB 939), each city and county must divert 50 percent of all solid waste by January 1, 2000, through source reduction, recycling, and composting activities. 
(b)  Diverting 50 percent of all solid waste requires the participation of the residential, commercial, industrial, and public sectors. 
(c)  As indicated under Public Resources Code §§ 42900 through 42911, the lack of adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials that are compatible with surrounding land uses is a significant impediment to diverting solid waste and constitutes an urgent need for state and local agencies to address access to solid waste for source reduction, recycling, and composting activities. This chapter has been developed to meet that need. 
(Code 1969, § 6.21.010; Ord. No. 691, § 1(part), 1993) 
Sec. 6.21.020. - General requirements. 
(a)  The city planning commission shall review the adequacy of recycling enclosures for all discretionary projects in accordance with the attached guidelines. This shall be completed through the design review process. 
(b)  In cases where planning commission review is not required, it shall be the responsibility of city staff to determine the adequacy of recycling enclosures in accordance with the attached guidelines. This shall be completed as needed through the design review process. 
(Code 1969, § 6.21.020; Ord. No. 691, § 1(part), 1993) 
Sec. 6.21.030. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to all new developments meeting the requirements described in section 6.21.020 and existing developments expanding floor area with a valuation in excess of $5,000.00. 
(Code 1969, § 6.21.030; Ord. No. 691, § 1(part), 1993) 
Sec. 6.21.040. - Modifications. 
    In certain cases, implementation of this chapter could pose undue hardships upon parcels of land which comply with local zoning ordinances; however, these parcels may not provide adequate space for the recycling enclosure. In those cases, the planning commission may reduce or modify the extent of the requirements in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  All requests shall be made in writing by the applicant or authorized agent directly to the city planning commission. 
(2)  All requests shall include basic facts and information regarding the need to make a modification. 
(3)  Such review shall be limited to slopes, adequate space, etc., and shall not take into consideration economic conditions. 
(4)  The planning commission shall make a determination based upon the finding that although the site for the intended use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the use and that all of the yards, setbacks, walls or fences, landscaping and other features required have been met, however adequate space, extreme slope, etc., will not allow for a recycling enclosure, or for an enclosure of the scope recommended by the guidelines. 
(Code 1969, § 6.21.040; Ord. No. 691, § 1(part), 1993) 
Sec. 6.21.050. - Existing development agreements. 
    In cases where a development agreement has been approved for a project, and the agreement does not include facilities for recycling enclosures, the agreement shall govern. 
(Code 1969, § 6.21.050; Ord. No. 691, § 1(part), 1993) 
Sec. 6.21.060. - Recyclable regulations. 
(a)  The regulation of recyclables pertaining to collection, transport and disposal shall be conducted by the city council for the purpose of collecting, transporting and disposing of refuse. All pertinent regulations contained under chapter 6.20 shall apply to recyclable materials as necessary. 
(b)  A recycling plan containing the following information shall be submitted to the solid waste coordinator for review and approval within 60 days of occupancy should an applicant choose to conduct his own recycling on site: 
(1)  Identification of targeted materials to be recycled. 
(2)  Collection frequency of refuse collection and recycling service. 
(3)  Provide method for tracking/quantifying recyclable materials. 
(4)  Method of program promotion and communication with tenants and/or employees. 
(Code 1969, § 6.21.060; Ord. No. 691, § 1(part), 1993) 
Sec. 6.21.070. - Enclosure design guidelines. 
    All enclosures for refuse and/or recyclables shall be in conformance with and subject to the refuse and recyclables enclosure guidelines. The guidelines may be revised as necessary by the city. Said guidelines are adopted by reference in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 6.21.070; Ord. No. 691, § 1(part), 1993) 
Sec. 6.21.080. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Compliance with this chapter shall be subject to review and approval by the city prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Any violation or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute sufficient grounds for refusal of a permit and/or license. 
(Code 1969, § 6.21.080; Ord. No. 691, § 1(part), 1993) 
CHAPTER 6.22. - UNDERGROUND STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Underground storage of hazardous substances, Health and Safety Code § 25280 et seq.; on and after July 1, 2013, only a city certified by the state water resources control board may implement a local oversight program for the abatement of unauthorized releases of hazardous substances from underground storage tanks, Health and Safety Code § 25297.01. 

Sec. 6.22.010. - Definitions. 
    The definitions set forth in Health and Safety Code § 25281 (Underground Storage of Hazardous Substances-Definitions), as amended, shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in Health and Safety Code § 25281, as amended, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in Health and Safety Code § 25281, as amended. 
(Code 1969, § 6.22.010; Ord. No. 528, § 1(part), 1983) 
Sec. 6.22.020. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit for operation. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no person may own or operate an underground storage tank unless a permit for its operation has been issued by the local agency to the owner. 
(2)  If the operator is not the owner of the tank, or if the permit is issued to a person other than the owner or operator of the tank, the permittee shall ensure that both the owner and the operator of the tank are provided with a copy of the permit. 
(3)  If the permit is issued to a person other than the operator of the tank, that person shall do all of the following: 
a.  Enter into a written agreement with the operator of the tank to monitor the tank system as set forth in the permit. 
b.  Provide the operator with a copy or summary of Health and Safety Code § 25299, in the form that the board specifies by regulation. 
c.  Notify the local agency of any change of operator. 
(b)  Each local agency shall prepare a form which provides for the acceptance of the obligations of a transferred permit by any person who is to assume the ownership of an underground storage tank from the previous owner and is to be transferred the permit to operate the tank. That person shall complete the form accepting the obligations of the permit and submit the completed form to the local agency within 30 days from the date that the ownership of the underground storage tanks is to be transferred. The local agency may review and modify, or terminate, the transfer of the permit to operate the underground storage tank, pursuant to the criteria specified in section 6.22.090(3) upon receiving the completed form. 
(c)  Any person assuming ownership of an underground storage tank used for the storage of hazardous substances for which a valid operating permit has been issued shall have 30 days from the date of assumption of ownership to apply for an operating permit pursuant to section 6.22.030, or, if accepting a transferred permit, shall submit to the local agency the completed form accepting the obligations of the transferred permit, as specified in subsection (b) of this section. During the period from the date of application until the permit is issued or refused, the person shall not be held to be in violation of this section. 
(d)  A permit issued pursuant to this section shall apply and require compliance with all applicable regulations adopted by the board pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 25299.3. 
(Code 1969, § 6.22.020; Ord. No. 528, § 1(part), 1983) 
Sec. 6.22.030. - Application procedure. 
(a)  An application for a permit to operate an underground storage tank, or for renewal of the permit, shall be made, by the owner or operator of the tank, on a standardized form provided by the local agency and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee, as specified in section 6.22.040. The department shall provide the board with a copy of the completed application. 
(b)  The application form shall include, but not be limited to, requests for the following information: 
(1)  A description of the age, size, type, location, uses, and construction of the underground storage tanks. 
(2)  A list of all the hazardous substances which are or will be stored in the underground storage tanks, specifying the hazardous substances for each underground storage tank. 
(3)  A description of the monitoring program for the underground storage tank or tank system. 
(4)  The name and address of the person, firm or corporation which owns the underground storage tank or tank system, and, if different, the name and address of the person who operates the underground storage tank or tank system. 
(5)  The address of the facility at which the underground storage tank or tank system is located. 
(6)  The name of the person making the application. 
(7)  The name and 24-hour phone number of the contact person in the event of an emergency involving the facility. 
(8)  If the owner or operator of the underground storage tank is a public agency, the application shall include the name of the supervisor of the division, section or office which owns or operates the tank. 
(9)  The state board of equalization registration number issued to the owner of the tank pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code § 50108.1. 
(c)  As a condition of any permit to operate an underground storage tank, the permittee shall notify the local agency, within the period determined by the local agency, of any changes in the usage of any underground storage tanks, including the storage of new hazardous substances, changes in monitoring procedures, and if there has been any unauthorized release occurrence, as defined in sections 6.22.110 and 6.22.120. 
(d)  If a permittee stores in an underground storage tank a hazardous substance which is not listed in the application, as required by subsection (b)(2) of this section, the permittee shall apply for a new or amended permit within 30 days after commencing the storage of that hazardous substance. 
(Code 1969, § 6.22.030; Ord. No. 528, § 1(part), 1983) 
Sec. 6.22.040. - Fees. 
(a)  A fee shall be paid to the local agency by each person who submits an application for a permit to operate an underground storage tank or to renew or amend a permit. The governing body of the county, or a city which assumes enforcement jurisdiction of the provisions of this chapter, shall establish the amount of the fees at a level sufficient to pay the necessary and reasonable costs incurred by the local agency in administering this chapter, including, but not limited to, permitting and inspection responsibilities. The governing body may provide for the waiver of fees when a public agency makes an application for a permit to operate or an application to renew a permit. 
(b)  This fee shall include a surcharge, the amount of which shall be determined by the state legislature annually to cover the costs of the board in carrying out its responsibilities under this chapter and the costs of the local agency in collecting the surcharges. The local agency may retain six percent of any surcharge collected for costs incurred in its collection. 
(c)  A local agency may waive the fee required by subsection (a) of this section for an underground storage tank which has a capacity of 5,000 gallons or less, which is located on a farm, and which contains motor vehicle or heating fuel used primarily for agricultural purposes, if the local agency finds that the fee will impose undue economic hardship upon the person applying for the permit. However, the local agency shall not waive the surcharge required under subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1969, § 6.22.040; Ord. No. 528, § 1(part), 1983) 
Sec. 6.22.050. - Inspection procedure. 
(a)  The local agency shall inspect every underground storage tank within its jurisdiction at least once every year. The purpose of the inspection is to determine whether the tank complies with the applicable requirements of Health and Safety Code § 25280 et seq., and the regulations adopted by the board pursuant to state law, including the design and construction standards of sections 6.22.080 and 6.22.090, whichever is applicable, whether the owner or operator has monitored and tested the tank as required by the permit, and whether the tank is in a safe operating condition. After an inspection, the department shall prepare a compliance report detailing the inspection and shall send a copy of this report to the permit holder. 
(b)  After an inspection conducted pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the local agency shall prepare a compliance report detailing the inspection and shall send a copy of this report to the permit holder and the owner or operator, if the owner or operator is not the permit holder. Any report prepared pursuant to this section shall be consolidated into any other inspection reports required pursuant to Health and Safety Code, chapter 8.11 (commencing with section 25404), the requirements listed in Health and Safety Code § 25404(c), and the regulations adopted to implement the requirements listed in Health and Safety Code § 25404(c). 
(c)  In addition to, or instead of, the inspections specified in subsection (a) of this section, the local agency may require the permit holder to employ, periodically, special inspectors to conduct the annual inspection. The local agency shall supply the permit holder with a list of at least three special inspectors that are qualified to conduct the inspection. The permit holder shall employ a special inspector from the list provided by the local agency. The special inspector's authority shall be the same as that of the local agency as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Within 60 days after receiving a compliance report or special inspection report prepared in accordance with subsection (b) or (c) of this section, respectively, the permit holder shall file with the local agency a plan to implement all recommendations contained in the compliance report or shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the local agency, why these recommendations should not be implemented. Any corrective action conducted pursuant to the recommendations in the report shall be taken pursuant to Health and Safety Code §§ 25296.10 and 25299.36. 
(Code 1969, § 6.22.050; Ord. No. 528, § 1(part), 1983) 
Sec. 6.22.060. - Authority. 
    In order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, any duly authorized representative of the department, the board, or the local agency, has the authority specified in Health and Safety Code § 25185, with respect to any place where underground storage tanks are located, and in Health and Safety Code § 25185.5, with respect to real property which is within 2,000 feet of any place where underground storage tanks are located. 
(Code 1969, § 6.22.060; Ord. No. 528, § 1(part), 1983) 
Sec. 6.22.070. - Trade secrets. 
(a)  The term "trade secrets," as used in this chapter, may include, but is not limited to, any formula, plan, pattern, process, tool, mechanism, compound, procedure, production data, or compilation of information which is not patented, which is known only to certain individuals within a commercial concern who are using it to fabricate, produce, or compound an article of trade or a service having commercial value, and which gives its user an opportunity to obtain a business advantage over competitors who do not know or use it. 
(b)  The board or a local agency may disclose trade secrets received by the board or the local agency pursuant to this chapter to authorized representatives or other governmental agencies only in connection with the board's or the local agency's responsibilities pursuant to this chapter. The board and the local agency shall establish procedures to ensure that these trade secrets are utilized only in connection with these responsibilities and are not otherwise disseminated without the consent of the person who provided the information to the board or the local agency. 
(c)  Any person providing information pursuant to section 6.22.030 shall, at the time of its submission, identify all information which the person believes is a trade secret. Any information or record not identified as a trade secret is available to the public, unless exempted from disclosure by other provisions of law. 
(d)  Where the local agency, by ordinance, provides an alternative to the listing of a substance which is a trade secret, the person storing that substance shall provide the identification of the material directly to the board pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1969, § 6.22.070; Ord. No. 528, § 1(part), 1983) 
Sec. 6.22.080. - Construction standards. 
    Every underground storage tank installed after January 1, 1984, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be designed and constructed to provide primary and secondary levels of containment of the hazardous substances stored in them in accordance with the following performance standards: 
a.  Primary containment shall be product-tight and compatible with the substance stored. 
b.  Secondary containment shall be constructed to prevent structural weakening as a result of contact with any released hazardous substances, and also shall be capable of storing, for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the recovery, of any released hazardous substance. 
c.  In the case of an installation with one primary container, the secondary containment shall be large enough to contain at least 100 percent of the volume of the primary tank. 
d.  In the case of multiple primary tanks, the secondary container shall be large enough to contain 150 percent of the volume of the largest primary tank placed in it, or ten percent of the aggregate internal volume of all primary tanks, whichever is greater. 
e.  If the facility is open to rainfall, then the secondary containment must be able to additionally accommodate the maximum volume of a 24-hour rainfall as determined by a 25-year storm history. 
f.  Single-walled containers do not fulfill the requirement of an underground storage tank providing both a primary and a secondary containment. However, an underground storage tank with a primary container constructed with a double complete shell shall be deemed to have met the requirements for primary and secondary containment set forth in this section if all of the following criteria are met: 
1.  The outer shell is constructed primarily of nonearthen materials, including, but not limited to, concrete, steel, and plastic, which provide structural support and a continuous leak detection system with alarm is located in the space between the shells. 
2.  The system is capable of detecting the entry of hazardous substances from the inner container into the space. 
3.  The system is capable of detecting water intrusion into the space from the outer shell. 
g.  The design and construction of underground storage tanks for motor vehicle fuels storage need not meet the requirements of subsections (1)a through (1)f of this section, inclusive, if the primary containment construction is of glass fiber, reinforced plastic, cathodically protected steel, or steel clad with glass-fiber reinforced plastic, any such alternative primary containment is installed in conjunction with a system that will intercept and direct a leak from any part of the tank to a monitoring well to detect any release of motor vehicle fuels stored in the tank and which is designed to provide early leak detection, response, and to protect groundwater from releases, and if the monitoring is in accordance with the alternative method identified in section 6.22.090(3). Pressurized piping systems connected to underground storage tanks used for the storage of motor vehicle fuels and monitored in accordance with section 6.22.090(3)d shall also be deemed to meet the requirements of this subsection; however, any pipe connected to an underground storage tank installed after July 1, 1987, shall be equipped with secondary containment that complies with subsections (1)a through (1)f of this section, inclusive. 
(2)  Be designed and constructed with a monitoring system capable of detecting the entry of the hazardous material stored in the primary containment into the secondary containment. If water could intrude into the secondary containment, a means of monitoring for water intrusion and for safely removing the water shall also be provided. 
(3)  When required by the department, a means of overfill protection for any primary tank, including an overfill prevention device or an attention-getting higher-level alarm, or both. Primary-tank filling operations of underground storage tanks containing motor vehicle fuels which are visually monitored and controlled by a facility operator satisfy the requirements of this subsection. 
(4)  Different substances that in combination may cause a fire or explosion, or the production of flammable, toxic or poisonous gas, or the deterioration of a primary or secondary container, shall be separated in both the primary and secondary containment so as to avoid potential intermixing. 
(5)  If water could enter into the secondary containment by precipitation or infiltration, the facility shall contain a means of monitoring for water intrusion and for removing the water by the owner or operator. This removal system shall also prevent uncontrolled removal of this water and provide for a means of analyzing the removed water for hazardous substance contamination and a means of disposing of the water, if so contaminated, at an authorized disposal facility. 
(6)  Underground pressurized piping that conveys a hazardous substance shall be equipped with an automatic line leak detector and shall be tightness tested annually. 
(7)  Before the underground storage tank is covered, enclosed, or placed in use, the standard installation testing for requirements for underground storage systems specified in section 2-7 of the Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, adopted by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 30), as amended and published in the respective edition of the Uniform Fire Code, shall be followed. 
(8)  Before the underground storage tank is placed in service, the underground tank system shall be tested in operating condition using a tank integrity test. 
(9)  If the underground storage tank is designed to maintain a water level in the secondary containment, the tank shall be equipped with a safe method of removing any excess water to a holding facility and the owner or operator shall inspect the holding facility monthly for the presence of excess water overflow. If excess water is present in the holding facility, the permit holder shall provide a means to analyze the water for hazardous substance contamination and a means to dispose of the water, if so contaminated, at an authorized disposal facility. 
(Code 1969, § 6.22.080; Ord. No. 528, § 1(part), 1983) 
State Law reference- Design and construction requirements for underground storage tanks installed on or after July 1, 2004, Health and Safety Code § 25290.1; design and construction requirements for underground storage tanks installed on or after July 1, 2003 and before July 1, 2004, Health and Safety Code § 25290.2. 
Sec. 6.22.090. - Tanks installed prior to January 1, 1984. 
    For every underground storage tank installed on or before January 1, 1984, and used for the storage of hazardous substances, the following actions shall be taken: 
(1)  On or before January 1, 1985, the owner or operator shall outfit the facility with a monitoring system capable of detecting unauthorized releases of any hazardous substances stored in the facility, and thereafter, the operator shall monitor each facility, based on materials stored and the type of monitoring installed. 
(2)  Provide a means of visual inspection of the tank, wherever practical, for the purpose of the monitoring required by subsection (a) of this section. Alternative methods of monitoring the tank on a monthly, or more frequent, basis may be required by the local agency, consistent with the regulations of the board. 
(3)  The alternative monitoring methods include, but are not limited to, the following methods: 
a.  Tank integrity testing for proving the integrity of an underground tank system at time intervals specified by the board. 
b.  A groundwater monitoring well which is down gradient and adjacent to the underground storage tank, vapor analysis within a well where appropriate, and analysis of soil borings at the time of initial installation of the well. The department, or any other public agency specified by the department, shall approve the location and number of wells, the depth of wells and the sampling frequency, pursuant to these regulations. 
c.  A continuous leak detection and alarm system that is located in monitoring wells adjacent to an underground tank system and which is approved by the local agency. 
d.  For monitoring tanks containing motor vehicle fuels, daily gauging and inventory reconciliation by the owner or operator, if all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  Inventory records are kept on file for one year and are reviewed quarterly. 
2.  The tank system is tested, using the tank integrity test at time intervals specified by the board and whenever there is a shortage greater than the amount which the board shall specify by regulation. 
3.  If a pressurized pump system is connected to the tank system, the system has a leak detection device to monitor for leaks in the piping. The leak detection device shall be installed in a manner designed to resist unauthorized tampering and to clearly show by visual inspection if tampering has occurred. The leak detection device shall be tested annually, at a minimum, and all devices found to be not performing in conformance with the manufacturer's leak detection specifications shall be promptly repaired or replaced. 
e.  For monitoring underground tank systems that are located on farms and that store motor vehicle or heating fuels used primarily for agricultural purposes, alternative monitoring methods include the following: 
1.  If the tank has a capacity of greater than 1,100 gallons but of 5,000 gallons or less, the tank shall be tested using the tank integrity test, at least once every three years, and the owner or operator shall utilize tank gauging on a monthly or more frequent basis, as required by the local agency, subject to the specifications provided in paragraph (7) of subdivision (c) of section 2641 of title 23 of the California Code of Regulations, as that section read on August 13, 1985. 
2.  If the tank has a capacity of more than 5,000 gallons, the tank shall be monitored pursuant to the methods for all other tanks specified in this subsection. 
(4)  The local agency, or any other public agency specified by the local agency, shall approve the location and number of wells, the depth of wells, and the sampling frequency, pursuant to these regulations. 
(Code 1969, § 6.22.090; Ord. No. 528, § 1(part), 1983) 
Sec. 6.22.100. - Monitoring records. 
(a)  The owner or operator of the underground storage facility shall monitor the facility using the method specified on the permit for the facility. Records of monitoring, testing, repairing, and closure shall be kept in sufficient detail to enable the local agency to determine whether the underground tank system is in compliance with the applicable provisions of state law, the regulations adopted by the board pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 25299.3, and the permit issued for the operation of the tank system. 
(b)  If the operator is not the owner, the owner shall provide a copy of the permit to the operator, enter into a written contract with the operator which requires the operator to monitor the tank as set forth in the permit, and provide the operator with a copy of Health and Safety Code § 25287, or a summary of this section, in the form which the board specifies by regulation. The owner shall notify the department of any change of operator. 
(Code 1969, § 6.22.100; Ord. No. 528, § 1(part), 1983) 
Sec. 6.22.110. - Unauthorized release from primary containment. 
    Any unauthorized release from the primary containment which the operator is able to clean up within eight hours after the release was detected or should reasonably have been detected, and which does not escape from the secondary containment, does not increase the hazard of fire or explosion and does not cause any deterioration of the secondary containment of the underground storage tank, shall be recorded on the operator's monitoring reports. 
(Code 1969, § 6.22.110; Ord. No. 528, § 1(part), 1983) 
Sec. 6.22.120. - Unauthorized release from secondary containment. 
(a)  Any unauthorized release which escapes from the secondary containment, or from the primary containment, if no secondary containment exists, increases the hazard of fire or explosion, or causes any deterioration of the secondary containment of the underground tank shall be reported by the owner or operator to the local agency within 24 hours after the release has been detected or should have been detected. A full written report shall be transmitted by the owner or operator of the underground storage tanks to the local agency within five working days of the occurrence of the release. The report shall include all of the following: 
(1)  A description of the nature and volume of the unauthorized release. 
(2)  The corrective or remedial actions undertaken. 
(3)  Any further corrective or remedial actions, including investigative actions, that will be needed to clean up the unauthorized release and abate the effects of the unauthorized release. 
(4)  A time schedule for implementing the actions specified in subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(5)  The source and cause of the unauthorized release. 
(6)  The underground storage tank system's record of compliance with this chapter, including data on equipment failures. 
(7)  Any other information the board deems necessary to implement or comply with this chapter Health and Safety Code, chapter 8.75 (commencing with section 25299.10), or the federal act. 
(b)  The department shall review the permit whenever there has been an unauthorized release or when it determines that the underground storage tank is unsafe. In determining whether to modify or terminate the permit, the local agency shall consider the age of the tank, the methods of containment, the methods of monitoring, the feasibility of any required repairs, the concentration of the hazardous substance stored in the tank, the severity of potential unauthorized releases, and the suitability of any other long-term preventive measures which would meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  The reporting requirements imposed by this section are in addition to any requirements which may be imposed by Water Code §§ 13271 and 13272. 
(Code 1969, § 6.22.120; Ord. No. 528, § 1(part), 1983) 
Sec. 6.22.130. - Tank repair. 
    If there has been any unauthorized release, as defined in section 6.22.120, from an underground storage tank containing motor vehicle fuel not under pressure, the permit holder may repair the tank once by an interior-coating process if the tank meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  An ultrasonic test, or comparable test, has been conducted to determine the thickness of the storage tank. If the result of the test indicates that a serious problem exists with regard to the tank, as determined by the person conducting the test, the department may require additional corrosion protection for the tank or may deny the authorization to repair. 
(2)  A hydrostatic test is an alternative to the ultrasonic test in subsection (a) of this section. If the result of the test indicates that a serious problem exists with regard to the integrity of the tank, as determined by the person conducting the test or the department, the department may require additional protection for the tank or may deny authorization for the repair. 
(3)  A vacuum test has been conducted with a result indexed at not more than 5.3 inches of mercury. This requirement shall not be applicable if technology is not available for testing the tank on site using accepted engineering practices. 
(4)  Following the repair, the standard installation testing for requirements for underground storage tanks specified in section 2-7.3 of the Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, adopted by the National Fire Protection Association on November 20, 1981 (NFPA 30-1981), and published in the 1982 edition of the National Fire Code shall be followed. 
(5)  The material used to repair the tank by an interior-coating process is compatible with the motor vehicle fuel that is stored, as approved by the board by regulation. 
(6)  The material used to repair the tank by an interior-coating process is applied in accordance with nationally recognized engineering practices, such as the American Petroleum Institute's recommended practice No. 1631 for the interior lining of existing underground storage tanks. 
(7)  The board may develop regulations, in consultation with the state fire marshal, for the repair of underground storage tanks, and the standards in this section shall remain in effect until the adoption of the regulations codified in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 6.22.130; Ord. No. 528, § 1(part), 1983) 
State Law reference- Ability of local agency to adopt and enforce regulations, requirements, or standards of performance regarding underground storage tanks that are more stringent than state laws not precluded, Health and Safety Code § 25299.2. 
Sec. 6.22.140. - Abandonment or closure. 
(a)  No person shall abandon an underground storage tank or close or temporarily cease operating an underground storage tank, except as provided in this section. 
(b)  An underground storage tank which is temporarily taken out of service, but which the owner or operator intends to return to use, shall continue to be subject to all the permit, inspection and monitoring requirements of this chapter and all applicable regulations adopted by the board pursuant to state law, unless the owner or operator complies with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section for the period of time the underground tank is not in use. 
(c)  No person shall close an underground storage tank unless the person undertakes all of the following actions: 
(1)  Demonstrates to the local agency that all residual amounts of hazardous substances which were stored in the tank prior to its closure have been removed, properly disposed of, and neutralized. 
(2)  Adequately seals the tank to minimize any threat to the public safety and the possibility of water intrusion into or runoff from the tank. 
(3)  Provides for and carries out the maintenance of the tank as the local agency determines is necessary, for the period of time the department requires. 
(4)  Demonstrates to the appropriate agency, which has jurisdiction over the site, that there has been no significant soil contamination resulting from a discharge in the area surrounding the underground storage tank or facility and that the site has been investigated to determine if there are any present, or were past, releases, and, if so, that appropriate corrective or remedial actions have been taken. 
(Code 1969, § 6.22.140; Ord. No. 528, § 1(part), 1983) 
Sec. 6.22.150. - Fines and penalties. 
(a)  Any operator of an underground storage tank shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $500.00 or more than $5,000.00 for each underground storage tank for each day of violation for any of the following: 
(1)  Operates an underground storage tank which has not been issued a permit. 
(2)  Fails to monitor the underground storage tank, as required by the permit. 
(3)  Fails to maintain records, as required by section 6.22.030. 
(4)  Fails to report an unauthorized release, as required by sections 6.22.110 and 6.22.120. 
(5)  Fails to properly close an underground storage tank, as required by section 6.22.140. 
(6)  Violation of an applicable requirement of the permit issued for the operation of the underground tank system. 
(7)  Violation of an applicable requirement of this chapter or any regulation adopted by the board pursuant to section Health and Safety Code § 25299.3. 
(8)  Failure to permit inspection or to perform a monitoring, testing, or reporting required pursuant to Health and Safety Code §§ 25288 or 25289. 
(9)  Making a false statement, representation, or certification in an application, record, report, or other document submitted or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter. 
(10)  Tampering with or otherwise disabling automatic leak detection devices or alarms. 
(b)  Any owner of an underground storage tank shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $500.00 or more than $5,000.00 per day for each underground storage tank, for each day of violation, for any of the following: 
(1)  Failure to obtain a permit as specified by this chapter. 
(2)  Failure to repair an underground tank in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Abandonment or improper closure of any underground tank subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Knowing failure to take reasonable and necessary steps to ensure compliance with this chapter by the operator of an underground tank. 
(5)  Violation of an applicable requirement of the permit issued for operation of the underground tank system. 
(6)  Violation of an applicable requirement of this chapter or a regulation adopted by the board pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 25299.3. 
(7)  Failure to permit inspection or to perform monitoring, testing, or reporting required pursuant to Health and Safety Code §§ 25288 or 25289. 
(8)  Making a false statement, representation, or certification in an application, record, report, or other document submitted or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  A person who intentionally fails to notify the board, the regional board, or the local agency when required to do so by this chapter, or who submits false information in a permit application, amendment, or renewal, pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 25286, is liable for a civil penalty of not more than $5,000.00 for each underground storage tank for which notification is not given or false information is submitted. 
(d)  (1)  A person who violates a corrective action requirement established by, or issued pursuant to, Health and Safety Code § 25296.10 is liable for a civil penalty of not more than $10,000.00 for each underground storage tank for each day of violation. 
(2)  A civil penalty under this subsection may be imposed in a civil action under this chapter, or may be administratively imposed by the board or a regional board pursuant to article 2.5 (commencing with section 13323) of chapter 5 of Division 7 of the Water Code. 
(e)  A person who violates Health and Safety Code § 25292.3 is liable for a civil penalty of not more than $5,000 for each underground storage tank for each day of violation. 
(f)  (1)  Any person who falsifies any monitoring records required by this chapter, or knowingly fails to report an unauthorized release, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $5,000.00 or more than $10,000.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not to exceed one year, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(2)  A person who intentionally disables or tampers with an automatic leak detection system in a manner that would prevent the automatic leak detection system from detecting a leak or alerting the owner or operator of the leak, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $5,000.00 or more than $10,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than one year, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(g)  In determining both the civil and criminal penalties imposed pursuant to this section, the board, a regional board, or the court, as the case may be, shall consider all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm or potential harm caused by the violation, the nature of the violation and the period of time over which it occurred, the frequency of past violations, and the corrective action, if any, taken by the person who holds the permit. 
(h)  Penalties under this section are in addition to, and do not supersede or limit, any and all other legal remedies and penalties, civil or criminal, which may be applicable under other laws. 
(i)  Subsection (a)(10) of this section does not prohibit the owner or operator of an underground storage tank, or his designee, from maintaining, repairing, or replacing automatic leak detection devices or alarms associated with that tank. 
(Code 1969, § 6.22.150; Ord. No. 528, § 1(part), 1983) 
CHAPTER 6.24. - ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH CODE 

Sec. 6.24.010. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to title 17 of the California Administrative Code, and other relevant state law, for the protection of the environmental public health, the issuance of permits and collection of fees, and providing penalties and remedies for the violation of such regulations, there is adopted by the city, as its Environmental Health Code (EHC), that certain code known as the Uniform Environmental Health Code, being chapters 1 through 11, division 3, title III of the San Bernardino County Code, except as provided in section 6.24.020. The city designates the county department of environmental health services (DEHS) as the enforcement agency for the purpose of this Environmental Health Code and all state law pertaining to environmental health. Pursuant to Government Code § 50022.6, a copy of said code is on file in the office of the clerk of the city and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 6.24.010; Ord. No. 567, § 3(part), 1987) 
Sec. 6.24.020. - Exceptions to adopted code. 
    The Environmental Health Code is amended, changed or deleted as follows: 
(1)  Chapter 7, Article 2, Underground Storage of Hazardous Substances, is deleted. 
(2)  Chapter 8, Article 2, Refuse collection, is deleted. 
(3)  Chapter 8, Article 4, Sewage Holding Tanks, Article 6, Designated Maintenance Areas and Article 7, Operation of Multiple Ownership Septic Systems, are deleted. 
(Code 1969, § 6.24.020; Ord. No. 567, § 3(part), 1987; Ord. No. 958-2018 , 8-20-2018) 
Sec. 6.24.030. - Remedies; penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person or entity to deny access, interfere with, prevent, restrict, obstruct, or hinder the department of environmental health services' (DEHS) employees or agents acting within the scope of their duty or agency. Offering physical resistance or bodily attack upon authorized representatives of DEHS acting within the scope of their duty or agency is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not less than ten days, without the alternative of a fine. 
(b)  In addition to criminal prosecution, civil action, and every other remedy or penalty provided by law, public nuisance may be abated or enjoined in an action brought by DEHS, or under circumstances immediately dangerous to public health or safety, may be summarily abated by DEHS enforcement officers as provided in this chapter or otherwise in the manner provided by law for the summary abatement of public nuisances. 
(c)  Except where punishable as a misdemeanor or felony under state law or in this chapter, any person or entity who violates any provision of this Environmental Health Code (EHC) shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00, but not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation, a fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second conviction within one year, and a fine not exceeding $500.00 for the third conviction within one year, the fourth and additional convictions within one year shall be punishable as misdemeanors and shall be punished by a fine not less than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or both, and such convicted person or entity may, in the discretion of the court, be adjudged in addition to the above penalties, to be liable to DEHS for all necessary costs incurred in investigation, discovery, analysis, inspection, cleanup, and other actual costs incurred by DEHS or its agents pertaining to the violation. 
(d)  Each day, or portion thereof, in violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. The owner, manager, and operator of every activity or facility subject to the jurisdiction of this EHC shall be responsible for any violation by any employee of any of its provisions. Payment of any penalty or serving any term of imprisonment provided for in this chapter shall not relieve any person or entity from the responsibility of correcting the condition constituting the violation. 
(Code 1969, § 6.24.030; Ord. No. 567, § 3(part), 1987) 
Sec. 6.24.040. - Adoption of County Inspection Grading of Food Establishments Code. 
(a)  The city adopts by reference and makes part of this chapter by reference the following portions of the San Bernardino County Code: 
(1)  Chapter 14 of division 3 of title 3. 
(2)  Section 16.0213B(b)(17) of chapter 2 of division 6 of title 1. 
(b)  The aforementioned county codes are adopted as the Inspection Grading of Food Establishments Code of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 6.24.040; Ord. No. 805, § 1(part), 2005) 
Sec. 6.24.050. - Violation; penalty. 
    In accordance with section 33.1406(c) of the County Code, The letter grade card shall not be defaced, marred, camouflaged, hidden or removed. It shall be unlawful to operate a food establishment unless the letter grade is posted. Removal of the letter grade card is a violation of this chapter and may result in the suspension or revocation of the public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in section 33.0112 of the County Code. 
(Code 1969, § 6.24.050; Ord. No. 805, § 1(part), 2005) 
CHAPTER 6.28. - PUBLIC NUISANCES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 859-2010, § 1(exh. A), adopted February 16, 2010, repealed ch. 6.28 and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former ch. 6.28, §§ 6.28.010-6.28.270, pertained to nuisances and derived from Ord. No. 594, §§ 1.1-1.10, 2.1-2.3, 3.1, 3.2, 4.1-4.13, 5.1-5.6, 6.1, 7.1, 7.2 1998; Ord. No. 789, §§ 2-6, 2003; Ord. No. 790, §§ 2-4, 2003. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to declare and abate nuisances, Health and Safety Code § 38771 et seq.; authority of city council to adopt ordinances and rules to protect and regulate health and sanitary matters in the city, Health and Safety Code § 101450; nuisances generally, Civil Code §§ 3479-3503; authority of city to declare and abate weed, rubbish, and other dangerous or injurious nuisance materials from property, Government Code § 39561 et seq.; authority of city to declare and abate abandoned excavations from property, Government Code § 50230 et seq. 

Sec. 6.28.010. - Findings, purpose and intent. 
(a)  Findings. The city council finds and declares as follows: 
(1)  Section VII of article XI of the California Constitution provides that a city may make and enforce within its limits all local, police, sanitary and other ordinances and regulations not in conflict with general laws. 
(2)  Government Code § 38771 provides that legislative bodies of cities may declare what constitutes a nuisance. 
(3)  Government Code § 38772 et seq., further provides that legislative bodies of cities may also provide for the summary abatement of any nuisance at the expense of the persons creating, causing, committing, or maintaining it, and by ordinance may make the expense of abatement of nuisances a lien against the property on which the nuisance is maintained and a personal obligation against the property owner. 
(4)  Nuisance conditions are offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and community appearance, an obstruction to or interference with the comfortable enjoyment of adjacent property or premises (both public and private), and/or are hazardous or injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the general public. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The city council hereby declares that the purposes and intent of this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  To define as public nuisances and violations those conditions and uses of land that are offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and/or community appearance, an obstruction to or interference with the comfortable enjoyment of adjacent property or premises, and/or hazardous or injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public. 
(2)  To develop regulations that will promote the sound maintenance of property and enhance conditions of appearance, habitability, occupancy, use and safety of all structures and premises in the city. 
(3)  To establish administrative procedures for the city's use, upon its election, to correct or abate violations of this chapter on real property throughout the city. 
(c)  This chapter is not intended to be applied, construed, or given effect in a manner that imposes upon the city, or upon any officer or employee thereof, any duty towards persons or property within the city or outside of the city that creates a basis for civil liability for damages, except as otherwise imposed by law. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.010, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.020. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. For purposes of this chapter, these definitions shall supersede any other definitions of the same terms in this Code. 
    Abandoned personal property means and refers to any item, object, thing, material or substance that, by its condition of damage, deterioration, disrepair, non-use, obsolescence or location on public real property or on private real property, causes a reasonable person to conclude that the owner has permanently relinquished all right, title, claim and possession thereto, or that the object, thing, material or substance cannot be used for its intended or designed purpose. Abandoned personal property may include junk, vehicles, and vacant property itself, that has or has not ever been developed. 
    Abandoned structure means a building or other structure that is vacant and is maintained in a condition of disrepair or deterioration, as discernible from a public right-of-way or adjoining real property. Factors that may also be considered in a determination of an abandoned structure include, without limitation: present operability and functional utility; the presence of nonfunctional, broken or missing doors or windows, such that entry therein by unauthorized persons is not deterred; the existence of real property tax delinquencies for the land upon which the structure is located; age and degree of obsolescence of the structure, and the cost of rehabilitation or repair versus its market value. 
    Abatement costs means all costs, fees and expenses, incidental or otherwise, incurred by the city in abating a public nuisance. 
    Accessible property means any property that is accessible through a gate, fence, wall or other barrier that is broken, unlocked, unsecured or otherwise missing or lacking. 
    Accessible structure means a building or structure (as defined by the building code) that is unsecured in any manner that could allow access to the interior of the building or structure by unauthorized persons. 
    Appellant means any responsible person who files a timely, complete appeal of a notice of abatement pursuant to the procedures established in this chapter. Any responsible person who has received a notice of abatement who does not file a timely appeal shall be deemed to have waived the right of appeal and will have failed to exhaust administrative remedies. 
    Attractive nuisance means any condition, device, equipment, instrument, item or machine that is unsafe, unprotected and may prove detrimental to minors, whether in a structure or in outdoor areas of developed or undeveloped real property. This includes, without limitation, any abandoned or open and accessible building, structures, wells, shafts, basements or excavations; any abandoned refrigerators and abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles; any structurally unsound buildings, structures, walls, or fences; or, any lumber, trash, walls, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove hazardous or dangerous to minors. An attractive nuisance shall also include pools, standing water or excavations containing water, that are unfenced or otherwise lack an adequate barrier thereby creating a risk of drowning, or which are hazardous or unsafe due to the existence of any condition rendering such water to be clouded, unclear or injurious to health due to, without limitation, any of the following: bacterial growth, infectious or toxic agents, algae, insect remains, animal remains, rubbish, refuse, debris, or waste of any kind. 
    Building means any structure having, or originally designed to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel, equipment, or property of any kind, and shall also include structures wherein things may be grown, made, produced, kept, handled, stored, or disposed of, and all appendages, accessories, apparatus, appliances, and equipment installed as a part thereof. 
    City manager means the city manager or duly authorized representatives. 
    City personnel means any city employee, representative, agent or contractor designated by the city manager to abate a public nuisance. 
    Code, codes, and Barstow Municipal Code mean the Barstow Municipal Code and any code, law, or regulation incorporated therein by reference and any adopted and uncodified ordinances. 
    Code compliance fees mean fees imposed by the city to defray its costs of code compliance actions, including, but not be limited to, the time and other resources of public officials expended by them in identifying, inspecting, investigating, seeking or causing the abatement of a violation at a residential structure. These include, but are not limited to, site inspections, drafting reports, taking photographs, procuring other evidence, engaging in meetings, conferences and communications with responsible persons, their agents or representatives, concerning a violation, as well as with attorneys for the city at any time, and appearances before judicial officers or reviewing authorities during the pendency of a judicial or administrative proceeding and other appearances at such judicial or administrative hearings. The time and resources that public officials further expend to confirm that a residential or nonresidential structure and/or real property remains free of a violation while a responsible person is on probation to a court or when a matter concerning a residential, or nonresidential, structure and/or real property remains pending before a reviewing authority in an administrative action, shall also constitute code compliance actions. For purposes of this definition: 
(1)  Residential structures means and include all structures and premises that are regulated by the state housing law (Health and Safety Code, division 13, part 1.5, section 17910 et seq.), and any future amendments thereto. These include, but are not limited to, apartment houses, hotels, motels, and dwellings, and residential buildings and structures accessory thereto. 
(2)  Nonresidential means any office, commercial, industrial, institutional or other use that is not identified in subsection (1) of this definition. 
(3)  Violation means and includes a public nuisance as described or referred to in this chapter, or any condition, activity or use that is caused, allowed to exist, or maintained (whether due to an affirmative act, or inaction or omission) by a responsible person in violation of any other provision, regulation, or requirement of this Code, or any applicable county, state or federal laws or regulations. 
    Community code compliance officer means any individual employed by the city with enforcement authority for city codes, or his duly authorized representatives, including, but not limited to, city community and economic development department staff and building department inspectors. 
    Compliance period means the period of time and/or required schedule set forth in a notice of abatement within which all nuisance abatement actions referenced in such notice must be completed. 
    Controlled substances mean any substance that is declared by state or federal law to be a controlled substance. 
    Distressed property means a property that meets any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Is under a current notice of default; 
(2)  Is under a current notice of trustee's sale; 
(3)  Is pending a tax assessor's lien sale; 
(4)  Has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure; or 
(5)  Has been transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
    Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions shall include, but shall not be limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, and/or mail; past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk and/or other debris; the absence of window coverings, such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items and/or commercial furnishings consistent with the permitted residential or commercial uses permitted within the zone of the real property; statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant. 
    Foreclosure means the process by which real property is sold at auction to satisfy a debt. 
    Hazardous materials means any material or substance of any kind that is declared by any federal, state, or local law, ordinance, or regulation to be composed of hazardous material. 
    Hearing officer means the city manager, or a designee thereof, who shall hear all timely appeals from a notice of public nuisance and intention to abate with city personnel. 
    Incidental expenses includes, but shall not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city, such as preparation of notices, specifications, contracts, inspection of work, costs of printing and mailings required hereunder, costs of any filing and/or recordation with the county recorder's office or other governmental agency, and the costs of administration and legal services. 
    Inoperable vehicle means and includes, without limitation, any vehicle that is immobilized or mechanically incapable of being driven on a highway. Factors that may be used to determine this condition include, without limitation, vehicles that have a nonoperational status with the DMV, or that are lacking a current and valid registration, a working engine, transmission, wheels, inflated tires, doors, windshield or any other part or equipment necessary for its legal and safe operation on a highway or any other public right-of-way. 
    Junk includes, but is not limited to, any cast-off, damaged, discarded, junked, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, wornout or wrecked appliance, device, equipment, furniture, fixture, furnishing, object, material, substance, tire, or thing of any kind or composition. The term "junk" may include abandoned personal property, as well as any form of debris, refuse, rubbish, trash or waste. Factors that may be considered in a determination that personal property is junk include, without limitation, its: 
(1)  Condition of damage, deterioration, disrepair or non-use. 
(2)  Approximate age and degree of obsolescence. 
(3)  Location. 
(4)  Present operability, functional utility and status of registration or licensing, where applicable. 
(5)  Cost of rehabilitation or repair versus its market value. 
    Notice of abatement means a notice of public nuisance and intent to abate with city personnel, as described in this chapter. 
    Notice of default means a recorded notice that a default has occurred under deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's sale and/or other foreclosure proceeding. 
    Order of abatement means an order issued by a hearing officer following a hearing on an appeal of a notice of abatement. 
    Owner means and includes any person having legal title to, or who leases, rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of, any real property in the city, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll. Owners include persons with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, or who are court-appointed administrators, conservators, guardians or receivers. An owner of personal property shall be any person who has legal title, charge, control, or possession of, or equitable right to such property. 
    Person means and includes any individual, partnership of any kind, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other organization or entity, however formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, or any combination of such persons. The term "person" also includes any public entity or agency that acts as an owner in the city, other than the city. 
    Personal property means property that is not real property, and includes, without limitation, any appliance, article, device, equipment, item, material, product, substance or vehicle. 
    Public nuisance means anything which is, or likely to become, injurious or detrimental to health, safety or welfare, or is offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any sidewalk, public park, square, street or highway. All conditions hereafter enumerated in this chapter, or that otherwise violate or are contrary to any provision of the Barstow Municipal Code, including all violations of state and federal law that are defined as a misdemeanor or felony, are public nuisances by definition and declaration, and said enumerated conditions shall not, in any manner, be construed to be exclusive or exhaustive. A public nuisance shall also exist when a person fails to comply with any condition of a city approval, entitlement, license or permit or when an activity on, or use of, real property violates, or is contrary to, any provision or requirement of the Barstow Municipal Code. 
    Real property or premises means any real property owned by any person and/or any building, structure, or other improvement thereon, or portions thereof. The term "real property" or "premises" includes any parkway or unimproved public easement abutting or adjacent to such real property, whether or not owned by the city. 
    Responsible person means any person, whether as an owner/tenant as defined in this chapter, or otherwise, that allows, causes, creates, maintains, or permits a public nuisance, or any violation of the Barstow Municipal Code or county or state law, or regulation thereof, to exist or continue, by any act or the omission of any act or duty. A responsible person shall also include employees, principals, joint ventures, officers, agents, and/or other persons acting at the direction of, and/or with the knowledge and/or consent of the owner and/or occupant of the lot or the building, structure, or use located thereon, in the utilization of such building structure or use. The actions or inactions of a responsible person's agent, employee, representative or contractor may be attributed to that responsible person. 
    Securing means and includes such measures as may be directed by the city manager (or designee thereof) that assist in rendering real property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, the repair of fences, walls, and other barriers, chaining or pad locking of gates and/or the repair or boarding of doors, windows, and/or other openings. The boarding of any window, door, or other opening shall be completed to a minimum of the current United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) securing standards at the time the boarding is completed or required and shall be consistent with the requirements of this chapter. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice, wall, fence, or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
    Vacant means real property and any building or structure thereon that is not legally occupied. 
    Vehicle. 
(1)  The term "vehicle" means any device, by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway or other public right-of-way, and includes all vehicles as defined by the state and all future amendments thereto. 
(2)  The term "vehicle" does not include devices: 
a.  That are propelled exclusively by human power, such as bicycles and wheelchairs; or 
b.  Those that are used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.020, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.030. - Public nuisances prohibited. 
    The city council hereby finds and declares that it is a public nuisance and unlawful for any person to allow, cause, create, maintain, or permit others to cause, create, or maintain, real property or premises in the city in such a manner that: 
(1)  Any one or more of the following conditions are found to exist thereon: 
a.  Land, the topography, geology or configuration of which, whether in natural state or as a result of grading operations, excavation or fill, causes or tends to cause erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare, or to adjacent properties. 
b.  Buildings or other structures, or portions thereof, that are partially constructed or destroyed or allowed to remain in a state of partial construction or destruction for an unreasonable period of time. As used herein, an unreasonable period shall mean any portion of time exceeding the period given to a responsible person by the city for the complete abatement of this nuisance condition with all required city approvals, permits, and inspections. Factors that may be used by the city to establish a reasonable period for the complete abatement of this nuisance include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  The degree of partial construction or destruction and the cause therefore. 
2.  Whether or not this condition constitutes an attractive nuisance or if it otherwise poses or promotes a health or safety hazard to occupants of the premises, or to others. 
3.  The degree of visibility, if any, of this condition from public property or adjacent private real property. 
4.  The scope and type of work that is needed to abate this nuisance. 
5.  The promptness with which a responsible person has applied for and obtained all required city approvals and permits in order to lawfully commence the nuisance abatement actions. 
6.  Whether or not a responsible person has complied with other required technical code requirements, including the acquisition of any necessary city approvals and/or permits, and requesting and passing required inspections in a timely manner, while completing nuisance abatement actions. 
7.  Whether or not a responsible person has applied for extensions to a technical code permit or renewed an expired permit, as well as the number of extensions and renewals that a responsible person has previously sought or obtained from the city. 
8.  Whether or not a responsible person has made substantial progress, as determined by the city, in performing nuisance abatement actions under a technical code permit that has expired, or is about to expire. 
9.  Whether delays in completing nuisance abatement actions under a technical code permit have occurred, and the reasons for such delays. 
c.  Abandoned buildings, structures or property. 
d.  Abandoned personal property that is visible from public or private property. 
e.  Accessible property through a gate, fence, wall, or other barrier that is broken, unlocked, unsecured or otherwise missing or lacking. 
f.  Accessible structure that is unsecured in any manner that could allow access to the interior of the building or structure by unauthorized persons. 
g.  Interior portions of buildings or structures (including, but not limited to, attics, ceilings, walls, floors, basements, mezzanines, and common areas) that have become defective, unsightly, or are maintained in a condition of dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution in property values, or interferes with the peaceful use, possession and/or enjoyment of properties in the vicinity, or where such condition otherwise violates or is contrary to the Barstow Municipal Code, or state or federal law. 
h.  Exterior portions of buildings or structures (including, but not limited to, roofs, balconies, decks, fences, stairs, stairways, walls, signs and fixtures), as well as on-site sidewalks, walkways, driveways and parking areas, that have become defective, unsightly, or are maintained in a condition of dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution in property values, or interferes with the peaceful use, possession and/or enjoyment of adjacent properties, or where such condition otherwise violates or is contrary to the Barstow Municipal Code, or state or federal law. 
i.  Clotheslines in front yard areas. 
j.  Obstruction of any kind, cause or form that interferes with light or ventilation for a building, or that interferes with or hinders ingress therein and/or egress therefrom. 
k.  Broken, defective, damaged, dilapidated, or missing windows, doors, or vents in a building or structure, and/or broken, defective, damaged, dilapidated, or missing screens for windows, doors, or crawl spaces in a building or structure. 
l.  Windows or doors that remain boarded up or sealed after 90 days may receive a written notice from the city to a responsible person requesting the removal of these coverings and the installation of fully functional or operable windows or doors. City actions to board up or seal windows or doors in order to deter unauthorized entry into structures shall not relieve responsible persons from installing fully functional or operable windows or doors. If the responsible person involved with this property requests the site remain fully boarded due to a long-term security request (that is, no active plans to revive and utilize the site), then the building must be boarded with plywood (all windows and doors) and the plywood shall be painted to match the exterior. 
m.  Overgrown vegetation, including, but not limited to, any one of the following: 
1.  Vegetation likely to harbor, or promote the presence of, rats, vermin and/or insects. 
2.  Vegetation causing or tending to cause detriment to neighboring properties, or that is out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in, or contribute to, a diminution of property values, including, but not limited to: 
(i)  Lawns with grass in excess of six inches. 
(ii)  Hedges, trees, or other plant material that are not maintained in a neat, orderly, and healthy manner as a result of lack of adequate mowing, grooming, trimming, pruning, and/or watering. 
3.  Vegetation that creates, or promotes, the existence of a fire hazard. 
4.  Vegetation that overhangs or grows onto or into any public property, including, but not limited to, any public alley, highway, land, sidewalk, street or other right-of-way, so as to cause an obstruction to any person or vehicle using such public property. 
5.  Tree branches or other vegetation within five feet of the rooftop of a structure so as to facilitate rodent or animal access thereto. 
n.  Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds, ground cover, and other vegetation, or the absence of healthful vegetation, that causes, contributes to, or promotes, any one of the following conditions or consequences: 
1.  An attractive nuisance. 
2.  A fire hazard. 
3.  The creation or promotion of dust or soil erosion. 
4.  A diminution in property values. 
5.  A detriment to public health, safety or welfare. 
o.  Any form of an attractive nuisance. 
p.  Items of junk or other personal property that constitute a fire or safety hazard or that are visible from public or adjoining private real property, or that are accumulated, kept, placed or stored in exterior portions of premises in such a manner as to constitute a violation of any provision of the Barstow Municipal Code, or that are otherwise out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution in property values. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the existence of a junkyard is not a nuisance when such use and the premises on which such use occurs are in full compliance with all provisions of title 19, Zoning, of this Code (including all approvals and permits required thereby), and all other applicable provisions of the Barstow Municipal Code, as well as all applicable state and federal laws. 
q.  Garbage cans, yard waste containers, and recycling containers that are kept, placed or stored in front or side yards and visible from public streets, except at times that solid or yard waste, or recyclables, are scheduled for collection by the city or its permitted collectors. 
r.  The keeping or disposing of, or the scattering or accumulating of combustible or other material, including, but not limited to, composting, firewood, lumber, junk, trash, debris, packing boxes, pallets, plant cuttings, tree trimmings or wood chips (except when used as mulch and contained within landscape planters), in interior or exterior areas of buildings or structures, when such items or accumulations: 
1.  Render premises unsanitary or substandard as defined by the Uniform Housing Code adopted by the city. 
2.  Violate the Barstow Municipal Code. 
3.  Cause, create, or tend to contribute to a fire or safety hazard. 
4.  Harbor, promote, or tend to contribute to the presence of rats, vermin and insects. 
5.  Cause, create, or tend to contribute to an offensive odor. 
6.  Cause the premises to be out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution of property values; provided, however, that this use of land or condition shall not constitute a nuisance when expressly permitted under the applicable zone classification and the premises are in full compliance with all provisions of title 19, Zoning, of this Code and all other applicable provisions of this Code, as well as all state and federal laws. 
s.  Vehicles exceeding the permissible gross vehicle weight for the streets or public property upon which they are located. A nuisance also exists under this provision when a vehicle is stopped, kept, placed, parked, or stored on private real property and when such vehicle exceeds the permissible gross vehicle weight for the streets or public property that were utilized in its placement on said private real property. 
t.  Abandoned, dismantled, inoperable or wrecked boats, campers, motorcycles, trailers, vehicles, or parts thereof, unless kept, placed, parked or stored within a completely enclosed, lawfully constructed structure. 
u.  Trailers, campers, boats, and other mobile equipment parked or stored in yard areas contiguous to streets or highways in violation of title 19, Zoning, of this Code and/or causing or tending to cause depreciation of nearby property values. 
v.  Any equipment, machinery, or vehicle of any type or description that is designed for or customarily used for construction-type activities that is kept, parked, placed or stored on public or private real property except when such item is being used during excavation, construction or demolition operations at the site where said equipment, machinery, or vehicle is located pursuant to an active building and/or other technical code permit. 
w.  Maintenance of signs, or sign structures, on real property relating to uses that have not been lawfully conducted or products that have not been lawfully sold thereon for a period of 180 calendar days or more, or for such shorter period as is established by this Code, or signs and their structures that are in disrepair or which are otherwise in violation of, or contrary to, this Code. 
x.  Specialty structures that have been constructed for a specific use, and which are unfeasible to convert to other uses, and which are abandoned, partially destroyed or are permitted to remain in a state of partial destruction or disrepair. Such specialty structures include, but are not limited to, the following: tanks for gas or liquids, lateral support structures and bulk-heads, utility high-voltage towers and poles, utility high-rise support structures, electronic transmitting antennas and towers, structures which support or house mechanical and utility equipment and are located above the roof lines of existing buildings, high rise freestanding chimneys and smoke stacks, and recreational structures such as tennis courts and cabanas. 
y.  Any personal property or building or structure that obstructs or encroaches on any public property, including, but not limited to, any public alley, highway, land, sidewalk, street or other right-of-way, unless a valid encroachment permit has been issued authorizing said encroachment or obstruction. 
z.  Causing, maintaining or permitting graffiti, as defined in the Barstow Municipal Code or other applicable state law, to be present or to remain on a building, structure or vehicle, or portion thereof, that is visible from a public right-of-way or from adjoining property. 
aa.  Storage of hazardous material on real property in such a manner as to be injurious, or potentially injurious or hazardous, to the public health, safety or welfare, or to adjacent properties, or that otherwise violates any local, state or federal law or regulation. 
bb.  Failure to provide and maintain adequate weather protection to structures or buildings, so as to cause, or tend to cause or promote, the existence of cracked, peeling, warped, rotted, or severely damaged paint, stucco or other exterior covering. 
cc.  Any discharge of any substance or material, other than stormwater, which enters, or could possibly enter, the city's storm sewer system in violation of the Barstow Municipal Code. 
dd.  Maintenance of any tarp or similar covering on, or over, any graded surface or hillside, except in the following circumstances: 
1.  A state of emergency has been declared by local, state or federal officials directly impacting the area to be covered; and 
2.  Covering with a tarp performed pursuant to an active building or grading permit. 
ee.  Maintenance of any tarp or similar covering on, or over, any roof of any structure, except during periods of active rainfall, or when specifically permitted under an active roofing or building permit. 
ff.  Unsanitary, polluted or unhealthful pools, ponds, standing water or excavations containing water, whether or not they are attractive nuisances but which are nevertheless likely to harbor mosquitoes, insects or other vectors. The likelihood of insect harborage is evidenced by any of the following conditions: water which is unclear, murky, clouded or green; water containing bacterial growth, algae, insect larvae, insect remains, or animal remains; or bodies of water which are abandoned, neglected, unfiltered or otherwise improperly maintained. 
gg.  Maintenance of premises so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of properties in the vicinity as to cause, or that tends to cause, substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or property values of such properties in the vicinity. 
hh.  Maintenance of inadequate landscaping upon any portion of any premises that is visible from any public street, public property or right-of-way if the premises is located in a residential zone; or maintenance of inadequate landscaping upon any portion of any premises in any commercial or industrial zone. For purposes of this subsection, the term "inadequate landscaping" shall mean such landscaping as results in a diminution of the appearance of the subject premises as compared with neighboring property, or degrades the aesthetic quality of the subject premises, or reduces property values in the immediate neighborhood, and includes, but is but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Lack of groundcover or lawns, shrubs, or other vegetation in any portion of the premises not otherwise developed with a structure, paving, or landscaping hardscape. 
2.  Insufficient groundcover, lawn, or other landscaping material on the premises, resulting in blowing dust and/or soil erosion. 
3.  Trees, shrubs, lawn, or other plants that are dying from lack of water, fertilizer or maintenance, or from disease. 
4.  Failure to comply with any landscaping plan approved by the city in connection with the issuance of any land use approval for the premises. 
5.  Tract homes built after December 19, 2007, shall maintain front yard landscaping to current standards identified in section 19.06.080. 
6.  Non-tract homes built after November 19, 2008, shall maintain front yard landscaping to current standards identified in section 19.06.080. 
7.  All single-family residential dwellings built prior to December 19, 2007, for tract homes, or November 19, 2008, for non-tract homes, shall maintain front yard landscaping in a healthy condition. Any overgrown landscaping shall be trimmed to be aesthetically pleasing. 
ii.  Any condition recognized in local or state law or in equity as constituting a public nuisance, or any condition existing on real property that constitutes, or tends to constitute, blight, or that is a health or safety hazard to the community or neighboring properties. 
jj.  Any violation of the Barstow Municipal Code, state law, or federal law that constitutes a misdemeanor or felony violation. 
kk.  Any distressed property. 
ll.  Any property showing evidence of vacancy. 
mm.  Property in foreclosure. 
nn.  Any property under a notice of default. 
oo.  Properties that are in the process of environmental remediation and have any attractive nuisance issues, to include the need for weed abatement, are littered, have fencing of poor quality and have exposed environmental remediation equipment are not acceptable and constitute a public nuisance. Regular maintenance on the property needs to take place to ensure that litter is picked up, to include wind-blown debris attached to fences. All fencing must be maintained in good repair and be of high quality (rental fencing is not acceptable, and slatted visual barrier fencing shall be installed where appropriate). A visual barrier to remediation equipment (tanks, piping, monitoring equipment, drums, etc.) must be provided so that the equipment is not visible from the street or adjacent properties. 
(2)  Any building or structure, or portion thereof, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the conditions listed in chapter 3 of the 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as adopted by the Barstow Municipal Code. 
(3)  Any building or structure, or portion thereof, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the conditions listed in Health and Safety Code § 17920.3, and any future amendments thereto. 
(4)  Any building or structure used by any person to engage in acts which are prohibited pursuant to the laws of the state, the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of this city, including, but not limited to, the following acts: 
a.  Unlawful possession and/or use of controlled substances; 
b.  Prostitution; and/or 
c.  Unlawful gambling. 
(5)  A condition, use or activity is present that constitutes a public nuisance as defined by Civil Code § 3479 or 3480, and any future amendments thereto. 
(6)  Any building, structure, or use of real property that violates or fails to comply with: 
a.  Any applicable approval, permit, license, or entitlement or condition relating thereto; 
b.  Any ordinance of the city, including, but not limited to, any provision of this Code; or 
c.  Any applicable, county or state law or regulation. 
(7)  If applicable the securing of real property rendering the site inaccessible to unauthorized persons. 
(8)  Any property that is not legally occupied and deemed vacant. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.030, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.040. - Abatement of public nuisances. 
    All conditions or uses that constitute a public nuisance as defined in this chapter shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition or repair, removal, securing or termination. The procedures for abatement in this chapter shall not be exclusive and shall not limit or restrict the city from pursuing any other remedies available at law, whether civil, equitable or criminal, or from enforcing city codes and ordinances, or from abating or causing abatement of public nuisances, in any other manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.040, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.050. - Continuing obligation of responsible persons to abate a public nuisance. 
(a)  Responsible persons shall not allow, cause, create, maintain or permit a public nuisance to exist on their premises. If public nuisances do arise or occur, responsible persons shall promptly abate them by rehabilitation, demolition or repair, removal or termination with all required city approvals, permits and inspections, whether occupied or vacant. 
(b)  The city may exercise its administrative, civil/injunctive and criminal remedies, or any one or combination of these remedies, to compel responsible persons to abate a public nuisance when, in its judgment, such persons have not completed nuisance abatement actions in a timely or proper manner, or when responsible persons have failed to prevent an occurrence or recurrence of a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.050, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.060. - Notice of abatement. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this Code or other applicable law, whenever a code compliance officer, building official or other public official, with supervisor approval, determines that city personnel may need to abate/secure (whether occupied or vacant) a public nuisance, he shall serve a written "Notice of Public Nuisance and Intention to Abate with City Personnel" on the responsible persons that contains the following provisions: 
(1)  The address of the real property on which the nuisance condition exist. 
(2)  A brief description of the nuisance conditions. 
(3)  A reference to the law prohibiting or pertaining to the nuisance condition. 
(4)  A brief description of the required corrective actions. 
(5)  The compliance period in which to complete the nuisance abatement actions (with all required city approvals, permits and inspections, when applicable). 
(6)  The period and manner in which a responsible person may contest the notice of abatement are as set forth in section 6.28.090. No such right shall exist when the city is not seeking to establish the right to abate a public nuisance with city personnel. 
(7)  A statement that the city may record a notice of substandard property with the county recorder's office against the premises if the public nuisance is not fully abated or corrected (with all required approvals, permits and inspections), as determined by the city, within the compliance period specified in the notice, provided that a timely appeal therefrom has not been made. 
(b)  The procedure in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to public nuisances constituting an imminent hazard. In such instances, the provisions contained within section 6.28.160 shall be followed. 
(c)  The city's election to issue a notice of abatement shall not excuse responsible persons from their continuing obligation to abate a public nuisance in accordance with all applicable laws, regulations and legal requirements. Furthermore, the issuance of a notice of abatement shall not obligate the city to abate a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.060, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.070. - Additional requirements for demolition of buildings or structures. 
(a)  The city shall, excepting in cases involving an imminent hazard, provide responsible persons with a reasonable period to elect between options of rehabilitation, demolition or repair, as well as a reasonable period of time to complete any of these options, before city personnel abate a public nuisance by demolishing a building or structure pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  The city shall, excepting in cases involving an imminent hazard, serve a notice of abatement on all secured lien holders of record with the county recorder's office in the event abatement actions include demolition of a building or structure. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply if demolition is required to address an imminent hazard. In such situation, the provisions of section shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.070, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.080. - Service of notice. 
(a)  Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this chapter, any notice required by this chapter may be served by personal delivery to any responsible person or by first class mail. The date of service of the notice shall be the date it is personally delivered or placed in a U.S. postal service mail receptacle. Failure of any responsible person to receive a notice by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this chapter, any notice issued to an owner of real property shall be sent to the mailing address on the last equalized assessment roll. Failure of any owner to receive a notice by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.080, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.090. - Right of appeal from a notice of abatement. 
(a)  A responsible person may contest a notice of abatement by filing a written request for an appeal with the city clerk within ten calendar days of service of the notice of abatement. A written request for an appeal shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of each responsible party who is appealing the notice of abatement. 
(2)  Address and description of real property upon which the city intends to enter and abate a public nuisance. 
(3)  Date of notice of abatement being appealed. 
(4)  Specific action or decision being appealed. 
(5)  Grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable the hearing officer to understand the nature of the controversy. 
(6)  The signature of at least one appellant. 
(b)  Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a notice of abatement. In this event, the notice of abatement is final and binding. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter only apply to instances where the city has elected to establish the right, but not the obligation, to abate public nuisances with city personnel. In no event does this chapter limit the right of city officials to issue alternative written or oral notices of code violations to responsible persons or to cause the abatement of public nuisances in a different manner, including, without limitation, by court orders arising from the city's exercise of its criminal or civil remedies. In such instances, a responsible person shall receive a right to hearing and other due process rights through the court process. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.090, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.100. - Sample notice of abatement. 
(a)  The notice of abatement shall be written in a form that is substantially consistent with the following: 


(b)  A notice of abatement shall be deemed in substantial compliance with this section regardless of form if all substantive information is contained in such notice of abatement. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.100, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.110. - Consequence for an untimely appeal. 
(a)  If a timely appeal is not received by the city clerk, the right to appeal is waived and the notice of abatement is final and binding. In such instances, the city may, without any administrative hearing, cause the abatement with city forces of any or all of the nuisance conditions or activities stated in the notice of abatement. Entry onto private real property that is both improved and occupied shall, excepting instances of an imminent hazard, be with an abatement warrant from the superior court. The city shall follow the procedures stated in this chapter for recovery of all abatement costs, fees and expenses (incidental or otherwise). 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall obligate the city to undertake abatement actions pursuant to a notice of abatement, whether or not there is a timely appeal. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.110, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.120. - Abatement by responsible person prior to hearing. 
(a)  Any responsible person shall have the right to abate a nuisance in accordance with the notice of abatement at his own expense, provided all corrective actions are completed with all required city permits, approvals and inspections, prior to the date the matter is set for a hearing. 
(b)  A hearing shall be cancelled if all nuisance conditions or activities are, as determined by the city, fully and lawfully abated prior thereto. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.120, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.130. - Review by hearing officer. 
(a)  Any responsible person who contests a notice of abatement shall, subject to filing a timely appeal, obtain review thereof before a hearing officer. The administrative appeal shall be scheduled no later than 60 calendar days, and no sooner than ten calendar days, after receipt of a timely filed request for appeal. The appellants listed on the written request for an appeal shall be notified in writing at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing by first class mail of the date, time, and location of the hearing. 
(b)  Any request by an appellant to continue a hearing must be submitted to the city clerk in writing no later than two business days before the date scheduled for the hearing. The hearing officer may continue a hearing for good cause, however, in no event may the hearing be continued for more than 30 calendar days without stipulation by all parties. 
(c)  At the place and time set forth in the notification of appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall hear the testimony of the appealing persons, the issuing officer, and/or their witnesses, as well as any documentary evidence presented by these persons concerning the alleged public nuisances. 
(d)  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish a nuisance exists by a preponderance of evidence. The issuance of a notice of abatement shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation and the community code compliance officer who issued the notices of violation is not required to participate in the appeal hearing. The appellant, and the community code compliance officer issuing the notices, as well as all other interested persons, shall have the opportunity to present evidence and to cross examine witnesses. The appellant, or other interested persons, may represent himself or be represented by anyone of his choice. The appellant, or other interested persons, may bring an interpreter to the hearing at his sole expense. 
(e)  If the appellant fails, or other interested persons fail, to appear or to otherwise submit any admissible evidence demonstrating the nonexistence of the alleged nuisance conditions, the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and send a notice thereof to the responsible persons by first class mail to the addresses stated on the appeal form. A cancellation of a hearing due to nonappearance of the appellant shall constitute the appellant's waiver of the right to appeal. In such instances, the notice of abatement is final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.130, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.140. - Decision of hearing officer; order of abatement. 
(a)  Within a reasonable time, not to exceed 15 calendar days following conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine if any nuisance condition exists at the subject property. If the hearing officer determines that each nuisance condition described in the notice of abatement is nonexistent, the notice of abatement shall be deemed canceled. If the hearing officer determines that one or more of the nuisance conditions described in the notice of abatement exists, he shall issue a written order of abatement which shall contain the following: 
(1)  A finding and description of each nuisance condition existing at the subject property. 
(2)  The name of each person responsible for a nuisance condition, or conditions, at the subject property, as well as the name of any appellant who lacks responsibility therefore. 
(3)  The required corrective action and completion date for each unabated nuisance condition. 
(4)  Any other finding, determination or requirement that is relevant or related to the subject matter of the appeal. 
(b)  The decision of the hearing officer is final and conclusive. The order of abatement shall also contain the following statement: "The hearing officer's decision is final, and judicial review of this decision is subject to the provisions and time limits set forth in Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.5 et seq." 
(c)  A copy of the order of abatement shall be served by first class mail on each responsible person to whom the notice of abatement was issued. If the owner is not an appellant, a copy of the order of abatement shall also be served on the owner by first class mail to the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll. Failure of a responsible person to receive a properly addressed order of abatement shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  The failure of any appellant to comply with an order of abatement by completing each of the requisite corrective actions in the manner and time set forth in the order of abatement constitutes a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with section 1.01.150. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.140, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.150. - Abatement of nuisance by responsible persons prior to city abatement actions. 
(a)  Any responsible person shall have the right to fully abate a nuisance in accordance with an order of abatement prior to the date of entry by city forces or agents upon the subject real property, provided that all corrective actions are completed in the manner and time set forth in the order of abatement. In such instances, all administrative proceedings shall be cancelled. 
(b)  Once the city enters a subject real property to abate a public nuisance, it shall have the right to complete this action. 
(c)  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to obstruct, impede or interfere with city personnel in the performance of any act that is carried out to abate a public nuisance. 
(d)  All personal property that is removed by city personnel from premises in the abatement of a nuisance shall be lawfully disposed of or destroyed without regard to its actual or salvage value. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.150, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.160. - Emergency action to abate an imminent hazard. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of the Barstow Municipal Code to the contrary, the city manager may cause a public nuisance to be summarily abated if it is determined that the nuisance creates an imminent hazard to persons, or to other real or personal property and securing the site is necessary. 
(b)  Prior to abating a nuisance which creates an imminent hazard, the city manager shall attempt to notify a responsible person by telephone or in writing of the imminent hazard and request its abatement by said person; provided, however, that the city manager may dispense with any attempt at prior notification of a responsible person if, in the sole discretion of the city manager, the nature or severity of the hazard justifies such inaction. If notice has been so given but, in the sole discretion of the city manager, the responsible persons fail to take immediate and meaningful steps to abate the imminent hazard, the city may abate the nuisance with city personnel without further notice. 
(c)  Within ten business days following emergency actions by city personnel to abate an imminent hazard, the city shall serve any responsible person with a notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard by first class mail. Notice to a property owner shall be mailed to the mailing address set forth in the last equalized assessment roll. Failure of any responsible person to receive a notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  A notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard shall contain the following provisions: 
(1)  The name of all responsible persons who are being served with the notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard and the address of the real property on which the imminent hazard was present. 
(2)  A brief description of the conditions and reasons why it constituted an imminent hazard. 
(3)  A brief description of the law prohibiting or pertaining to the imminent hazard. 
(4)  A brief description of the actions city personnel took to abate the imminent hazard. 
(e)  Omission of any of the foregoing provisions in a notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard, whether in whole or in part, or the failure of a responsible person to receive this document, shall not render it defective or render any proceeding or action pursuant to this chapter invalid. 
(f)  Emergency abatement of an imminent hazard by city personnel shall not preclude the city from recording a notice of substandard property in accordance with the provisions of section 6.28.220, if conditions thereafter remain at the premises that constitute a violation of law or a public nuisance. 
(g)  The city shall be entitled to recover its fees, costs, and expenses (incidental or otherwise) for the abatement of an imminent hazard. In such instances, the city shall follow the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.160, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.170. - Combination of notices. 
    The notices that are authorized by this chapter may be combined in the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.170, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.180. - Establishment of costs of abatement. 
(a)  The city shall keep an accounting of the abatement costs. 
(b)  The city shall serve a statement of abatement costs on the responsible persons within 20 calendar days of the city's completion of nuisance abatement actions. Said abatement costs shall consist of all city costs and expenses associated with actions taken to abate the nuisance(s) whether through criminal, civil, administrative, or other means, per section 1.01.150 et seq. Service of this statement shall be made in the manner provided for in section 6.28.080. 
(c)  Unless a timely contest of the statement of abatement costs is filed, a responsible person shall tender the abatement costs in U.S. currency to the city within 30 calendar days of the date of service of the statement of abatement costs. 
(d)  A responsible person has the right to contest a statement of abatement costs by filing a written request for contest with the city clerk's office (located at 220 East Mountain View St., Suite A, Barstow, California 92311) within ten calendar days of service of the statement of abatement costs. 
(1)  A written request for contest shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name, address, telephone number, and signature of each responsible party who is contesting the statement of abatement costs. 
b.  Address and description of real property upon which the city abated a public nuisance. 
c.  Date of the statement of abatement costs being appealed. 
d.  Description of the specific abatement cost being contested, and a statement of the grounds for contest in sufficient detail to enable the city council to understand the nature of the controversy. 
(2)  No fee shall be due for the filing of a request for contest. 
(e)  Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely request for contest constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a statement of abatement costs. In this event, the statement of abatement costs is final and binding, and the city may proceed to collect its abatement costs as contained in a final statement of abatement costs in any manner allowed by law. 
(f)  If a timely request for contest is received by the city clerk, a hearing shall be set before the city council no later than 60 calendar days, and no sooner than ten calendar days, of receipt. A notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be served on all responsible parties who contested the statement of abatement costs by first class mail to the addresses stated on the request form at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing. Failure of a person requesting a contest to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(g)  Any request by an appellant to continue a hearing must be submitted to the city clerk in writing no later than five business days before the date scheduled for the hearing. The city council may continue a hearing for good cause; however, in no event may the hearing be continued for more than 45 calendar days without stipulation by all parties. 
(h)  At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the request to contest the statement of abatement costs, the city council shall hear and pass upon the evidence submitted by city personnel, together with any objections or protests raised by responsible persons liable for said costs. Thereupon, the city council may make such revision, correction or modification to the statement as it may deem just, after which the statement, as it is submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The hearing may be continued from time to time for good cause. 
(i)  The decision of the city council is final. 
(j)  The city clerk shall cause a confirmed statement of abatement costs to be served upon all persons who contested the original statement by first class mail to the addresses stated on the request form. This document shall also contain the following statement: "Judicial review of the city council's decision is subject to the provisions and time limits set forth in Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.5 et seq." 
(k)  Failure of a person who contested the statement of abatement costs, or any other responsible person, to receive a properly addressed confirmed statement shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(l)  A responsible person shall tender the abatement costs in U.S. currency to the city within 30 calendar days of the date of service of the confirmed statement of abatement costs. The city may thereafter proceed to collect its abatement costs as contained in the confirmed statement of abatement costs in any manner allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.180, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.190. - Collection of abatement costs by special assessment. 
(a)  The city may cause a special assessment to be made upon real property upon which a public nuisance was abated pursuant to Government Code § 38773.5 in the event a statement of abatement costs or a confirmed statement of abatement costs is not paid in a timely manner. 
(b)  A notice of special assessment shall be sent to the owners of the subject real property by certified mail at the time the assessment is imposed which shall contain the following recitals: 
The property may be sold after five years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax collector's power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrance for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
(c)  The city attorney or city prosecutor shall establish the notice of special assessment form for use or consideration by the tax collector in collecting a special assessment. 
(d)  The notice of special assessment shall be entitled to recordation with the county recorder's office. 
(e)  The amount of a special assessment shall also constitute a personal obligation of the property owners of land upon which the nuisance was abated. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.190, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.200. - Collection of costs of abatement by nuisance abatement lien. 
(a)  As an alternative to the procedure contained in section 6.28.190, the city may cause a nuisance abatement lien to be recorded upon real property upon which a public nuisance was abated pursuant to Government Code § 38773.1 in the event a statement of abatement costs or a confirmed statement of abatement costs is not paid in a timely manner. 
(b)  A lien shall not be recorded prior to serving the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the public nuisance existed, with a notice. This document shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with article 3 (commencing with section 415.10) of chapter 4 of title 5 of part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county pursuant to Government Code § 6062. 
(c)  The nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the county recorder's office and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. 
(d)  A nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section shall specify the amount of the lien for the city, the name of the city department on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date of the abatement actions, the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
(e)  In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (d) of this section shall be recorded by the city. 
(f)  A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment. 
(g)  The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
(h)  The amount of a nuisance abatement lien shall also constitute a personal obligation of the property owners of land upon which the nuisance was abated. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.200, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.210. - Treble the costs of abatement. 
    Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a public nuisance, except for public nuisance conditions abated pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 17980, the court may order that person to pay treble the costs of the abatement. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.210, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.220. - Recordation of substandard notice. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of the Barstow Municipal Code to the contrary, if the city determines that any property, building or structure, or any part thereof, is in violation of any provision of the Barstow Municipal Code and said violation has not been fully abated or corrected, as determined by the city, in the manner and time provided in a written notice to a responsible person, then the city, in its sole discretion, may record a notice of substandard property with the county recorder's office against said premises. As used herein, the term "fully abated or corrected" includes the procurement of all required city approvals, permits, licenses and the passage of all city required inspections. 
(b)  The city may record a notice of substandard property without the issuance of a notice of abatement pursuant to section 6.28.060, provided that a written notice of violation or a written notice of correction to a responsible person previously disclosed that a substandard notice may be recorded against a property if a violation is not fully abated or corrected in the manner and time delineated in said notice. 
(c)  A notice of substandard property may be recorded after service of a notice of abatement provided that: 
(1)  The notice of abatement contained this disclosure; 
(2)  The public nuisance was not fully abated or corrected in the manner and time specified in the notice of abatement; and 
(3)  A timely and proper appeal to the notice of abatement was not made. 
(d)  A notice of substandard property may be recorded after service of an order of abatement provided that: 
(1)  The order of abatement contained this disclosure; and 
(2)  The public nuisance was not fully abated or corrected in the manner and time specified in the order of abatement. 
(e)  The city attorney or the city prosecutor shall approve the form that constitutes a notice of substandard property. 
(f)  The city shall record a notice of rescission of substandard property with the county recorder's office within ten business days of its determination that a violation or a public nuisance has been fully abated or corrected. 
(g)  The city shall cause copies of recorded notices of substandard property and notices of rescission of substandard property to be served on all persons having an ownership interest in the subject real property as shown in the last equalized assessment roll. Service thereof shall be by first class mail. Failure of any person to receive such notices shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.220, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.230. - Code compliance fees. 
(a)  Pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 17951, responsible persons who cause, allow or maintain a violation in, or upon, residential properties, shall be charged code compliance fees by the city to defray its costs of code compliance actions. Such fees shall not exceed the amount reasonably required to achieve this objective and are chargeable whether the city's code compliance actions occur in the absence of formal administrative or judicial proceedings, as well as prior to, during, or subsequent to, the initiation of such proceedings. 
(b)  The amounts or rates of code compliance fees for city personnel time, inspections and other resources that are used for code compliance actions shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  The city manager, or a designee thereof, is authorized to adopt regulations for the uniform imposition of code compliance fees, and for related administrative actions pertaining to such fees. 
(d)  The fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other fees or charges that responsible persons may owe in accordance with any other provision of this Code, or which are imposed pursuant to county, state or federal laws or regulations. 
(e)  Code compliance fees shall be recoverable in conjunction with any civil, administrative or criminal action to abate, cause the abatement or cessation of, or otherwise remove a violation or a public nuisance. 
(f)  Failure to pay code compliance fees shall constitute a debt that is collectible in any manner allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.230, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.240. - Recovery of attorney's fees. 
(a)  A prevailing party in any administrative, civil or equitable judicial action to abate, or cause the abatement or cessation of a public nuisance as defined in this chapter, or in any appeal or other judicial action arising therefrom, may recover reasonable attorney's fees in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Attorney's fees are not recoverable by any person as a prevailing party unless a city official (other than the city manager or designated hearing officer) elects in writing to seek recovery of the city's attorney's fees at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding. Failure to make such an election precludes any entitlement to, or award of, attorney's fees in favor of any person or the city. 
(2)  The city is the prevailing party when an administrative or judicial determination is made or affirmed by which a person is found to be responsible for one or more conditions or activities that constitute a public nuisance. A person is the prevailing party only when a final administrative or judicial determination completely absolves that person of responsibility for all conditions or activities that were alleged in that action or proceeding to constitute a public nuisance. An administrative or judicial determination that results in findings of partial responsibility and partial non-responsibility on the part of a person for conditions or activities that were alleged in that action or proceeding to constitute a public nuisance shall nevertheless result in the city being the prevailing party. 
(b)  Provided that the city has made an election to seek attorney's fees, an award of attorney's fees to a person shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in that action or proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.240, 5-20-2013) 
Sec. 6.28.250. - Applicability of other laws. 
(a)  This chapter does not exclusively regulate the conditions and use of property within the city. This chapter shall supplement other provisions of this Code and other statutes, ordinances or regulations now existing or subsequently enacted by the city, the county, the state or any other entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(b)  The procedures for abatement set forth in this chapter are not exclusive and are in addition to any other provisions set forth in this Code or by state law for the abatement of public nuisances, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 905-2013, § 6.28.250, 5-20-2013) 
CHAPTER 6.30. - ADMINISTRATIVE FINES AND PENALTIES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Establishment of amounts, procedures, and appeals for administrative fines and penalties, Government Code § 53069.4. 

Sec. 6.30.010. - Administrative fines and penalties. 
    Each violation of a provision of this Code for which the penalty is an infraction or misdemeanor shall be subject to an administrative fine and penalty pursuant to this Code. The provisions of this chapter relating to administrative fines and penalties are in addition to all other remedies, criminal and civil, which may be pursued by the city to address any violation of codes, ordinances, mandates, regulations, resolutions, rules or other laws adopted by the city. Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from initiating a civil, criminal or other legal or equitable proceedings. 
(Code 1969, § 6.30.010; Ord. No. 789, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 6.30.020. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    Administrative citation means a notice issued by an enforcement officer pursuant to this chapter that there has been a violation of the code or any code it adopts by reference, including a notice of noncorrection unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Building code violations means any violations of chapter 15.08. 
    Code commission means a commission of three or more people appointed by the city council to serve as the hearing authority. 
    Code violation means any violation of this Code, any code adopted by reference in this Code, or any other ordinance of the city. 
    Enforcement officer means an individual enumerated in section 1.01.160 and designated by the city manager to enforce the provisions of the code. 
    Hearing authority means the code commission; provided, however, that unless three or more individuals have been appointed by the city council to serve on the code commission and are currently serving in that capacity, then the city council shall appoint one or more hearing officers to serve as the hearing authority for a fixed term. 
    Issuance date means the day an administrative citation is personally served on a responsible person, is mailed to a responsible person or is posted on real property where a property related violation occurs. 
    Issue means to give, mail or post an administrative citation. 
    Notice of decision means a notice that informs a responsible person of a decision made pursuant to provisions of this chapter. 
    Notice of noncorrection means a notice contained in a second administrative citation issued for a building code violation that notifies the responsible person that the violation on the prior administrative citation has not been corrected within the applicable correction period. 
    Responsible person means any of the following: 
(1)  An individual or legal entity causing a code violation. 
(2)  An individual or legal entity that, by his or its action or failure to act, maintains or allows a code violation to continue. 
(3)  An individual or legal entity whose agent, employee or independent contractor causes a code violation by his action or failure to act. 
(4)  An owner of, or a lessee or sublessee with the current right of possession of, real property on which a code violation occurs. 
(5)  An on-site manager of a business normally working daily at the site when the business is open and responsible for the activities at such business. 
(6)  A natural person or legal entity, and the owners, majority stockholders, controlling owners, corporate officers, trustees and/or general partners of a legal entity that is a responsible person under subsections (1) through (5) of this definition. 
(Code 1969, § 6.30.020; Ord. No. 789, § 1(part), 2003; Ord. No. 882-2011, § 2, 5-16-2011) 
Sec. 6.30.030. - Administrative citation. 
(a)  When a violation does not create an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the general public, the city shall provide a reasonable period of time before the imposition of an administrative citation for a responsible person to correct or otherwise remedy a violation. After determining that a responsible person has violated a provision of this Code and has not corrected such violation after a reasonable time, an enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation to that person. 
(b)  If, following an investigation, an enforcement officer determines that a responsible person committed a code violation, he may issue an administrative citation for a violation whether or not he personally observed the creation of the circumstances which constitute a code violation. 
(c)  A responsible person to whom an administrative citation is issued shall be liable for, and shall pay to the city, the fine pursuant to the administrative citation on the date specified in the administrative citation. 
(d)  Every responsible person who applies for and receives a permit, license or other approval (e.g., subdivision map, special use permit, variance, zoning clearance) shall comply with all conditions imposed upon the issuance of the permit, license or other approval. If a responsible person violates any condition of such permit, license or other approval, an enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation to that responsible person, who shall be liable for payment of any civil fines. 
(e)  Each day a responsible person allows a code violation to exist shall be a separate violation and that responsible person shall be subject to a separate fine for each such day. 
(f)  An administrative citation may charge a code violation for one or more days on which a violation exists and for violation of one or more code sections. 
(g)  The city council, planning commission or city staff may consider the fact that a responsible person has been issued administrative citations when determining whether to grant, suspend, revoke or deny any permit, license or other approval to that responsible person and such administrative citation shall be evidence that the responsible person has committed acts that threaten the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(Code 1969, § 6.30.030; Ord. No. 789, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 6.30.040. - Building code violations. 
(a)  When a responsible person is issued an administrative citation for a building code violation, the enforcement officer shall provide the responsible person 30 days in which to correct the violation. No responsible person issued an administrative citation for a building code violation shall be liable for a civil fine unless the violation continues after the 30 days allowed for its correction, including any written extensions granted by the city manager, and after the responsible person is issued a second administrative citation containing a notice of noncorrection. 
(b)  A responsible person issued an administrative citation for a building code violation may request an extension of the correction period, provided that such request is filed with the city manager prior to the expiration of the original 30-day correction period. 
(c)  The city manager may grant a reasonable extension of the period of time to correct a violation if the responsible person has submitted substantial evidence showing that the correction cannot be made within the 30-day period. The city manager's decision to grant or deny the request for an extension shall be in writing and shall be final and nonappealable. 
(d)  The filing for an extension does not, unless granted, extend the 30-day correction periods. 
(e)  If a building code violation has not been corrected during the correction period, an enforcement officer may issue a second administrative citation. A responsible person issued an administrative citation containing a notice of noncorrection shall be liable for, and shall pay to the city, the fines described in the second administrative citation by the date specified in that second administrative citation. An enforcement officer may issue additional administrative citations and impose fines for every day the code violation continues uncorrected from the end of the correction period. 
(f)  If, upon reinspection, an enforcement officer determines a code violation has been corrected, the enforcement officer shall issue a notice to the responsible person stating such conclusion. 
(Code 1969, § 6.30.040; Ord. No. 789, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 6.30.050. - Contents of administrative citation. 
(a)  Every administrative citation shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name of the responsible persons. 
(2)  Date on which an inspection established the code violations. 
(3)  The code sections violated. 
(4)  Address where the code violations occurred. 
(5)  Description of the code violations. 
(6)  The amount and effective date of the fine which will be, or is, imposed. 
(7)  Procedures to pay the fine, if imposed. 
(8)  For building code violations, the date that the 30-day correction period expires and the procedure to request an extension of that period. 
(9)  Description of the procedure for requesting the preliminary review, waiver of fine deposit and hearing to contest the administrative citation. 
(10)  A statement that the cited code violation is a public nuisance and that collection of any unpaid fines and/or nuisance abatement costs may be placed as a special assessment or lien against the property where a violation occurs. 
(11)  Signature of the enforcement officer issuing the administrative citation. 
(12)  Date of issuance. 
(13)  Any other information deemed necessary by the city attorney for enforcement or collection of the administrative fines. 
(b)  A self-addressed envelope in which the responsible person may mail to the city the fine or request a hearing regarding the waiver of fine deposit and/or hearing shall accompany any administrative citation. 
(Code 1969, § 6.30.050; Ord. No. 789, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 6.30.060. - Issuance of administrative citations. 
    An administrative citation may be issued as follows: 
(1)  An enforcement officer may personally serve the citation on the responsible person. The responsible person is required to sign a copy of the administrative citation showing his receipt, but his failure to do so shall have no effect on the enforcement of the citation. 
(2)  An enforcement officer may mail the administrative citation by first class mail. 
(3)  An enforcement officer may post a copy of the administrative citation on the subject property in a conspicuous place for a property related code violation and, in which case, the enforcement officer shall also mail a copy of the administrative violation to the responsible person at the address where the violation occurred. 
(Code 1969, § 6.30.060; Ord. No. 789, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 6.30.070. - Amount of administrative fines and penalties. 
(a)  The fines for violations of this Code shall be established by resolution of the city council. The schedule of fines may include escalating fine amounts for repeated code violations within specific periods of time. 
(b)  Administrative fines not paid prior to their due date shall be subject to a penalty and interest for every day of delinquency. 
(Code 1969, § 6.30.070; Ord. No. 789, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 6.30.080. - Payment of fines. 
(a)  All fines are due on the day specified in the administrative citation. 
(b)  Fines shall be paid to the city manager. Payment shall be made by mailing the envelope included with the administrative citation and enclosing the fine amount paid by check or money order. Cash payments may be made only in person at city hall. 
(c)  Payment of a fine or penalty pursuant to this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any continued or repeated violation of this Code. 
(d)  Pending a hearing by the hearing authority, payment of a fine may be stayed if the city manager determines, pursuant to section 6.30.090, that a responsible person is unable to deposit the fine. 
(Code 1969, § 6.30.080; Ord. No. 789, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 6.30.090. - Preliminary review. 
(a)  If the request is made within 14 days of the date that an administrative citation that does not contain a notice of noncorrection is issued, any responsible person may request a preliminary review. 
(b)  A request for a preliminary review shall be made on a form specified by the city manager, shall be filed with the city manager, and shall include all information that the responsible person desires the city manager to consider in his preliminary review of the citation. A request for preliminary review may include a request for waiver of the fine deposit. A responsible person requesting a waiver of fine deposit bears the burden to establish by substantial evidence, including a sworn affidavit, that he is unable to deposit the fine associated with the administrative citation. 
(c)  The preliminary review shall be conducted by the city manager. 
(d)  The preliminary review shall include a review of the administrative citation, the written request for an administrative review and any evidence the responsible person may submit with the written request. 
(e)  The responsible person shall be notified of the results of the preliminary review within ten working days of filing a written request for preliminary review. The decision on a preliminary review is not a final disposition of a citation and therefore is not subject to judicial review. 
(f)  A request for preliminary review shall not extend any time period for compliance, the due date of any fine imposed or the time to request an administrative hearing. 
(g)  If the city manager concludes that no code violation occurred or that the responsible person was not responsible for the code violation, then he shall dismiss the administrative citation, without prejudice to the issuance of a further administrative citation should additional evidence be developed. 
(h)  The city manager shall also rule whether the responsible person qualifies for waiver of the fine deposit, if such a request has been made. 
(Code 1969, § 6.30.090; Ord. No. 789, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 6.30.100. - Administrative hearing. 
(a)  A responsible person may request a hearing, except that a hearing for a building code violation may not be requested unless and until a second administrative citation containing a notice of noncorrection has been issued. 
(b)  A request for a hearing shall be filed with the city manager on a form established by the city manager within 30 days of the issuance of the administrative citation, and shall include any grounds for the hearing which the responsible person wishes the city to consider. Unless waived upon preliminary review, the request shall be accompanied by a deposit of the fine imposed by the administrative citation. 
(c)  A responsible person may request one continuance of a hearing provided he does so in writing in advance of the date of the hearing and states a reasonable basis for the request. Unless the city issues a written notice of continuance, a responsible person shall attend the hearing at the date, time and location specified in the notice of hearing transmitted by the city to the responsible person. A responsible person's failure to attend a hearing shall constitute an abandonment of the request for the hearing and a failure to exhaust the administrative remedies. 
(Code 1969, § 6.30.100; Ord. No. 789, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 6.30.110. - Hearing procedures. 
(a)  The hearing shall be conducted by the hearing authority at the date, time and location specified in the notice of hearing transmitted by the city to the responsible person. 
(b)  The city manager shall provide all information relevant to the administrative citation to the hearing authority prior to the hearing date. If an enforcement officer submits a written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing authority, a copy of this report shall be issued to the responsible person at least five calendar days prior to the hearing. Issuance shall be deemed complete at the time the report is deposited in the mail and addressed to the person at the address indicated on the administrative hearing request form or such other address for the responsible person of which the city has notice. 
(c)  An administrative citation and other reports prepared by an enforcement officer concerning a code violation and any attempted correction of a code violation shall be accepted by the hearing authority as prima facie evidence of the facts stated in such documents. 
(d)  The hearing authority shall allow the responsible person an opportunity to testify at the hearing and to present evidence concerning the administrative citation, any financial hardship or any code violation specified by the administrative citation. 
(e)  The enforcement officer or any other representatives of the city shall not be required to attend the hearing. The hearing authority shall not require that the enforcement officer submit any evidence other than a copy of the administrative citation. The enforcement officer may, in his discretion, appear at the hearing and/or submit additional evidence at the hearing. 
(f)  The hearing authority may continue a hearing from time to time and allow a responsible person additional time to remedy a violation. In addition, the hearing authority may request additional information or evidence from the recipient of an administrative citation prior to issuing a decision. 
(g)  All hearings shall be recorded on a video or audio device, unless the city elects to use a court reporter. If a court reporter is not used, the city need not provide transcriptions of any hearings, but, within 15 days after payment of a reasonable duplication fee, shall make the video or audio recordings available to the responsible person. If a court reporter is used, a recipient of the administrative citation may obtain a copy of the transcript upon payment of any applicable fees or costs. 
(h)  A hearing need not be conducted in accordance with the technical rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might consider such admission improper in a civil action. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. Irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(i)  After considering all testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing authority shall issue a written decision to affirm, modify or dismiss the administrative citation. The decision shall include the hearing authority's findings, as well as information regarding the recipient's right to seek judicial review of the decision and the time in which to do so. The city manager shall issue the responsible person a copy of the hearing authority's written decision. The decision of the hearing authority shall be final and non-appealable. 
(j)  If the hearing authority determines that the administrative citation should be affirmed, the fine and/or penalty amount on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city. 
(Code 1969, § 6.30.110; Ord. No. 789, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 6.30.120. - Judicial review. 
(a)  A responsible person may seek judicial review of the hearing authority's decision pursuant to Government Code § 53069.4 within 20 calendar days after he receives a copy of the notice of decision. The appeal shall be heard de novo, except that the contents of the city's file in the case shall be received in evidence. A copy of the document or instrument of the city providing notice of the violation and imposing the administrative fine and penalty shall be admitted into evidence as prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein. The responsible person shall personally serve or mail, by first class mail, a copy of his request for judicial review on or to the city clerk. 
(b)  If the court finds in favor of the responsible person, the city shall reimburse the fine and any interest and penalties in accordance with the judgment of the court. 
(c)  If no request for judicial review of a decision of the hearing authority is filed within the time set forth in this section, the order or decision shall be final for all purposes. 
(Code 1969, § 6.30.120; Ord. No. 789, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 6.30.130. - Collection of delinquent fines and penalties. 
(a)  The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of fines, including interest and penalties. 
(b)  If a responsible person owes the city any delinquent fines, interest, penalties, liens or assessments, the city may refuse to issue, extend or renew a permit, license or other approval to that person or pertaining to the property that is the subject of the administrative citation and delinquent fines. 
(c)  The city prosecutor may issue a criminal citation or complaint against any responsible person who does not timely pay any fine due to the city. 
(d)  Any violation of this Code shall constitute a public nuisance. The city may seek to abate the public nuisance and collect the costs incurred by the city by recording a nuisance abatement lien and/or special assessment against the property on which a property-related violation occurred pursuant to Government Code § 38773.1 or 38773.5, or other applicable law. 
(e)  Any delinquent fines, interest and penalties may be recovered as a lien or special assessment against the property on which the code violation occurred. 
(f)  Prior to recording a lien or special assessment, the city shall prepare a cost report itemizing the amount owed by the responsible person. 
(g)  The city shall notify each responsible person of the time, date and location that the city council will consider any cost report imposing a lien or special assessment on property. 
(h)  At a public hearing, the city council shall consider the cost report and any objections of any responsible person and may modify the cost report if it determines that the public interest requires it to do so. 
(i)  Upon approval by the city council, the city shall file a certified copy of the cost report with the county treasurer-tax collector. The city shall request that the treasurer-tax collect enter each assessment on the tax roll and collect each assessment at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes. 
(Code 1969, § 6.30.130; Ord. No. 789, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 6.30.140. - Recovery of abatement costs. 
    The administrative citation process described in this chapter does not preclude the city from recovering any code violation abatement costs incurred by the city in performing its code enforcement efforts pursuant to this Code. 
(Code 1969, § 6.30.140; Ord. No. 789, § 1(part), 2003) 
CHAPTER 6.32. - GRAFFITI[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to adopt ordinance regulating the sale of aerosol containers of paint or other liquid substances capable of defacing property and governing the placement of graffiti on public or private, real or personal property, Penal Code § 594.5; authority of city to provide for summary abatement of graffiti nuisance at expense of person creating the nuisance, Government Code § 38772. 

Sec. 6.32.010. - Authorization to remove graffiti and other unauthorized inscribed materials from private and public properties. 
    Whenever the city manager or his designee determines that graffiti or other inscribed materials are so located on public or privately owned permanent structures on public or privately owned real property within this city so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way in this city, the city manager or his designee is authorized to provide for the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material upon the following conditions: 
(1)  In removing the graffiti or other inscribed material, the painting or repair of a more extensive area shall not be authorized. 
(2)  Where a structure is owned by a public entity other than this city, the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material may be authorized only after securing the consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure and such entity executes a release and waiver approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(3)  Where a structure is privately owned, the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material may be authorized only after securing the consent of the owner and the owner executes a release and waiver approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(Code 1969, § 6.32.010; Ord. No. 602, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 6.32.020. - Alternative procedures available. 
    In the event the property owner of private property upon which graffiti or other inscribed material has been placed declines to consent to removal thereto by the city or fails or refuses to grant subject consent within a reasonable time after request made by the city, the property upon which graffiti or other inscribed materials has been placed shall be subject to the abatement process set forth in chapter 6.28. 
(Code 1969, § 6.32.020; Ord. No. 602, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 6.32.030. - Intent. 
    Graffiti on public and private property is a blighting factor which not only depreciates the value of the property, but also the value of the adjacent and surrounding communities. Government Code § 53069.3 authorizes a city to enact ordinances to provide for use of city funds to remove graffiti from publicly and privately owned permanent structures located within the city. The city council finds that graffiti or related inscribed material is obnoxious and, pursuant to Government Code § 53069.3, authorizes that a program be instituted allowing for the use of city funds to remove graffiti on public and private property. It is the city council's further intent to provide for the prohibition of the placement of graffiti on public and private property as herein set forth. 
(Code 1969, § 6.32.030; Ord. No. 715, § 1(part), 1995) 
State Law reference- Repair, removal or replacement of defaced publicly or privately owned property, Government Code § 53069.3. 
Sec. 6.32.040. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint capable of defacing property. 
    Felt-tip marker means any broad-tipped indelible marker or similar implement containing ink or dye that is not water-soluble, and which has a flat or angled writing surface one-fourth inch long or greater. 
    Graffiti means and includes any unauthorized inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any structural component of any building, structure, or other facility, regardless of the nature of the material of that structural component. 
    Publicly or privately owned structures means and includes any freeway, highway, street, alley, curb, gutter, sidewalk, drainage channel, structure or facility, parking lot, trees or other foliage, walls, fences, buildings and any portion thereof, windows, traffic signals and devices, vehicles, but may also include shelters, billboards, signs and supporting structures, traffic signs, signals and structures, and public utility structures and facilities. 
(Code 1969, § 6.32.040; Ord. No. 715, § 1(part), 1995) 
Sec. 6.32.050. - Sales to minors prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person who owns, conducts, operates, manages, or is employed by any business enterprise which sells aerosol paint containers or felt-tip markers to sell any such aerosol paint containers or felt-tip markers to minors. 
(Code 1969, § 6.32.050; Ord. No. 715, § 1(part), 1995) 
Sec. 6.32.060. - Graffiti prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to paint, chalk or otherwise apply graffiti or inscribe material on publicly or privately owned structures located on publicly or privately owned real property within the city. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the owner of any private property to permit graffiti or other inscribed material to remain so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way in the city, such as a road, parkway or alley, providing the city has given the property owner written notice to remove the graffiti within a period of seven calendar days, and the seven-day period has elapsed, unless the property owner agrees in writing to allow the city to remove the graffiti. 
(Code 1969, § 6.32.060; Ord. No. 715, § 1(part), 1995) 
State Law reference- Vandalism, Penal Code § 594. 
Sec. 6.32.070. - Graffiti removal. 
(a)  The following procedure shall be followed for removal of graffiti by the city, with the consent of the property owner. Whenever the public works department determines that graffiti or other inscribed material is so located on public or private property so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way, and the owner of the property consents to the removal by the city of the graffiti, the city shall be authorized to provide for the removal of the graffiti. 
(b)  If the city provides for the removal of graffiti, it shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that where the graffiti is located. 
(c)  Prior to the removal of graffiti, the city shall obtain written consent of the owner and the owner shall execute an appropriate release prepared by the city attorney. 
(Code 1969, § 6.32.070; Ord. No. 715, § 1(part), 1995) 
Sec. 6.32.080. - Penalties. 
(a)  Criminal penalties. Any violation of section 6.32.050(a) shall be a misdemeanor punishable by either six months in jail, a $1,000.00 fine, or by such fine and imprisonment, and by the performance of community service in the form of graffiti cleanup to the maximum extent permitted by Penal Code § 594 and/or any other provision of law. 
(b)  Additional penalties available. Whenever deemed appropriate, it is the city's intent to petition a sentencing court to impose the following additional penalties upon conviction: 
(1)  Litter or graffiti cleanup pursuant to Vehicle Code § 42001.7, upon conviction of violation of Vehicle Code § 23111, 23112 or 23113(a). 
(2)  Suspension or delay of issuance of a driver's license pursuant to Vehicle Code § 13202.6 upon a graffiti-vandalism conviction. 
(3)  Performance of community service, including graffiti removal service by any minor determined to be a ward of the court as a result of committing a vandalism-related offense in the city, as provided in Welfare and Institutions Code article 18.5 - Graffiti Removal and Damage Recovery Program (Welfare and Institutions Code § 742.10 et seq.). 
(4)  Performance of community service, including graffiti removal service of up to 100 hours by any minor determined to be a ward of the court as a result of committing a drug-related offense in the city, as provided in Welfare and Institutions Code § 729.8. 
(c)  It is the city's further intent that pursuant to Penal Code § 640.6(a), all acts of graffiti-vandalism occurring within the city shall be prosecuted as misdemeanors pursuant to Penal Code § 594 et seq., or this chapter. 
(d)  Pursuant to Civil Code § 1714.1, any parent or legal guardian whose minor child is convicted of a violation of this chapter or who paints, chalks, or otherwise applies graffiti as prohibited by section 6.32.050, or who assists, aids or abets such graffiti application, shall be personally liable for any and all costs to any person or business incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by said child, or by said graffiti implement, and for all law enforcement costs, city staff costs, attorney's fees and court costs incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages or reimbursement, up to $25,000.00. 
(Code 1969, § 6.32.080; Ord. No. 715, § 1(part), 1995) 
Sec. 6.32.085. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6.32.090. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6.32.100. - Graffiti abatement charges. 
(a)  The abatement and related administrative costs incurred by the city in abating any nuisance resulting from the defacement of property by graffiti or any other inscribed material shall be: 
(1)  A personal obligation of any minor creating, causing or committing the nuisance; 
(2)  A personal obligation of the parent or guardian having custody and control of that minor; 
(3)  A special assessment against any parcel of land owned by that minor; and/or 
(4)  A special assessment against any parcel of land owned by the parent or guardian having custody and control of that minor. 
(b)  If the abatement and related administrative costs incurred by the city in abating any nuisance resulting from graffiti or any other inscribed material are to be imposed as a special assessment against a parcel of land owned by the minor or parent or guardian of the minor, the building official shall render an itemized report in writing to the city council showing such costs. A copy of said report, together with a notice of the time when said report shall be heard by the council for confirmation, shall be served upon the owner of the property which is to be so assessed at least five days prior to submitting the same to the city council. Proof of service shall be made by affidavit or declaration placed in the city file. The city council shall then impose a special assessment pursuant to subsection (a) of this section which assessment shall constitute a lien on real property owned by the minor or the parents or legal guardian of said minor or minors. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this subsection: 
    Abatement and related administrative costs include, but are not limited to, court costs, attorney's fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the minor. 
    Graffiti or other inscribed material means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any real or personal property. 
    Minor means a minor who has confessed to, admitted to, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of Penal Code § 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6 or 640.7, or a minor convicted by final judgment of a violation of Penal Code § 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6 or 640.7, or a minor declared a ward of the juvenile court pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code § 602 by reason of the commission of an act prohibited by Penal Code § 594, 594.5, 640.5, 640.6 or 640.7. 
(d)  This section shall not be deemed to preclude recovery of the costs of abating a nuisance resulting from graffiti from any other person who may be responsible for such costs under law. 
(Code 1969, § 6.32.100; Ord. No. 715, § 1(part), 1995) 
CHAPTER 6.34. - HAZARDOUS WASTE 

Sec. 6.34.010. - Adoption of hazardous waste management plan. 
    The county hazardous waste management plan is adopted. Chapters 1 through 4, chapters 6 through 9 and chapters 11 through 14 are incorporated by reference. Chapter 5 and chapter 10 are adopted with revisions. The entire text of the plan is made a part of the general plan. 
(Code 1969, § 6.34.010; Ord. No. 654, § 2(part), 1990) 
Sec. 6.34.020. - Findings of consistency. 
    All zoning, subdivision, conditional use permits and variances will be consistent with the hazardous waste management plan. 
(Code 1969, § 6.34.020; Ord. No. 654, § 1(part), 1990) 
CHAPTER 6.36. - SHOPPING CARTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 938-2015 , § 1, adopted September 21, 2015, amended chapter 6.36 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 6, §§ 6.36.010-6.36.100, pertained to shopping carts. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
State Law reference- Identification of shopping and laundry carts, Business and Professions Code § 22435 et seq. 

Sec. 6.36.010. - Findings and declaration. 
    The city council makes the following findings and declarations: The accumulation of wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof, on public property is found to create a condition tending to reduce property values, to promote blight and deterioration, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to be aesthetically detrimental to the community and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Responsibility for minimizing or eliminating this impact rests with individuals who use shopping carts and the businesses which provide shopping carts for their patrons. Therefore, effective containment or control of the shopping carts shall be mandated, and the presence of wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof, on public property, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 938-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 6.36.020. - Definitions. 
    The following word and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them unless otherwise noted: 
    Abandoned shopping cart means a shopping cart located outside the premises or parking lot or facility of the business establishment which furnishes the shopping cart for use by its patrons. 
    City Manager means the manager for the city or his/her designee. 
    Shopping cart means any basket of any size, mounted on wheels or a similar device, including parts thereof, provided by a store operator for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind within a business establishment or designated parking or loading area of that business establishment. 
    Shopping cart owner means the owner of the shopping cart, the agent of the owner of the shopping cart, including individuals or business entities, or the business establishment which furnishes the shopping cart for use. 
    Store premises mean the lot area, maintained and managed by the business, that may include the building, parking lot and adjacent walkways, and where the business' shopping carts are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 938-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 6.36.030. - Administration and enforcement. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city manager and code enforcement of the city. In enforcing the provisions of this chapter, employees of the aforementioned departments may enter onto public property to examine a shopping cart or parts thereof, or to obtain information as to the identity of a shopping cart owner, and to remove, or cause the removal of, a shopping cart, or parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 938-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 6.36.040. - Retrieval. 
    All shopping cart owners shall secure and continuously maintain a service to retrieve shopping carts which have been removed from their premises, and provide evidence thereof, to the city manager upon request. 
(Ord. No. 938-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 6.36.050. - General assessments. 
(a)  The provisions contained in title 6 of the Barstow Municipal Code related to shopping carts shall apply. 
(b)  Upon request, shopping cart owners shall provide to the city manager, including but not limited to, information concerning shopping cart use, loss and recovery specific to that business location, and such other information deemed reasonable by the city manager to determine the adequacy of the shopping cart containment system or control method. 
(c)  All shopping cart owners shall post a multilingual sign not less than 18 inches in width and 24 inches in height with block lettering not less than one-half inch in width and two inches in height in a conspicuous place on the building within two feet of all customer entrances and exits stating, at a minimum, the following: 
REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS 
FROM THE PREMISES IS 
PROHIBITED BY LAW. 
B & P Code Section 22435.2 
(d)  Stores who have a high incidence of abandoned carts are required to secure installation of disabling devices on all shopping carts which prevent their removal from the owner's premises. A high incidence is defined when there is more than one occurrence of owner's carts abandoned for more than three business days. 
(e)  Cart identification is required. Every owner who, in connection with the conduct of a business, including but not limited to, a food dispensing business, retail business or laundry business, owns or makes any cart available to the public shall permanently affix a durable metal or plastic sign to such cart containing all the following information as required in the Business and Professions Code § 22435.1 as that statute now exists or may be amended hereafter. 
(f)  A cart that does not have a sign attached is presumed to be abandoned if it has been left standing unattended on any public property or private property other than the premises or parking area of the owner's business establishment. The city may impound such a cart, as provided in this chapter immediately upon discovery of the cart. 
(Ord. No. 938-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 6.36.060. - Unauthorized removal or possession. 
    Procedures related to removal and possession of any shopping carts shall be pursuant to Business and Professions Code, §§ 22435.2-22435.5. 
(Ord. No. 938-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 6.36.070. - Abandoned shopping carts; abatement, removal and storage. 
(a)  Procedures related to authorization for abatement, removal and storage of abandoned shopping carts shall be pursuant to Business and Professions Code, § 22435.7. 
(b)  The administrative fees for the removal and storage of shopping carts shall be established or modified by resolution of the city council and shall include the actual cost of removal and storage of any shopping cart, or parts thereof, plus the proportionate share of administrative costs in connection therewith. The schedule for such fees shall remain on file and be available in the finance department of the city. The city manager shall review the fees charged for such service at least once annually, and may recommend changes to the council when the costs for such services make it appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 938-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 6.36.080. - Shopping cart violations; misdemeanor. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 1.01 of this Code, whenever in this chapter, any act is prohibited or declared unlawful or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, it shall be a misdemeanor for each incident and/or each day of failure to comply. 
(Ord. No. 938-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Secs. 6.36.090-6.36.100. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 938-2015, § 2, adopted September 21, 2015, repealed §§ 6.36.090, 6.36.100, which pertained to impound and repeat violator fees. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
CHAPTER - 6.38. 
RESERVED 
Title 7 - ABANDONED VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Removal of parked and abandoned vehicles generally, Vehicle Code § 22650 et seq.; authority of city to abate and remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles from private or public property, Vehicle Code § 22660. 

CHAPTER 7.04. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.04.010. - General provisions. 
    In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Vehicle Code § 22660 to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations: 
(1)  The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
(2)  As used in this title: 
    Highway means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. The term "highway" includes street. 
    Owner of the land means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
    Owner of the vehicle means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
    Public property does not include the term "highway." 
    Vehicle means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1969, § 7.04.010; Ord. No. 306, § 1(part), 1970; Ord. No. 351, §§ 1, 2, 1971) 
Sec. 7.04.020. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This title shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; 
(2)  One vehicle or part thereof which is located behind a solid fence six feet in height or which is not plainly visible from a highway, street or other public or private property; or 
(3)  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than chapter 10 (commencing with section 22650) or Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this title. 
(b)  This title is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city council of the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1969, § 7.04.020; Ord. No. 306, § 1(part), 1970) 
Sec. 7.04.030. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this title shall be administered and enforced by the chief building inspector. In the enforcement of this title such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this title. 
(b)  When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this title. 
(Code 1969, § 7.04.030; Ord. No. 306, § 1(part), 1970) 
Sec. 7.04.040. - Costs. 
    The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs. This cost of administration may be set as a fixed sum per removal, or as a percentage of the actual cost of removal under this title. 
(Code 1969, § 7.04.040; Ord. No. 306, § 1(part), 1970) 
Sec. 7.04.050. - Notice of intention. 
(a)  Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the chief building inspector shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein. 
(b)  A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following form: 
Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the chief building inspector within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the city council on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
(c)  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day period, this statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within ten days after mailing the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city council shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(d)  The notice of intention is not required for removal of a vehicle or part thereof that is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and incapable of being towed, is valued at less than $200.00 by a person specified in Vehicle Code § 22855, and is determined by the city council to be a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety, provided that the property owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 7.04.050; Ord. No. 351, § 3, 1971) 
CHAPTER 7.08. - HEARINGS 

Sec. 7.08.010. - Notice of hearings. 
(a)  A public hearing shall be held on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or part thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or part thereof against the property on which it is located. 
(b)  Notice of hearing shall be mailed at least ten days before the hearing by certified mail, with a five-day return requested, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized county assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record unless vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. 
(c)  If any of the foregoing notices are returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, the hearing shall be continued to a date not less than ten days from the date of such return. 
(Code 1969, § 7.08.010; Ord. No. 306, § 1(part), 1970; Ord. No. 351, § 4, 1971) 
Sec. 7.08.020. - Hearing of testimony. 
(a)  All hearings under this title shall be held before the city council which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
(b)  The city council may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this title. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or part thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council may find that a vehicle or part thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which the vehicle or part thereof is located. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or part thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
(c)  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the land owner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the city council shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such land owner. 
(d)  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the city council but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Code 1969, § 7.08.020; Ord. No. 306, § 1(part), 1970; Ord. No. 351, §§ 5, 6, 1971) 
Sec. 7.08.030. - Written notice. 
(a)  The city clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in section 7.08.010. 
(b)  In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
(Code 1969, § 7.08.030; Ord. No. 306, § 1(part), 1970) 
CHAPTER 7.12. - ORDER 

Sec. 7.12.010. - Order for removal. 
(a)  Five days after adoption of this order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by section 7.08.010, or 15 days after such action of the city council authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. 
(b)  Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof, notice shall be given to the department of motor vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the department of motor vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Code 1969, § 7.12.010; Ord. No. 306, § 1(part), 1970) 
CHAPTER 7.16. - COST 

Sec. 7.16.010. - Cost of removal. 
    If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to section 7.08.010 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Government Code § 38773.5 and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
(Code 1969, § 7.16.010; Ord. No. 306, § 1(part), 1970) 
CHAPTER 7.20. - ABATEMENT 

Sec. 7.20.010. - Nuisance abatement. 
    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store, or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or part thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property not including highways within the city for a period in excess of 30 days unless such vehicle or part thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. 
(Code 1969, § 7.20.010; Ord. No. 306, § 1(part), 1970) 
Title 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local regulation and licensing of dogs, Food and Agricultural Code § 30501 et seq.; authority of city to adopt and/or enforce a program for the control of potentially dangerous or vicious dogs, Food and Agricultural Code § 31683; authority of city to impose and collect a dog license fee in order to cover the cost of dog control services and programs, Government Code § 38792. 

CHAPTER 8.04. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8.04.010. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this title, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Animal includes any mammal, poultry, bird, reptile, fish, or any other dumb creature. 
    At large means a dog off the premises of its owner and not under restraint by leash, or chain, or not otherwise controlled by a competent person. 
    Dog includes female as well as male dogs. 
    Horse includes mule, burro, pony, jack, hinny or jenny. 
    Kennel means any person, firm or corporation engaged in the commercial business of breeding, buying, selling, or boarding dogs and/or cats. 
    Owner means any person, firm or corporation, owning, having an interest in, or having control or custody or possession of any animal. 
    Person includes any person, partnership, corporation, trust and association of persons. 
(Code 1969, § 8.04.010; Ord. No. 883-2011, § 1, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 8.04.020. - References. 
    Whenever any reference is made to any portion of this title such reference applies to all amendments and additions thereto now or hereafter made. 
(Code 1969, § 8.04.020; Ord. No. 883-2011, § 1, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 8.04.050. - Powers performed by deputy. 
    Whenever this title grants the power to, or imposes a duty upon the humane officer or other public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officer or by a person authorized, pursuant to law, by the officer, unless a provision in this title expressly provides otherwise. 
(Code 1969, § 8.04.050; Ord. No. 883-2011, § 1, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 8.04.060. - Authority of animal control contractors. 
(a)  Humane officers. Employees of a public pound, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or a humane society who have qualified as humane officers pursuant to California Corporations Code § 14502 are authorized to issue notices to appear in court pursuant to Penal Code § 853.5 for violations of state animal control laws or chapters 8.04 through 8.16, or violations of the provisions of title 19 insofar as it enforces sections 19.16.020(1), and 19.20.040(4), at such times as there exists a valid contract for these services between the city and the public pound, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or humane society. 
(b)  Animal control officers. Animal control officers employed by the city and animal control officers who are employees of a public pound, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or a humane society are authorized to issue notices to appear in court pursuant to Penal Code § 853.5 for violations of this title or the provisions of title 19, at such times as they are employed directly by the city or there exists a valid contract for these services between the city and the public pound, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or humane society. 
(c)  Only within the city. The authority of the humane officers and animal control officers is limited to the jurisdiction of the city. Humane officers and animal control officers are not authorized to take any person into custody even though the person to whom the notice is delivered does not give his written promise to appear in court. 
(Code 1969, § 8.04.060; Ord. No. 883-2011, § 1, 7-18-2011) 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of local officers for failure of animal owner to care for animal, Penal Code § 597.1. 
Sec. 8.04.070. - Minimum care of animals required. 
    Consistent with Penal Code ch. 597, no person may torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, drink, or shelter, cruelly beat, mutilate, or cruelly kill any animal, or cause or procure any animal to be so tortured, tormented, deprived of necessary sustenance, drink, shelter, or to be cruelly beaten, mutilated, or cruelly killed, or to live in a grossly unsanitary situation; and whoever, having the charge or custody of any animal, either as owner or otherwise, subjects any animal to needless suffering, or inflicts unnecessary cruelty upon the animal, or in any manner abuses any animal, or fails to provide the animal with proper food, drink, or shelter or protection from the weather, or allows the animal to live in a grossly unsanitary situation, is in violation of this Code. 
(Code 1969, § 8.04.070; Ord. No. 883-2011, § 1, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 8.04.080. - Licensing and rabies vaccination. 
    All dogs shall be properly licensed and vaccinated against rabies. The term of the license shall not exceed the expiration of the rabies vaccination. Any licensed animal shall renew their license prior to the expiration of their current license. The licensing authority shall include the potentially dangerous designation in the registration records of the dog, either after the owner or the keeper of the dog has agreed to the designation or after the city has determined the designation applies to the animal. The city shall charge a regular licensing fee to provide for the increased costs of maintaining the records of the animal. 
Sec. 8.04.090. - Animals or fowl at large prohibited. 
    No person owning or having charge of any animal or fowl shall permit the same to be at large on any highway, street, sidewalk, lane, alley or other public place, or upon any private property other than that of the person owning or having charge of such animal or fowl unless such owner or person having charge of such animal or fowl has the consent of the owner of the private property. 
Sec. 8.04.100. - Dead animal disposal. 
(a)  Definition. The term "dead animal," as used in this chapter, means the dead body of any animal. 
(b)  Unlawful disposal prohibited. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person owning or having control of a dead animal to permit such dead animal to remain unburied for a period in excess of 24 hours. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person owning or having control of a dead animal to place the body in any street, park or public place or in any public refuse receptacle. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to any animal killed for the purpose of consumption, provided that the remains of such dead animal are processed in such a manner as to prevent such dead animal from spoiling. 
(d)  Cost of removal. In addition to any other penalty in this title, the city shall be entitled to dispose of any dead animal coming within the prohibitions of this chapter if such animal remains unburied for a period in excess of 24 hours and/or is placed in any street, park, public place, or in any public refuse receptacle. Such costs of removal and burial shall be a lien and charge against the owner and person in control of such animal immediately prior to its death. The city shall attempt to contact the owner of such dead animal prior to disposing of same. Fees shall be established pursuant to a resolution of the city council. 
CHAPTER 8.08. - HUMANE OFFICER 

Sec. 8.08.010. - Office established. 
(a)  The office of humane officer is established. 
(b)  Except as limited in section 8.04.060, the office of humane officer may be held by a "humane officer," as defined by California Corporation Code § 14502 or by an animal control officer employed by either the city or by a public pound, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or humane society under a valid contract with the city for the provisions of animal control services. 
(Code 1969, § 8.08.010; Ord. No. 167, § 2.01(part), 1967; Ord. No. 296, § 1(a), 1969; Ord. No. 883-2011, § 2, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 8.08.020. - Badges. 
    The humane officer and his deputies, while engaged in the execution of their duties, shall wear in plain view a badge having, in the case of the humane officer, the term "humane officer," and in the case of the deputy humane officer, the term "deputy humane officer" engraved thereon. 
(Code 1969, § 8.08.020; Ord. No. 167, § 2.01(a), 1967; Ord. No. 296, § 1(a), 1969) 
Sec. 8.08.040. - Humane officer to keep record. 
    The humane officer shall keep a record of the number of all animals impounded, showing in detail in the case of each animal the description, dates of receipt, the date and manner of disposal, the name of the person redeeming or purchasing, and the fees and charges and proceeds of sales received on account thereof, and such additional records as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 8.08.040; Ord. No. 167, § 2.01(c), 1967; Ord. No. 296, § 1(a), 1969) 
Sec. 8.08.050. - Animal shelter provided. 
    There shall be provided by the city a suitable building or enclosure to keep and safely hold all animals herein enumerated which are subject to be impounded which shall be known and designated as the animal shelter. 
(Code 1969, § 8.08.050; Ord. No. 167, § 2.02, 1967; Ord. No. 296, § 1(a), 1969) 
Sec. 8.08.060. - Impounding. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the humane officer to take up, impound and safely keep any of the animals enumerated in chapters 8.04 through 8.12 found running at large, staked, tied or being herded or pastured in any street, lane, alley, court, square, park or other place belonging to or under the control of the city, or upon any property in the city contrary to the provisions of chapters 8.04 through 8.12. 
(b)  Any person may deliver any animal to the humane officer or a deputy humane officer to be disposed of or euthanized in a humane manner at the discretion of the humane officer. The fee for such disposition may be set by the humane officer with the approval of the city manager in order to compensate the city or its agents for the costs of such service. 
(Code 1969, § 8.08.060; Ord. No. 167, § 2.03, 1967; Ord. No. 296, § 1(a), (c), 1969) 
Sec. 8.08.070. - Care of animals. 
    When any animal is so impounded, it shall be provided with proper and sufficient food and water by the humane officer. 
(Code 1969, § 8.08.070; Ord. No. 167, § 2.04, 1967; Ord. No. 296, § 1(a), 1969) 
Sec. 8.08.080. - Notification of owner. 
    The humane officer shall immediately, upon impoundment of licensed dogs or other animals, make every reasonable effort to notify the owners of the licensed dogs or other animals impounded, and inform the owners of the conditions whereby they may regain custody of the animals. 
(Code 1969, § 8.08.080; Ord. No. 167, § 2.05, 1967; Ord. No. 296, § 1(a), 1969) 
Sec. 8.08.090. - Reclaiming animals. 
(a)  The owner of any impounded animal shall have the right to reclaim it at any time prior to the lawful disposition thereof upon payment to the humane officer of the costs and charges herein provided in chapters 8.04 through 8.12, for the impounding and keeping of the animals. Such costs and charges include any license fee, penalties, impound fees, board and care charges, veterinarian fees, medications and other charges incurred in the interests of the health and safety of the animals. 
(b)  No person may remove any impounded animal from the animal shelter or vehicle operated by the humane officer or a deputy humane officer without the consent of such humane officer or deputy humane officer. 
(Code 1969, § 8.08.090; Ord. No. 167, § 2.06, 1967; Ord. No. 296, § 1(a), (d), (e), 1969) 
Sec. 8.08.100. - Exhibition of license. 
    No person shall fail or refuse to exhibit the registration of any animal required to be licensed by chapters 8.04 through 8.12 when required to do so by the humane officer. 
(Code 1969, § 8.08.100; Ord. No. 167, § 2.07, 1967; Ord. No. 296, § 1(a), 1969) 
Sec. 8.08.110. - Additional duties. 
    It is the duty of the humane officer to enforce any other sections of chapters 8.04 through 8.12 whether enumerated as a duty or not. 
(Code 1969, § 8.08.110; Ord. No. 167, § 2.08, 1967; Ord. No. 296, § 1(a), 1969) 
Sec. 8.08.120. - Interference with duty. 
    No person shall interfere with the humane officer or his deputies in the performance of their official duties. 
(Code 1969, § 8.08.120; Ord. No. 167, § 2.09, 1967; Ord. No. 296, § 1(a), 1969) 
Sec. 8.08.130. - Fees and charges upon impounded animals. 
    The city council shall by resolution, establish a schedule of impound fees and care and feed charges for impounded animals. The owner of any animal apprehended or impounded by the animal control officer or other public safety personnel, pursuant to this title, whether the animal is claimed or unclaimed by the owner, shall be liable for and shall pay to the city the established impound fees, care and feeding charges, together with any additional charges or fees levied by the city for the purpose of defraying expenses incurred by the city related to the apprehension of said animal, or to ensure compliance with other provisions of this title. 
(Code 1969, § 8.08.130; Ord. No. 167, § 2.10, 1967; Ord. No. 296, § 1(a), (f), 1969; Ord. No. 373, § 2, 1972; Ord. No. 796, § 1, 2004) 
Sec. 8.08.140. - Accounting for sums collected. 
    The humane officer shall be the agent for the city in the collecting, accounting and disbursing of all sums collected by him and his deputies pursuant to the terms of this chapter. He shall file a monthly report with the city manager in a manner and form prescribed by the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 8.08.140; Ord. No. 167, § 2.11, 1967; Ord. No. 296, § 1(g), 1969) 
CHAPTER 8.12. - POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 871-2011, adopted Feb. 7, 2011, amended Ch. 8.12 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 8.12, §§ 8.12.005-8.12.150, pertained to dogs. See the Ordinance List and Disposition Table for full derivation. 
State Law reference- Potentially dangerous and vicious dogs, Food and Agricultural Code § 31601 et seq. 

Sec. 8.12.010. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this section to establish procedures pursuant to Food and Agricultural Code §§ 31601 and 31683 et seq. to deal with potentially dangerous and vicious dogs. Potentially dangerous and vicious dogs have become a serious threat to the safety and welfare of the citizens of this city. Attacks by potentially dangerous and vicious dogs on human beings and domestic animals are attributable to the failure of animal owners or keepers to register, confine and properly control vicious and potentially dangerous dogs. Potentially dangerous and vicious dogs are hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.010; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.020. - Exceptions to chapter. 
(a)  This chapter shall not apply to licensed kennels, humane society shelters, animal control facilities or veterinary clinics. 
(b)  This chapter shall not apply to any dog used in the performance of police or law enforcement work by any police department or any other law enforcement agency or law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.020; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.030. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall be defined as follows, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Potentially dangerous dog means: 
(1)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the prior 36-month period, engages in any behavior which requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the dog are off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog; 
(2)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a human being; 
(3)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog; 
(4)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or private property, except private property on which that animal resides, in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; 
(5)  Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or 
(6)  Any dog which engages in or is found to have been trained to engage in exhibitions of fighting. 
    Vicious dog means: 
(1)  Any dog seized under Penal Code § 599(aa) and upon the sustaining of a conviction of the owner or keeper under Penal Code § 297.5(a); 
(2)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner inflicts severe injury on or kills a human being. Severe injury means any physical injury to a human being that results in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery; or 
(3)  Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a "potentially dangerous dog" which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of its determination, continues the behavior described in the definition of potentially dangerous dog in this section, or any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a potentially dangerous dog, which is not properly licensed and vaccinated, not properly restrained, not properly maintained so as to be contained on the owner's property and/or not in compliance with any specific orders made by the hearing officer. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.030; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.040. - Procedure for declaring dog potentially dangerous and/or vicious. 
(a)  If an animal control officer, humane officer or a law enforcement officer has investigated and determined that there exists probable cause to believe that a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious, the chief of police, or his designee, shall set a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the dog in question should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. 
(b)  If, upon investigation, it is determined by the animal control officer, humane officer or law enforcement officer that probable cause exists to believe that the animal in question poses an immediate threat to public safety, then the animal control officer, humane officer or law enforcement officer shall seize and impound the animal pending the hearings to be held pursuant to this chapter. The investigating officer seizing the animal in question will conduct a thorough review of all facts and complete their investigation in a timely manner but should not exceed ten business days to complete their investigation unless extenuating circumstances exist, and if so, the owner or keeper of the animal in question shall be notified prior to the end of ten business days after the seizure of the animal in question that extenuating circumstances exist and the investigation will remain open until all facts have been reviewed and documented. The owner or keeper of the animal shall be liable to the city for the costs and expenses of keeping the animal if the animal is later adjudicated potentially dangerous or vicious. 
(c)  When an animal has been impounded pursuant to subsection (b) of this section and it is not contrary to public safety, the animal control officer, humane officer or law enforcement officer may permit the animal to be confined at the owner's expense in a city-approved licensed kennel or veterinary facility. 
(d)  The animal control officer, humane officer or law enforcement officer shall notify the owner or keeper of the dog that an administrative hearing will be held by the city, at which time the owner may present evidence as to why the dog in question should not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. 
(e)  The owner or keeper of the dog shall be served with notice of the hearing, either personally or by first class mail with return receipt requested or by first class postage pre-paid not less than ten business days before the time set for hearing. Service shall be deemed complete at the time notice is personally served or deposited in the mail. 
(f)  Failure of any person to receive notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this chapter. 
(g)  The hearing shall be open to the public. 
(h)  The chief of police or other person designated by the chief of police shall conduct the administrative hearing. 
(i)  Notice shall be substantially in the form set forth below: 
Notice of administrative hearing re: determination and disposition of potentially dangerous or vicious dog. This is a notice of hearing before the Barstow City chief of police or his/her designee, to determine whether your dog (name of dog-description of dog if available) is a potentially dangerous or vicious dog. Your appearance is required on the following date, time and location: Date: _____ Time: _____, Location: ___________. If your dog is found to be a potentially dangerous and/or vicious dog as defined by Barstow Municipal Code section 8.12.030 et seq., the chief of police or other person designated as hearing officer, may issue any one or more of the following orders: 
(1)  The dog shall be properly licensed and vaccinated against rabies. 
(2)  The dog shall be maintained on owner's property and shall, at all times, be kept indoors, or in a securely fenced primary enclosure with a secondary perimeter fenced yard from which the dog cannot escape, and into which children cannot trespass. The dog may not be off the owner's premises unless it is restrained by substantial leash, of appropriate length, humanely muzzled, and if it is, under the immediate control of a responsible adult. 
(3)  If the dog in question dies or is sold, transferred or permanently removed from the city where the owner resides, the owner shall notify the City of Barstow of the changed condition and new location of the dog within two business days in writing. 
(4)  The dog shall be destroyed. 
(5)  Owner shall pay any and all costs incurred by the city in the administration of Barstow Municipal Code section 8.12.010 et seq., including but not limited to, costs incurred by the city for housing, maintenance, feeding and providing care, including medical care, of the dog during such time as the dog is in the custody of the City of Barstow. 
(6)  Owner can be mandated to spay or neuter the dog. 
(7)  Owner can be ordered to attend dog training/handling class. 
(8)  Any person keeping or harboring any dog or animal deemed potentially dangerous or vicious within the city must provide proof of ability to respond in damages up to $100,000.00 by obtaining a policy of insurance coverage in said amount for bodily injury to, or death of, any person or persons or for damage to property owned by any other person or persons which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such dog or animal. 
(9)  Failure to appear results in forfeiture of privilege to present evidence. 
(10)  Public information may be made available via the city website at the discretion of the city on the location of any dog or animals deemed potentially dangerous or vicious within the city, including but not limited to, the photo and description of the dog or animals and circumstances causing the city to deem the dog or animals potentially dangerous or vicious. 
(j)  At any time prior to or after an administrative hearing to determine if a dog should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious or at any time prior to or after an appeal hearing, the owner or keeper may request to relinquish ownership of the animal in question to the city. Upon relinquishment of a dog the owner of that dog shall present sufficient identification to establish his ownership of the dog and shall sign a statement that he is the lawful owner of the dog. The owner or keeper shall be responsible for all applicable fees regarding the costs associated with the investigation and costs associated with boarding and caring for the animal during impoundment. At no time shall the animal be humanely euthanized until all mandated hold periods have been satisfied upon relinquishment of ownership of the animal in question. 
(k)  If an animal control officer, humane officer or a law enforcement officer has investigated and determined the animal is not potentially dangerous or vicious the investigating officer shall notify the owner or keeper that a hearing will not be required. The animal, if impounded, will be immediately released to the owner or keeper and a notice will be issued to the owner or keeper stating upon conclusion of the investigation the animal need not be designated potentially dangerous or vicious. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.040; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.050. - Administrative hearing by chief of police or designee. 
(a)  At the time stated in the notice, the chief of police or hi designee, hereinafter referred to as hearing officer, shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests and shall receive testimony under oath relative to the alleged potentially dangerous and/or vicious animal. The hearing officer may admit into evidence all relevant evidence, including incident reports and affidavits of witnesses. The hearing officer may find, upon a preponderance of evidence, that the animal in question is potentially dangerous or vicious and may make other orders authorized by this chapter. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
(b)  If the hearing officer finds by a preponderance of evidence that the animal which is the subject of the hearing is potentially dangerous and/or vicious, the hearing officer shall prepare findings and an order, which shall specify and make specific orders with respect to the animal as authorized by this chapter. A copy of the findings and order shall be served to the dog owner either personally or by first class mail with return receipt requested or by first class postage pre-paid no later than ten business days after the conclusion of the hearing on the owner of the animal in accordance with the provisions of section 8.12.040. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.050; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.060. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  After the hearing is conducted pursuant to this chapter, the owner/keeper of the animal shall be notified in writing of the determination and orders issued, either personally or by first class mail with return receipt requested or by fist class postage pre-paid. If a determination is made that the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, the owner or keeper shall comply with those orders made by the hearing officer within the timelines established in said written notice but in no case more than 30 days after the date of determination or 35 days if the notice of determination is mailed to the owner or keeper of the dog. 
(b)  If the owner or keeper of the animal contests the determination of the hearing officer, and/or any orders imposed therein, he may, within ten business days from the date the notice of determination was served, appeal the decision of the hearing officer. The date of service is the date the notice of determination was personally served or deposited into the mail. An appeal shall be made in writing to the city manager. The owner or keeper of the animal shall serve personally or by first class mail, postage pre-paid, their written request to appeal the determination of the hearing officer to the city manager. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an appeal request for review, the city manager shall mail a written notice to the owner or keeper of the animal of a review hearing for the purpose of reviewing the hearing officer's notice of determination that the animal should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious, which notice shall be mailed by first class mail, postage pre-paid, not less than ten business days before the date set for the review hearing. The owner or keeper of the animal shall be given the opportunity to present evidence as to why the animal in question should not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious as previously determined by the hearing officer. 
(d)  If the owner or keeper of the animal fails to appear at the review hearing, the right to said appeal hearing shall be deemed waived and the determination and orders by the hearing officer that was the basis of the appeal shall be deemed final. 
(e)  Upon conclusion of the appeal hearing the city manager shall serve a copy of the findings and order to the owner of the animal either personally or by first class mail with return receipt requested or by first class postage pre-paid no later than ten business days after the conclusion of the hearing. 
(f)  The city manager shall either affirm or overturn the hearing officer's determination and related orders in their entirety or in part. The city manager may modify orders issued by the hearing officer making them more restrictive or less restrictive. All orders must be adhered to within the timelines set by the city manager's written findings. Judicial review of any final administrative decision of the city manager is subject to the time limits set forth in Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6, and notice to that effect shall be included in the city manager's written decision. 
(g)  Failure of the owner or keeper to reclaim a dog impounded pursuant to section 8.12.080 declared to be potentially dangerous or vicious within three business days from the conclusion of an appeal hearing will be so deemed abandoned by the owner or keeper and subject to disposal as allowable by this Code. Release of a dog determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious is conditioned upon the compliance with the written orders of the hearing officer and/or the city manager and reimbursement to the city for keeping the dog during the period of investigation and pending the hearings. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.060; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.070. - Licensing and rabies vaccination. 
(a)  All dogs shall be properly licensed and vaccinated against rabies. The term of the license shall not exceed the expiration of the rabies vaccination. The license for any dog shall be renewed prior to the expiration of the dog's current license. 
(b)  If a dog has been designated as potentially dangerous and vicious, the licensing authority shall include the designation in the registration records of the dog, either after the owner or keeper of the dog has agreed to the designation or after the city has determined the designation applies to the dog. The city shall charge a potentially dangerous and vicious animal fee in addition to the regular licensing fee to provide for the increased costs of maintaining the records of the dog. The exceptions detailed in section 8.12.020 shall also apply to this section. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.070; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 932U-2015, § 2, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 8.12.080. - Cost assessment when animal seized. 
    If it is determined at the hearing as provided in this chapter that the dog in question is potentially dangerous and/or vicious, the hearing officer may assess the owner of the dog for any costs of administration incurred by the city, including, but not limited to, costs incurred in housing, maintaining and feeding the dog and for any medical attention required for the dog as determined by a licensed veterinarian. Costs assessed shall be charged to the owner and shall be a lien upon the owner's real property where the animal was maintained. The city council shall affirm such assessment and cause the same to be recorded on the assessment roll, and thereafter such assessment shall constitute a special assessment against and a lien upon the property. The assessment shall be levied in accordance with Government Code § 38773.5. In circumstances where the dog owner is a tenant and the owner of the real property is not the owner of the dog, the city may pursue the lien through collections and not place a lien on the real property. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.080; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.090. - Identification and sterilization requirement for potentially dangerous and vicious dogs. 
    The owner or keeper of any dog determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious pursuant to this chapter shall, at his expense, provide permanent identification by means of an implanted microchip and a collar and tag designating the dog as potentially dangerous or vicious. The dog determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious shall at all times wear a red collar made of a durable material which shall have the city dog license tag designating the dog potentially dangerous or vicious affixed to the collar. The red collar and license tag shall immediately be placed on the dog prior to release from the animal shelter or from any city-approved licensed kennel or veterinary facility. The owner or keeper of the animal determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious shall be required to provide proof of the implanted microchip to the animal control agency providing animal control services to the city no less than five business days after being declared potentially dangerous or vicious. The microchip identification number shall be noted in the city licensing files for that dog. Any dog determined to be potentially dangerous may be required to be sterilized, at the owner's expense as determined by the hearing officer. Any dog determined to be vicious shall be sterilized at the owner's expense. A photograph of the animal shall be kept on record for identification, in addition to the registration, as a potentially dangerous or vicious animal. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.090; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.100. - Procedure for destruction. 
(a)  Unless a timely written appeal is filed with the city pursuant to section 8.12.060, a dog determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious may be destroyed by the animal control agency providing animal control services to the city when it is found, after a hearing pursuant to section 8.12.050, that the release of the dog would create a significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  If it is determined that a dog found to be potentially dangerous or vicious shall not be destroyed, the hearing officer shall impose conditions upon the ownership of the dog that protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.100; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.110. - Restraint and enclosure. 
(a)  A dog determined to be potentially dangerous pursuant to this chapter shall at all times while not securely confined indoors: 
(1)  Be confined in an area which is securely fenced and locked so as to prevent trespassing by children and from which the dog cannot escape; 
(2)  The animal shall be housed pursuant to the provisions of Penal Code § 597t (adequate enclosed area) with minimum dimensions of the primary enclosure being five feet by ten feet and be of a height which does not restrict the animal's natural movements and which allows the owner or keeper into the enclosure to maintain the animal; 
(3)  The primary enclosure shall be surrounded by a perimeter fence which prevents the entry of the public onto the property of the owner or keeper but shall not serve in any part as a primary enclosure for the animal; 
(4)  The primary enclosure shall include a covered enclosure and a solid concrete flooring; 
(5)  When off the property of its owner or keeper, be humanely muzzled and leashed with a substantial leash or chain not to exceed four feet in length and under the immediate control of a responsible adult who is familiar with and in control of the dog; or 
(6)  Be humanely confined in a vehicle so that it can neither escape nor inflict injury on passersby. 
(b)  A dog determined to be vicious pursuant to this chapter, at all times while not securely confined indoors: 
(1)  Shall be confined in an outdoor fenced enclosure on the property where the dog is kept or maintained, so it cannot bite, attack or cause injury to any person. All enclosures, fences and gates must be constructed of substantial material and installed and maintained in a workmanlike manner. The enclosure must be anchored solidly to concrete flooring and must be of sufficient structural strength and height to ensure the strict confinement of the dog and to prevent unauthorized access. To accomplish the intent of full containment, a cover over the enclosure shall be installed. In addition, any and all gates must be kept locked; 
(2)  The animal shall be housed pursuant to the provisions of Penal Code § 597t (adequate enclosed area) with minimum dimensions of the primary enclosure shall be five feet by ten feet and be of a height which does not restrict the animal's natural movements and which allows the owner or keeper into the enclosure to maintain the animal; 
(3)  The primary enclosure shall be surrounded by a perimeter fence which prevents the entry of the public onto the property of the owner or keeper but shall not serve in any part as a primary enclosure for the animal; 
(4)  May be off the property of the owner or keeper for purposes of obtaining veterinary care, being sold or given away as approved by the animal control agency, complying with any provision of law or with a directive of the chief of police or his designee or the animal control agency providing animal control services to the city; and 
(5)  When off the property of its owner or keeper or in the care of a veterinarian, shall be securely and humanely muzzled and restrained with a harness and nylon leash, sufficient to restrain the dog, not exceeding four feet in length, and shall be under the direct charge and control of its owner or keeper. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, a dog which is humanely muzzled and/or confined in a vehicle shall be able to drink, breathe and pant freely under conditions which do not subject the animal to needless suffering. 
(d)  When circumstances warrant, the officer-in-charge of the animal control agency providing animal control services to the city may modify conditions of restraint to accommodate the special needs of the dog. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.110; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.120. - Posting of property where potentially dangerous or vicious dogs are maintained. 
    The owner or keeper of a dog which has been determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious pursuant to this chapter shall display a sign, on the property where the dog is kept, containing a visual and verbal warning that there is a dangerous or vicious dog on the property. The sign shall be visible to the general public and in a prominent place upon the premises where the animal is being kept or maintained capable of being read from any adjacent street, sidewalk or other such public right-of-way. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.120; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.130. - Owners to maintain liability insurance coverage for potentially dangerous and vicious dogs. 
    Any person keeping or harboring any dog or animal deemed potentially dangerous or vicious within the city must provide proof of ability to respond in damages up to $100,000.00 by obtaining a policy of insurance coverage in said amount for bodily injury to, or death of, any person or persons or for damage to property owned by any other person or persons which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such dog or animal. Proof of coverage shall be provided to the agency providing animal care and control services to the city within ten business days and shall be provided each time thereafter whenever the coverage period changes. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.130; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.140. - Notice of disposal or escape. 
(a)  The owner or keeper of any dog found to be potentially dangerous or vicious pursuant to this chapter shall notify the animal control agency providing animal control services to the city immediately if the dog has escaped, is unconfined, has attacked another animal, has bitten a human being, or has died. 
(b)  The owner or keeper of a dog found to be potentially dangerous pursuant to this chapter shall notify the animal control agency providing animal control services to the city within 48 hours if the dog is sold, transferred, or permanently removed from the place where the owner or keeper resided or kept the dog at the time the dog was determined to be potentially dangerous. The owner or keeper shall also inform the animal control agency of any new address where the dog is to be kept and the name, address and telephone number of any new owner. 
(c)  The owner or keeper of a dog found to be vicious shall notify the animal control department at least 48 hours prior to selling, transferring, or permanently removing the dog to a new location, seek approval of the animal control agency for the transaction, and shall also provide the animal control agency providing animal control services to the city with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the dog with the address of any new permanent location of the dog. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.140; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.150. - Owners to permit compliance inspections. 
    As a condition of maintaining a potentially dangerous or vicious animal, its owner or keeper shall allow access to the animal control agency providing animal control services to the city, humane officers or law enforcement officers to inspect the premises to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and/or the requirements of the orders issued by the hearing officer between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily. Prior notification of the inspection to the owner or keeper of the potentially dangerous or vicious animal shall not be required. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.150; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.160. - Unlawful to own, harbor or keep dog found by another jurisdiction to be potentially dangerous or vicious. 
    No dog which has previously been determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious after an administrative hearing or court order by another jurisdiction will be allowed to be kept, owned or harbored in the city. Any notice by the animal control department to remove, abate or destroy any dog owned, harbored, or maintained in violation of this section may be appealed to the chief of police or his designee by filing with the chief of police a written statement of the factual basis for the appeal within ten business days from the date the notice was served on the owner of the animal. The date of service is the day the notice was personally served, or deposited in the mail by the animal control department. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.160; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.170. - Keeping by minors prohibited. 
    No dog determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious pursuant to this chapter shall be kept by an owner or keeper who is considered a minor. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.170; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.180. - City may post potentially dangerous or vicious animals on city website. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this section to protect the safety and welfare of the citizens of this city. In doing so, the city may provide information describing how an animal was declared by the city to be a potentially dangerous and vicious dog via the city website. The public will be allowed access to information including, but not limited to, the street address, description and photo of the animal, and circumstances describing how an animal was declared by the city to be potentially dangerous and vicious. The circumstances will describe if an attack occurred to a human being and/or domestic animal. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.180; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.190. - Penalty. 
    Any violation of this chapter, including any violation of any written orders issued pursuant to an administrative hearing by a hearing officer and/or the city manager involving a potentially dangerous or vicious dog shall be punishable by a fine as imposed in chapter 6.30. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from initiating a civil, criminal, or other legal or equitable proceeding for a violation of this chapter. In this regard, any violation of this chapter, including a violation of any written orders by a hearing officer or the city manager, shall also be deemed a misdemeanor offense and may be prosecuted accordingly. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.190; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.200. - Payment of fines. 
    All fines paid pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the city for the purpose of deferring costs of implementation of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.200; Ord. No. 871-2011, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.210. - Vicious, dangerous; nuisance abatement. 
(a)  It is unlawful to permit any vicious dog or dangerous animal to go unrestrained. 
(b)  The keeping or harboring of any dog, cat or other animal or fowl, whether licensed or not, which by habitual howling, yelping, barking, or other noise disturbs or annoys any considerable number of persons or neighborhood is unlawful, and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The owner or any other person responsible for a dog or other animal shall be responsible for containing said animal. It is unlawful for any animal to trespass on private or public property so as to damage or destroy any property or item of value and the same is declared to be a nuisance and any such animal may be impounded by the humane officer. Whenever it shall be affirmed in writing by three or more persons having separate residences or regularly employed in the neighborhood that any animal is an habitual nuisance by reason of trespassing or damage to property, being vicious or by its actions, potentially vicious, or in any other manner causing undue annoyance, the humane officer, if he finds such nuisance to exist, shall serve notice upon the owner or custodian that the nuisance must be abated. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.210; Ord. No. 883-2011, § 4, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.220. - Tethering prohibited. 
(a)  Consistent with Health and Safety Code § 122335, for purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following definitions: 
    Agricultural operation means an activity that is necessary for the commercial growing and harvesting of crops or the raising of livestock or poultry. 
    Animal control means the officers charged with enforcing this title. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, organization, trade or professional association, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, association, trust, estate, or any other legal entity, and any officer, member, shareholder, director, employee, agent, or representative thereof. 
    Reasonable period means a period of time not to exceed three hours in a 24-hour period, or a time that is otherwise approved by animal control. 
(b)  No person shall tether, fasten, chain, tie, or restrain a dog, or cause a dog to be tethered, fastened, chained, tied, or restrained, to a dog house, tree, fence, or any other stationary object. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, a person may do any of the following in accordance with Penal Code § 597t: 
(1)  Attach a dog to a running line, pulley, or trolley system. A dog shall not be tethered to the running line, pulley, or trolley system by means of a choke collar or pinch collar. 
(2)  Tether, fasten, chain, tie, or otherwise restrain a dog pursuant to the requirements of a camping or recreational area. 
(3)  Tether, fasten, chain, or tie a dog no longer than is necessary for the person to complete a temporary task that requires the dog to be restrained for a reasonable period. 
(4)  Tether, fasten, chain, or tie a dog while engaged in, or actively training for, an activity that is conducted pursuant to a valid license issued by the state if the activity for which the license is issued is associated with the use or presence of a dog. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit a person from restraining a dog while participating in activities or using accommodations that are reasonably associated with the licensed activity. 
(5)  Tether, fasten, chain, or tie a dog while actively engaged in any of the following: 
a.  Conduct that is directly related to the business of shepherding or herding cattle or livestock. 
b.  Conduct that is directly related to the business of cultivating agricultural products, if the restraint is reasonably necessary for the safety of the dog. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a person from walking a dog with a hand-held leash. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.220; Ord. No. 883-2011, § 1, 7-18-2011) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Health and Safety Code § 122335. 
Sec. 8.12.230. - Dog defecation removal. 
    No owner or custodian in immediate control of a dog may allow the dog to defecate on property over which neither the owner nor custodian of the dog has relevant property rights, unless the owner or custodian of the dog either promptly removes the defecation from the property or has prior permission of the property owner to allow the dog to defecate on the property without promptly removing the defecation. If the custodian and the owner of the dog are not the same person, and the dog defecated in the presence of the custodian, then the custodian and not the owner of the dog shall be responsible for the prompt cleanup of the defecation. 
(Code 1969, § 8.12.230; Ord. No. 883-2011, § 4, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 8.12.240. - Dogs loose or at large. 
    It is unlawful for any dog to be loose or at large and not physically restrained on any public street, sidewalk, lane, alley, court, public park or other public place, or any private property or premises other than those of the person owning or having custody of said dog. Any such dog found at large or loose and not physically restrained as set forth herein shall be impounded. The owner or any other person responsible for said dog shall be responsible for containing it. A physical restraint pursuant to this section shall not exceed six feet in length. A violation of this section shall constitute a violation pursuant to section 1.01.150. The exceptions detailed in section 8.12.020 shall also apply to this section. 
(Ord. No. 932U-2015, § 3, 2-2-2015) 
CHAPTER 8.14. - CATS 

Sec. 8.14.010. - Issuance of cat identification. 
    If a cat owner or person having custody or control of the cat requests that a cat identification microchip be implanted into a cat, upon payment of a fee which shall be set by resolution of the city council, the humane officer shall cause the implantation of the microchip into the cat. 
(Code 1969, § 8.14.010; Ord. No. 883-2011, § 5, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 8.14.020. - Record maintenance. 
    The humane officer shall keep a record of the name and address of the person for whom this service was provided, the date the chip was implanted, and a description of the cat in which the chip was implanted. 
(Code 1969, § 8.14.020; Ord. No. 883-2011, § 5, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 8.14.030. - Removal of cat identification. 
    Except as authorized by the cat owner or applicable law, no person shall remove from any cat any collar, harness, or other device to which is attached an identification tag, or remove such tag therefrom, nor remove any implanted cat identification microchip. 
(Code 1969, § 8.14.030; Ord. No. 883-2011, § 5, 7-18-2011) 
CHAPTER 8.16. - POLICE DEPARTMENT DOGS 

Sec. 8.16.010. - Status defined. 
    Dogs specially trained for or by the police department and used exclusively by the department and officers thereof are hereby declared to be regarded in the same manner as special and personal equipment of the police department. 
(Code 1969, § 8.16.010; Ord. No. 281, § 1, 1968) 
Sec. 8.16.020. - Admission to public inns, etc. 
    Officers of the police department, when accompanied by dogs referred to in section 8.16.010, shall be afforded the same treatment as blind persons and their guide dog, signal dog, or service dog as such terms are defined in Civil Code § 54.1, especially trained for the purpose. The officers and their dogs shall not be denied admittance to any hotel, motel, public inn, public cafe or bar, public elevator or other similar place within the city when admission is in the line of duty of any such officer. 
(Code 1969, § 8.16.020; Ord. No. 281, § 2, 1968) 
Sec. 8.16.030. - Maltreatment by others prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously torture, tease, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the police department in the performance of any of the functions or duties of the department, officer or member. 
(Code 1969, § 8.16.030; Ord. No. 281, § 3, 1968) 
CHAPTER 8.18. - NUISANCE ANIMAL NOISE ABATEMENT 

Sec. 8.18.010. - Habitual barking prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of one or more of any animal, either willfully or through failure to exercise proper control, to allow such animal to habitually bark, howl, crow, or make any other loud noises in such a manner as to at any time, day or night, cause general annoyance or discomfort to a neighboring inhabitant. The standard of general annoyance or discomfort is a reasonable person standard, i.e., the noise is such that a reasonable person, under the same or similar circumstances, would suffer annoyance or discomfort. 
(Code 1969, § 8.18.010; Ord. No. 878-2011, § 1, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 8.18.020. - Evidence of complaints. 
(a)  Two complaints usually required. Evidence of a violation may be based upon complaints from neighboring inhabitants, hereby defined as persons living within 200 yards of such animal owner or keeper's premises, or if said animal wanders outside of said premises, within 200 yards of any place where such animal wanders outside of said premises. If there is more than one neighboring inhabitant, evidence of a violation requires complaints from at least two neighboring inhabitants living in separate residences. If there is only one neighboring inhabitant, evidence of a public nuisance may be based on a complaint from only one person in that household. 
(b)  Waiver of dual complaint requirement. If there is more than one neighboring inhabitant, as defined above, evidence of a public nuisance may, upon application of a single complaining neighboring inhabitant, be established by that person by seeking a waiver from the humane officer of the two-complainant requirement. To obtain such a waiver, a single complaint shall provide to the humane officer additional credible evidence of a violation, which may include, but is not limited to, tape recordings, videotapes, sound monitoring logs, photographs, maps, or declarations of other persons. 
(c)  Waiver of 200-yard requirement. If the complainants live in excess of 200 yards of such animal owner or keeper's premises, that person or those persons may establish evidence of a violation by seeking a waiver from the humane officer of the 200-yard requirement. To obtain such a waiver, a complainant or complainants living more than 200 yards from the noise shall provide to the humane officer additional credible evidence that they are experiencing a level of noise comparable to a person residing within 200 yards of the noise, which evidence may include, but is not limited to, tape recordings, videotapes, sound monitoring logs, photographs, maps, or declarations of other persons living a similar distance away from the noise. 
(Code 1969, § 8.18.020; Ord. No. 878-2011, § 1, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 8.18.030. - Response to complaints. 
    The humane officer will substantially follow the procedures below in responding to all complaints of noisy animals; however, the procedures and timelines set forth herein are discretionary and not mandatory. Should a particular stage in the process take longer than the period set forth, or should exceptional circumstances require any of the periods be shortened, the process may proceed to the next step without the necessity of repeating any prior step. 
(1)  Notification of potential violation. Upon receiving an initial complaint from any person, either orally or in writing, the owner or keeper of the animal that may be violating this chapter will be sent a courtesy abatement letter. The letter will notify the owner or keeper that the humane officer has received a complaint or complaints regarding his animal that may be in violation of this chapter, describing the substance of the complaint. The letter will also explain the process and potential costs/consequences for all parties of the process going to citation and will encourage the parties to attempt to resolve the complaint themselves. Upon sending out the initial courtesy abatement letter the humane officer will enter the date and address of the animal owner or keeper in the nuisance animal noise letter log that is kept on file. A blind copy of the letter will be sent to the complainant, with a cover memo requesting the complainant contact animal care and control if the noise has not abated by the end of the two-week period specified in the letter. At the same time the initial letter is sent, the complainant will be sent a nuisance animal noise information sheet along with two nuisance animal noise complaint forms, with instructions that, if the nuisance has not abated by the end of the two-week period, to complete the form and have at least one neighboring inhabitant in a separate household complete the second form. The complainants must complete and sign the forms under penalty of perjury, and return them to animal care and control. The letter shall also contain a waiver application form, and advise a single complainant, or complainants, or a complainant that lives further than 200 yards from the animal owner or keeper, that he may, by filling it out, obtain from the humane officer a waiver of the two-complainant requirement. Upon sending out the nuisance animal noise information sheet and nuisance animal noise complaint form, animal care and control personnel will enter the date, complainant's name and address and the alleged violator's name and address on the nuisance animal noise complaint form log that is kept on file. 
(2)  Formal complaint. If, at the end of the two-week period, the complainant advises animal care and control that the noise is not abated, the complainant will be advised that he may file a formal written complaint by submitting the nuisance animal noise complaint form. At the time of this second contact, in which the complainant indicates that a nuisance animal noise problem still exists, the nuisance animal noise letter log will be checked to verify that an initial letter has been sent to the animal owner or keeper. 
(3)  Notice of violation. Upon receipt of two or more completed nuisance animal noise complaint forms, or one if there is only one neighboring inhabitant or a waiver of the two-complainant rule is granted, the humane officer will serve a notice of violation on the animal owner or keeper. The notice shall be served in person, or sent first class mail, postage prepaid, and shall advise the animal owner or keeper that he will be given two weeks from the mailing or service of the notice to comply with the provisions of this section in order to avoid further enforcement action. A file will be kept on the residential address of the animal owner or keeper. The completed nuisance animal noise complaint form and a copy of the notice of violation will be kept on file. A blind copy of the notice of violation will be sent to the complainant, with a cover memo requesting the complainant contact animal care and control if the noise has not abated by the end of the two-week period specified in the notice of violation. 
(4)  Administrative citation or criminal enforcement. If, at the end of the two-week period specified in the notice of violation, the complainants or complainant advises the humane officer that the noise is not abated, either a criminal or an administrative citation may be issued in accordance with sections 1.01.150 et seq. and/or chapter 6.30. 
(5)  Daily separate violations. Each subsequent day, or portion thereof, that an animal owned or kept by a party receiving a notice of violation creates an animal noise nuisance beyond the two-week period specified in subsection (4) of this section, shall constitute a separate violation and a separate criminal or administrative citation may be issued in accordance with chapter 6.30. For each criminal citation issued, in addition to the procedures set forth in subsections 1.01.150 et seq., and subsections (6) and (7) of this section shall be followed. 
(6)  Investigation report. Once a criminal citations has been issued to the animal owner or keeper, the issuing humane officer must complete an investigation report. The immediate supervisor, if applicable, of the humane officer will review the court's copy of the criminal citation and the completed investigation report. After the report has been approved and typed, the following documents will be attached and forwarded to the appropriate court: 
a.  Court's copy of the criminal citation. 
b.  Investigation report. 
c.  Copy of the notice of violation. 
d.  All copies of the nuisance animal noise complaint form or forms received from the complainant or complainants, if there is more than one complainant. 
(7)  Copy of documents. A complete copy of the documents that are forwarded to the appropriate court will be placed in the file kept on the animal owner or keeper. 
(Code 1969, § 8.18.030; Ord. No. 878-2011, § 1, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 883-2011, § 6, 7-18-2011) 
CHAPTER 8.20. - SPAYING AND NEUTERING OF PIT BULLS 

Sec. 8.20.010. - Spaying and neutering of pit bulls. 
(a)  No person shall own or keep a pit bull over the age of four months which has not been spayed or neutered, except as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  For the purposes of this chapter, the term "pit bull" means any Staffordshire bull terrier, American pit bull terrier, or American Staffordshire terrier breed of dog, or any mixed breed of dog which contains, as an element of its breeding, any of these breeds so as to be identifiable as partially of one of these breeds. 
(c)  The following pit bulls are exempt from the regulations described in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  A purebred Staffordshire bull terrier, American pit bull terrier, or American Staffordshire terrier, recognized by and registered with the American Kennel Club (AKC), United Kennel Club (UKC), American Dog Breeders Association (ADBA), or other comparable national dog registry. 
(2)  A dog that has been appropriately trained and is actually being used by a public law enforcement agency for law enforcement purposes. 
(3)  An assistance dog as defined in Food and Agricultural Code § 30850. 
(4)  A dog which has been certified by a licensed veterinarian as having a health reason for not being spayed/neutered. 
(5)  A dog which is used for breeding purposes at a breeding kennel licensed by the county. 
(Code 1969, § 8.20.010; Ord. No. 877-2011, § 1, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 8.20.020. - Determination of breed. 
(a)  Upon the request of any person, including the city manager, or upon the humane officer's own initiative, the humane officer will determine whether a dog is a pit bull that has not been spayed or neutered in violation of section 8.20.10. 
(b)  The dog owner or custodian may appeal a determination issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section by filing a written request for appeal with the city within ten days after notice of the determination is mailed to the owner or custodian. No provision herein shall prohibit personal service. The determination by the humane officer is deemed final if a timely appeal is not received by the city. The appeal shall be heard within 30 days after the city's receipt of the request for appeal. The city shall mail written notification to the owner or custodian of the date, time, and place of the hearing, at least ten days prior to the hearing date. Failure of the owner or custodian or agent to appear at the hearing will result in forfeiture of the right to a hearing. 
(c)  The hearing may be informal and the rules of evidence not strictly observed. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer designated by the city. The determination of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(d)  The city shall mail written notification of the appeal determination to the owner or custodian of the dog within ten days after the hearing. 
(e)  If the written notification of the appeal determination confirmed that the dog is an unaltered pit bull kept in violation of section 8.20.010(a), the owner or custodian of the pit bull shall submit written documentation to the city confirming compliance with section 8.20.010(a) within 15 days of the city mailing the notice of determination. Alternatively, if the pit bull has been moved to a location outside the city, within 15 days of the city mailing the notice of determination, the owner or custodian shall provide the city with the new location of the pit bull, the current owner or custodian's name, and the telephone number and address of the owner or custodian. 
(Code 1969, § 8.20.020; Ord. No. 877-2011, § 1, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 8.20.030. - Penalties and criminal actions. 
    Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity (hereafter "person") violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified. The penalties for violations of any provision of this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  First violation. 
a.  A first violation may result in the city impounding the pit bull. The owner or custodian of the pit bull shall be responsible for the costs of impoundment, including daily boarding costs, if it is determined that the owner or custodian is in violation of section 8.20.010(a). 
b.  A first violation shall be an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. Any owner of an unaltered pit bull who has been cited for a violation of this chapter shall have his citation dismissed if within 30 days after being notified of the violation, the owner or custodian corrects the violation or provides the city proof that the animal has been spayed or neutered. 
(2)  Second violation. If the owner or custodian fails to correct the underlying cause of the violation within 30 days after being notified of the violation, it shall be deemed a second violation. Additionally, a violation within one year of a first violation shall be deemed a second violation. A second violation is an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(3)  Third violation. A subsequent violation after the second within one year shall be punishable as a misdemeanor or as an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(4)  Fourth violation. Whenever any person has been convicted of three violations of this chapter within a one-year period, any fourth violation shall be a misdemeanor punishable as has been set forth in section 1.01.150(a). 
(5)  New violations daily. Each person shall be charged with a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall, upon conviction, be punished accordingly. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by this city, summarily abated as such, and each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 8.20.030; Ord. No. 877-2011, § 1, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 8.20.040. - Powers performed by deputy. 
    For purposes of this chapter, whenever a power is granted to, or a duty imposed upon a public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officer or by a person authorized, pursuant to law, by the officer, unless the terms of this chapter expressly provide otherwise. 
(Code 1969, § 8.20.040; Ord. No. 877-2011, § 1, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 8.20.050. - Use of term "humane officer." 
    If the animal control officer is serving as the humane officer, then the term "humane officer" shall mean the animal control officer. 
(Code 1969, § 8.20.050; Ord. No. 877-2011, § 1, 4-18-2011) 
Title 9 - PEACE, MORALS, AND SAFETY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- For constitutional provisions authorizing any city to make and enforce within its limits all such local, police, sanitary and other regulations as are not in conflict with the general laws, see Cal. Const., Art. II, § 11. 

CHAPTER 9.04. - CURFEW 

Sec. 9.04.010. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Custodial person means any parent or legal guardian of the minor, or any person 18 years of age or older who is authorized by a parent or legal guardian to take care and custody of the child. 
    Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Establishment means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    Minor means a person under the age of 18 years. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
(Code 1969, § 9.04.010; Ord. No. 733, § 3(part), 1997) 
Sec. 9.04.020. - Nighttime curfew for minors. 
    Unless the minor meets one or more of the exceptions set forth in section 9.04.040, it is an infraction for any minor to be present between the hour of 10:00 p.m. and the time of sunrise of the following day in or upon any of the following places: 
(1)  Any public or private street, road, drive, alley, or trail; 
(2)  Any public or community park or recreation area; 
(3)  Any public ground, place, or building; 
(4)  Any vacant lot or abandoned or vacant building; or 
(5)  Any establishment, as defined in section 9.04.010. 
(Code 1969, § 9.04.020; Ord. No. 733, § 3(part), 1997) 
Sec. 9.04.030. - Daytime curfew. 
    Unless the minor meets one or more of the exceptions set forth in sections 9.04.040 and 9.04.050, it is an infraction for any minor subject to compulsory education or compulsory continuation education to be present between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. of the same day on days when the minor's school is in session, in or upon any of the following places: 
(1)  Any public or private street, road, drive, alley, or trail; 
(2)  Any public or community park or recreation area; 
(3)  Any public ground, place, or building; 
(4)  Any vacant lot or abandoned or vacant building; or 
(5)  Any establishment, as defined in section 9.04.010. 
(Code 1969, § 9.04.030; Ord. No. 733, § 3(part), 1997) 
Sec. 9.04.040. - General exemptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply if the minor is: 
(1)  Accompanied by a custodial person; 
(2)  On an errand directed by, and in possession of a written excuse from, a custodial person; 
(3)  Engaged in or going directly to or returning directly from school-approved activity or one that is supervised by school personnel, a medical appointment, a religious activity, other lawful educational or recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the school, the city, a civic organization, or a similar entity that takes responsibility for the child; 
(4)  Engaged in a lawful employment activity or in a place in connection with or as required by a business, trade, profession, or occupation in which the minor is lawfully engaged, or going directly to or returning directly from such activity; 
(5)  Engaged in or going directly to or returning directly from any other lawful activity with written permission from a custodial person; 
(6)  Involved in an emergency or seeking medical assistance; 
(7)  Exercising rights protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article 1 of the California Constitution, including but not limited to: free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and freedom of assembly; 
(8)  In the right-of-way abutting the minor's residence; 
(9)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(10)  Emancipated pursuant to state law and California Family Code § 7000 et seq., including but not limited to the following reasons: married or in the military service; 
(11)  Homeless. 
(Code 1969, § 9.04.040; Ord. No. 733, § 3(part), 1997) 
Sec. 9.04.050. - Additional daytime curfew exemptions. 
    Section 9.04.030, Daytime curfew, shall not apply where: 
(1)  The minor is in possession of a valid school-issued, off-campus permit giving permission to leave campus; 
(2)  The minor is receiving home or private school instruction pursuant to Education Code § 48222; 
(3)  The minor is receiving instruction by a qualified tutor pursuant to Education Code § 48224; 
(4)  The minor is otherwise exempt by law from attendance at a public or private full-time day school; or 
(5)  The minor is authorized to be absent from school pursuant to the provisions of Education Code § 48205, or any other applicable state or federal law. 
(Code 1969, § 9.04.050; Ord. No. 733, § 3(part), 1997; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 1999) 
Sec. 9.04.060. - Parental responsibility. 
    Every custodial person who allows or permits a minor in his custody to violate any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1969, § 9.04.060; Ord. No. 733, § 3(part), 1997) 
Sec. 9.04.070. - Community service or parenting classes for first offense. 
    On a first offense, the court may order community service or parenting classes instead of a fine, as may be appropriate. 
(Code 1969, § 9.04.070; Ord. No. 733, § 3(part), 1997) 
Sec. 9.04.080. - Enforcement procedures. 
    A police officer shall ask the age of an apparent offender and his reason for being on the premises or property. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that none of the exceptions set forth in this chapter apply. 
(Code 1969, § 9.04.080; Ord. No. 733, § 3(part), 1997) 
Sec. 9.04.090. - Power of law enforcement officers. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting in any way the power or right of law enforcement officers to make investigations, detentions or arrests as would have been permitted had this chapter not been enacted. 
(Code 1969, § 9.04.090; Ord. No. 733, § 3(part), 1997) 
Sec. 9.04.100. - Penalties. 
    A violation of this chapter or any provision thereof is punishable pursuant to section 1.01.150. 
(Code 1969, § 9.04.100; Ord. No. 733, § 3(part), 1997) 
CHAPTER 9.12. - FIREARMS 

Sec. 9.12.010. - Defined. 
    As used herein "firearms" means any instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell or bullets by the action of air or gunpowder exploded within it and includes the following mechanisms: gun, shotgun, rifle, pistol, revolver, airgun and air rifle. 
(Code 1969, § 9.12.010; Ord. No. 83, § 1, 1952) 
Sec. 9.12.020. - Discharge. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to shoot off or discharge any firearm not in necessary self defense or in the performance of official duty, within the corporate limits of the city, without first obtaining the permission of the chief of police. 
(Code 1969, § 9.12.020; Ord. No. 83, § 2, 1952) 
CHAPTER 9.16. - DISCARDED ICEBOXES AND REFRIGERATORS 

Sec. 9.16.010. - Airtight door prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lid, or a door or lid equipped with a lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of the icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(Code 1969, § 9.16.010; Ord. No. 99, § 1, 1954) 
Sec. 9.16.020. - Snap-lock device prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has any door or lid equipped with an airtight snap-lock or other similar closing device, or door or lid from the icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(Code 1969, § 9.16.020; Ord. No. 99, § 2, 1954) 
CHAPTER 9.24. - GAMBLING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Gambling Control Act, Business and Professions Code § 19800 et seq. 

Sec. 9.24.010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit gambling within the city that is not sanctioned by the State or the United States of America. With the technological advances (internet access, networked computers, etc.), a new form of gambling (e.g., internet sweepstakes) that has previously been un-regulated has emerged. This chapter is not intended to restrict legitimate businesses from providing internet access to their customers, or restrict business centers (as an ancillary use to hotels and motels for the sole purpose of providing internet access, printing, faxing and email services, without any gaming or sweepstakes), but to prevent any businesses from creating a public nuisance to the adjacent businesses and surrounding neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 915-2013, § 1(9.24.010), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 9.24.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Computer gaming and internet access business means an establishment that provides computers or other electronic devices for access to the worldwide web, internet, e-mail, video games or computer software programs which operate alone or are networked (via Local Area Network, or LAN, Wide Area Network, or WAN, or otherwise) or which function as a client/server program, and which seeks compensation, in any form, from users (including but not limited to, the purchase of phone cards for use for internet time, etc.). The term "computer gaming and internet access business" is synonymous with a personal computer ("PC") cafe, internet cafe, internet sales business and internet center, but does not include a public use or internet learning center as defined in this section. 
    Nongaming internet uses includes the following: 
(1)  A bona fide public use or internet learning center. 
(2)  A bona fide commercial business providing a usable or consumable product, service, etc. (e.g., coffee and/or sandwich shop, restaurant, hotel/motel) that provides wireless local area network (WLAN, or Wi-Fi), or other internet or network connection (LAN, WAN, etc.), without providing any computers, software or subscription for gaming or other sites (including pop-up menus to such sites) to the customer, where the Wi-Fi is an ancillary component of the business, and any charges for such Wi-Fi service comprises less than ten percent of the monthly gross receipts for the store. 
    Public use or internet learning center means an establishment that provides computer access which is operated by the city, a school district, a college district, or a private institution of learning providing classes in computer instruction which does not engage in gaming, lottery or gambling activity, or a nonprofit organization which does not receive any compensation in any form for the use of a computer and which has a federal tax exempt status. 
(Ord. No. 915-2013, § 1(9.24.020), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 9.24.040. - Gambling places prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, within the city, to keep, maintain, conduct, control, have charge of, knowingly be present at, or visit any house, or room, place or apartment where any game is played, conducted, dealt, or carried on, with cards, dice other device or contrivance, mechanical, electrical, electro-mechanical, or computer based via the internet, network, or stand-alone software, for money, checks or credit. 
(b)  It is also unlawful for a place of business, within the city, to offer for sale phone cards, Internet time, etc., where the purchased credits allow the purchaser free points or other measurable units that may be risked by the purchaser for an opportunity to win money. Said purchase shall be deemed for the purposes of illegal gambling. The conduct of a game, contest, lottery, scheme, or promotional offering (e.g., sweepstakes, internet sweepstakes, etc.) may be lawful if: 
(1)  No part of the purpose of the contest is illegal gambling; 
(2)  No part of the contest involves the use of a gambling device; 
(3)  It is an ancillary use of the site that involves less than ten percent of the gross monthly receipts and: 
a.  A consumable or usable product is purchased other than a phone card, internet access card, or similar form of credit; 
b.  The activity is for a limited time, not to exceed one month in duration, and not occurring for a minimum of three months; and 
c.  The activity does not simulate any "Las Vegas" or casino style gambling device. 
(Code 1969, § 9.24.040; Ord. No. 153, § 1, 1959; Ord. No. 915-2013, § 1(9.24.040), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 9.24.050. - Gambling prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person within the city to deal, carry on, participate in, bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on, with cards, dice or other device or contrivance, mechanical, electrical, electro-mechanical, or computer-based via the internet, network, or stand-alone software, for money, checks or credit. 
(Code 1969, § 9.24.050; Ord. No. 153, § 2, 1959; Ord. No. 915-2013, § 1(9.24.050), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 9.24.070. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, this chapter shall not apply to bingo games authorized by chapter 9.25. 
(b)  Any federal and/or state sanctioned gambling, such as: 
(1)  Indian gaming casinos that have also gained land use approval; 
(2)  State or federal lotteries. 
(c)  As affiliated with a bona fide nonprofit organization for the sole purpose of raising funds for the non-profit agency, and pursuant to the approval and criteria of a temporary event permit pursuant to chapter 9.45. 
(Code 1969, § 9.24.060; Ord. No. 415, § 1, 1976; Ord. No. 432, § 1, 1977; Ord. No. 529, § 2, 1984; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 1, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 915-2013, § 1(9.24.070), 9-16-2013) 
CHAPTER 9.25. - BINGO GAMES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, adopted April 6, 2009, amended Ch. 9.25, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 9.25 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
State Law reference- Legislature by statute may authorize cities and counties to provide for bingo games for charitable purposes, Cal. Const. Art. IV, § 19; municipalities not prohibited from licensing and regulating by ordinance bingo games for charitable purposes, Penal Code § 326.5. 

Sec. 9.25.010. - Short title. 
    This chapter may be cited as the City of Barstow Bingo Ordinance. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.010; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.020. - Authority for enactment. 
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to article IV, section 19 of the California Constitution and Penal Code §§ 326.3 and 326.5. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.020; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.030. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application: 
    Bingo has the meaning set forth in Penal Code § 326.5(o) as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
    Calendar week means Monday through Sunday. 
    Conduct, operate and staff all mean persons directly involved in the conduct of a bingo game and include, but are not limited to, calling numbers, distributing cards, and the awarding prizes. 
    Permittee organization means an organization to which the city manager has issued a permit to conduct bingo games under this chapter. 
    Premises. 
(1)  The term "premises" means real property within the city on which bingo games are or may be permitted under this chapter and which are: 
a.  Owned or leased by an organization, or property the use of which is donated to the organization; and 
b.  Used by that organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. 
(2)  Premises need not be used or leased exclusively by, or donated exclusively to, a permittee organization. 
    Remote caller bingo game has the meaning set forth in Penal Code § 326.3(u). 
    Security personnel means one or more persons exclusively employed to protect persons and property at bingo games. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.030; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.040. - Bingo games authorized; remote caller bingo games authorized. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the holding of any bingo games in compliance with the requirements of this chapter by organizations exempted from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701(l) and 23701w, or by mobile home park associations and senior citizens organizations, and school districts, provided that the proceeds of such games are used solely for charitable purposes. 
(b)  Bingo games for charitable purposes are authorized pursuant to section 19, article IV of the California Constitution, and Penal Code § 326.5, and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Eligible organizations may apply for a permit to conduct bingo games in the city under the provisions of Penal Code § 326.5 and the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Remote caller bingo games for charitable purposes are authorized pursuant to section 19, article IV of the California Constitution, and Penal Code § 326.3. Remote caller bingo games shall be conducted in accordance with Penal Code § 326.3 and this chapter and only by organizations exempted from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701(l) and 23701w, or by mobile home park associations, senior citizens organizations, and charitable organization affiliated with school districts. In addition, no organization shall be authorized to conduct remote caller bingo games unless the organization: 
(1)  Has been incorporated or in existence for three or more years; and 
(2)  Has a city-issued permit to conduct bingo games. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.040; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.050. - California Penal Code § 326.3, incorporated. 
    The provisions of Penal Code § 326.3 are incorporated herein by this reference and apply along with provisions of this chapter to control remote caller bingo games authorized by this chapter. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and Penal Code § 326.3, Penal Code § 326.3 shall control. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.050; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.060. - California Penal Code § 326.5, incorporated. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Penal Code § 326.5(a), the provisions of Penal Code § 326.5 are incorporated herein by this reference and apply along with provisions of this chapter to control bingo games authorized by this chapter. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and Penal Code § 326.5, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(Code 1969, § 9.20.060; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.070. - Permit required. 
    No person or organization may conduct or allow another to conduct bingo games, and no person may act as a bingo manager in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city manager to do so. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.070; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.080. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Applications for a permit to conduct bingo games in the city must be in writing on a form provided by the city manager and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the applicant organization and evidence that the applicant is an eligible organization under section 9.25.040; 
(2)  The names, and addresses and signature of the presiding officer and at least one other officer of the applicant organization; 
(3)  The name, address and signature of each person designated as a "bingo manager" pursuant to section 9.25.160; 
(4)  The mailing address of the applicant organization; 
(5)  The mailing and street addresses of the premises on which bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy load of the room or rooms in which bingo will be played provided by the fire code in effect in the city when the application is made; 
(6)  The proposed day or days of the week and hours during which the applicant organization proposes to conduct bingo games; 
(7)  A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Penal Code § 326.5 and this chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, and understands that the city manager may revoke the permit for a violation of any such provision; 
(8)  A statement setting forth the character, location and extent of the charitable work of the applicant organization; 
(9)  A statement of the charitable use to which the proceeds of bingo games will be put; 
(10)  A statement that the applicants have read and are familiar with the provisions of this chapter and will require all persons who operate or staff bingo games to read and be familiar with all provisions of this chapter prior to operating or staffing bingo games; 
(11)  A statement that the applicant intends or does not intend to conduct remote caller bingo games; 
(12)  If applicable, a statement that the applicant agrees to conduct remote caller bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Penal Code § 326.3 and this chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, and understands that the city manager may revoke the bingo game permit for a violation of any such provision; 
(13)  If applicable, a valid and current license to conduct remote caller bingo issued by the California Gambling Control Commission; 
(14)  Such other information as may be required by the city manager. 
(b)  Such application shall be signed under penalty of perjury by a person or persons with authority to bind the applicant organization. 
(c)  An applicant shall submit with an application a certificate of determination of exemption from the California Franchise Tax Board showing that the organization is exempt from tax under Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701(a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g) or (l), or a letter of good standing from the exemption division of the franchise tax board showing an exemption under one of said sections. This subsection shall not apply to a mobile home park association, a senior citizens organization, or a school district. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.080; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.090. - Contents of permits. 
    Upon determining that an applicant is qualified to conduct bingo games in the city, the city manager shall issue a permit stating: 
(1)  The name and legal nature of the organization to which the permit is issued; 
(2)  The address of the premises on which bingo games may be conducted; 
(3)  The capacity of the room or rooms in which bingo games may be conducted; 
(4)  The date the permit expires; 
(5)  Any bingo managers designated pursuant to section 9.25.160; 
(6)  Any rules for the conduct of bingo games imposed pursuant to section 9.25.190; and, 
(7)  Such other related information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.090; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.100. - Permit fee. 
    Each initial application for an organization or bingo manager permit and any renewal request related to such permit shall be accompanied by a fee of $50.00 or such larger amount as may be established by resolution of the city council consistently with Penal Code § 326.5(l) as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. If the applicant for a permit is denied or the renewal thereof is denied, one-half of such fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.100; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.110. - Duration of permit. 
    A permit issued under this chapter shall expire one year after issuance or at such earlier time that the permittee organization no longer meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.110; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.120. - Investigation by police. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a permit, the city manager shall forward the application to the chief of police for study and investigation. The chief of police shall investigate all persons listed on the application. No person may operate or staff a bingo game who has been convicted of embezzlement, theft, fraud or gambling. Based on the study and investigation, the chief of police shall recommend to the city manager either denial or approval of the permit application. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.120; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.130. - Change in facts must be reported. 
    A permittee organization or a permitted bingo manager shall immediately report to the city manager any change in the information provided on an application for a permit under this chapter. Prior to conducting remote caller bingo games, a permittee organization shall supplement its permit application by providing the city with: 
(1)  A statement that the permittee organization agrees to conduct remote caller bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Penal Code § 326.3 and this chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, and understands that the city manager may revoke the bingo game permit for a violation of any such provision; and 
(2)  A valid and current license to conduct remote caller bingo issued by the California Gambling Control Commission. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.130; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.140. - Posting of permit and rules. 
    At all times during which bingo is played, the permittee organization shall post conspicuously at the public entrance to the room or rooms in which bingo is played: the permittee organization permit, the bingo manager permit, any rules and regulations established by the city manager for the conduct of bingo games under the permit, and the permittee organization's rules of bingo operation. The posted rules shall be legible and accessible to all players. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.140; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.150. - Operation and staffing of games. 
(a)  Bingo games shall be operated and staffed only by members of the permittee organization, who shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. 
(b)  Only the permittee organization shall operate any bingo game or participate in the promotion, supervision or conduct of bingo games. 
(c)  This section does not preclude a permittee organization from employing or contracting another to employ security personnel who are not members of the permittee organization. Security personnel shall not operate or staff bingo games. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.150; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.160. - Bingo manager. 
(a)  One or more members of the permittee organization shall be designated as bingo managers on an application for a permit under this chapter and on any permit issued under this chapter. A permitted bingo manager shall be present at all times that a permittee organization conducts bingo games and that bingo manager shall be responsible for the conduct and operation of the bingo games and for compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(b)  No person may be a bingo manager unless he is a nonsalaried, noncompensated member of the permittee organization for at least six months before he is designated as a bingo manager and first obtains a bingo manager permit under section 9.25.170. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.160; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.170. - Bingo manager permit. 
    An applicant for a bingo manager permit shall file a written application stating, in addition to such information as may be required by the city manager: 
(1)  Neither the bingo manager nor the members of the permittee organization will receive any profit, wage or salary, or any other direct or indirect consideration from any bingo game; 
(2)  The bingo manager applicant has read and understands all requirements of this chapter for the conduct of bingo games in the city and accepts full responsibility for the conduct of such bingo games consistently with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.170; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.180. - Hours and days of operation. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, bingo games shall be conducted between 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight for a maximum of six hours per day and no more than two days per calendar week by any permittee organization or on any one premises whether or not more than one organization is permitted to conduct bingo games on those premises. 
(b)  The city manager may issue a permit to allow bingo games to be played over any consecutive three-day period provided that such permit is granted only once per calendar year to any permittee organization. A request for a permit under this subsection (b) shall be made on a form provided, and as otherwise specified, by the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.180; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.190. - Rules of operation. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 9.25.150(c), no person shall receive or pay a profit, wage or salary from the proceeds of any bingo game conducted in the city. No person other than a permittee organization shall have, hold or obtain any financial interest in the conduct of bingo games. 
(b)  No permittee organization or bingo manager shall permit: 
(1)  Any person to participate in a bingo game, unless that player is present when the bingo game is conducted, except for remote caller bingo games; 
(2)  Any person to play any game of bingo on credit; 
(3)  Any minor to play bingo; 
(4)  Any alcoholic beverage to be served or consumed in a room where a bingo game is conducted during or between the playing of the games. 
(c)  The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed $500.00 in cash, kind, or both, for each separate bingo game which is held. The value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any remote caller bingo game shall not exceed 37 percent of the gross receipts for that game. When an authorized organization elects to deduct fees paid for the use and processing of credit card sales from the amount of gross revenues for that game awarded for prizes, the maximum amount of gross revenues that may be awarded for prizes shall not exceed 37 percent of the gross receipts for that game, less the amount of redirected fees paid for the use and processing of credit card sales. 
(d)  All persons who operate or staff bingo games shall wear on the outside of their clothing an identification insignia or badge, no less than 21/2 by 31/2 inches in size, bearing the name of the permittee organization and the name and any title of the staff member. 
(e)  Bingo games authorized under this chapter shall be conducted only on premises identified on the permit pursuant to which they are conducted. 
(f)  Bingo games shall be open to the public and may not be limited to the members of the permittee organization. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.190; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.200. - Proceeds from games must be kept in separate fund. 
(a)  All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes of the permittee organization, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Any permittee organization other than an organization exempt from the bank and corporation tax under Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701d, shall use the proceeds of bingo games only for the charitable purposes of the permittee organization or as follows: 
(1)  Such proceeds may be used for prizes and to pay permit and application fees under this chapter; and 
(2)  The portion of such proceeds specified by Penal Code § 326.5 may be used for rental of property; overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment; administrative expenses; security equipment; and security personnel. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.200; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.210. - Inspection of premises. 
(a)  No person shall interfere with, prevent or refuse to permit a duly authorized representative of the city manager, the fire department or any peace officer to inspect any place in which bingo games or remote caller bingo games are conducted in the city, whether or not bingo games or remote caller bingo games are being conducted at the time of the inspection. 
(b)  Failure to allow, or interference with, an inspection constitutes a violation and shall be grounds for revocation of a permit or denial of a bingo application or permit. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.210; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.220. - Permit revocation. 
(a)  Whenever it shall be shown or whenever the city manager has knowledge that a permittee, or agent thereof, has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the city manager shall immediately suspend the permit and give the organization or bingo manager written notice ("notice of suspension") by registered mail of the suspension and a brief statement of the reasons therefor. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the notice of suspension, the organization or bingo manager shall cease from conducting any bingo game or remote caller bingo game, and the failure to do so shall constitute a separate and further violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.220; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.230. - Appeal. 
(a)  In the event of any finding or decision of the city manager which is adverse to the application of an organization or bingo manager for a permit or renewal thereof under this chapter, or if a permit is suspended or revoked, the organization or bingo manager may appeal to the city council, provided, that such appeal is filed with the city clerk within 15 calendar days from the date of the finding or decision of the city manager. The city manager shall notify the organization or bingo manager of this right to appeal, and such notice shall accompany each and every adverse finding and decision of the city manager. The finding or decision and the notice of this right to appeal shall be mailed by registered mail, to the organization or bingo manager at the address which appears on the application for a permit or renewal thereof. 
(b)  Failure of the city manager to receive a timely request for an appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest the finding or decision. Unless a timely appeal is filed, a finding or decision of the city manager becomes final and unappealable. 
(c)  Within 30 calendar days of the filing date of an appeal, the city council shall conduct a hearing on the appeal. The city shall give the appellant at least five calendar days' mailed notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing at the address specified on the appeal. The failure of any appellant to receive a properly addressed notice of hearing shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. Within ten calendar days after conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its decision. The decision of the city council shall be a final decision. 
(e)  The failure of any appellant to appear at the hearing without such cause as the city council may deem sufficient to justify a continuance shall constitute a default and the finding or decision of the city manager shall thereupon be final and unappealable. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.230; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.240. - Audit and accounting requirements. 
(a)  Prior to July 31 and prior to January 31 of each year, a permittee organization shall, at its own expense, submit on a form to be provided by the city manager a report of gross revenues, expenses and other information reasonably required by the city manager to enforce this chapter. A permittee organization shall annually submit to the city manager a copy of its federal tax return not later than 60 calendar days after that return is filed with the Internal Revenue Service. 
(b)  A permittee organization shall maintain complete and accurate records of income received from, and prizes and other expenses disbursed in connection with, the operation and staffing of bingo games. 
(c)  The city manager may at any time demand a complete and detailed accounting of the records required under subsection (b) of this section and any other data or information pertaining to the operation of bingo games maintained by a permitted organization. The city manager may subject that accounting and such data and information to, an agreed upon procedures examination, audit, and/or any other accounting review which may extend to, without limitation: 
(1)  Proceeds from the operation of bingo games. 
(2)  An accounting of the number of players and number of games played over a designated period. 
(3)  An inspection of bingo cards, funds, equipment or any other records or documentation in connection with the operation of games over a designated period. 
Such detailed accounting or further data or information shall be provided at the expense of the permittee organization if, in the sole discretion of the city manager, such detailed accounting or further data or information is necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(d)  In the event a permittee organization fails to render an accounting or provide information pursuant to the provisions of this section within 60 calendar days of the city manager's request, the city manager may suspend that organization's permit until the requested accounting or information provided. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.240; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 9.25.250. - Civil remedies and criminal penalties. 
(a)  The city attorney may bring an action to enjoin a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  A violation of section 9.25.160(a) and Penal Code § 326.3(c) shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $10,000.00, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. A violation of any other provision of this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor punishable under section 1.01.150. 
(Code 1969, § 9.25.250; Ord. No. 847-2009, § 2, 4-6-2009) 
CHAPTER 9.28. - SKATEBOARDING AND SKATEBOARD PARKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Local authority to prohibit or restrict riding of skateboards on sidewalks or roadways, Vehicle Code § 21967. 

Sec. 9.28.010. - Short title, authority and applicability. 
(a)  This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Skateboarding and Skateboard Park Ordinance." 
(b)  The ordinance enacted pursuant to this chapter shall apply to the use of skateboards in city owned and operated skateboard parks, prohibited uses of skateboards and other coasting devices on property located in the city and outside of a designated skateboard park, and signage directed to skateboarding. 
(c)  This chapter shall apply to the extent permitted by the statutes and laws of the state. 
(Code 1969, § 9.28.010; Ord. No. 834, § 2(part), 2007) 
Sec. 9.28.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms as used in this chapter shall have the meaning respectively ascribed thereto, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
    Coasting device means roller skates, in-line skates, rollerblades, scooters, coasters or other rolling device self-propelled by human, motor or wind power, but excludes skateboards. 
    Skateboard means a board of any material which has wheels attached to it, and is propelled or moved by human gravitational or mechanical power, to which there is not fixed any device or mechanism to turn or control the wheels, and excludes roller skates, in-line skates, rollerblades, scooters, coasters and similar devices. 
    Skateboard park means any publicly owned or operated facility designed and maintained for the purpose of skateboard use. 
    Skateboarding means to ride, operate or use a skateboard. 
(Code 1969, § 9.28.020; Ord. No. 834, § 2(part), 2007) 
Sec. 9.28.030. - Use of a skateboard park. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Other than during posted hours of operation, use a skateboard park unless first expressly authorized by a city representative in writing; 
(2)  Use the skating surface of a skateboard park for any use other than proper use of a skateboard; 
(3)  Use the skating surface of a skateboard park unless that person is wearing proper safety equipment, including at least a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads, which is in good condition and designed and approved for such activity; 
(4)  Use alcohol, or non-prescribed drugs or medication for which a prescription is required, in or within 300 feet of a skateboard park; or be under the influence of alcohol, or non-prescribed drugs or medication for which a prescription is required, while at a skateboard park; 
(5)  Use prescribed drugs or medication in or within 300 feet of a skateboard park, or under the influence of the same while at a skateboard park, where such prescribed drugs or medication may affect one's ability to safely operate a skateboard; 
(6)  Dispose of debris, waste and trash except in an appropriate receptacle provided by the city; 
(7)  Apply graffiti or otherwise deface a skateboard park; 
(8)  Use or be upon a skateboard in a skateboard park while wearing an audio headset; 
(9)  Introduce, employ or use any unauthorized equipment, obstacle or apparatus within a skateboard park; 
(10)  Enter or remain in a skateboard park with any food, beverage or glass containers; 
(11)  Play amplified music within a skateboard park; 
(12)  Use profane or abusive language or act in any discourteous manner while at a skateboard park; 
(13)  No skateboarding on wet surfaces; 
(14)  Permit spectators to enter into the skating area of a skateboard park; 
(15)  Skateboard on or otherwise employing any fences, wall, curbs, planters, benches, stairs/steps, railing, parking lots, or driveways within the city limits for skateboarding, unless within the skating area of a skateboard park; 
(16)  Throw a skateboard or launch a skateboard toward spectators or other skaters; 
(17)  Skateboard in a skateboard park owned and operated by the city, unless the individual using a skateboard in a skateboard park is age 12 or older. Individuals under the age of 12 years old shall be accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(b)  If any person violates or fails to comply with any one or more of the rules listed in this section, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 9.28.080. 
(Code 1969, § 9.28.030; Ord. No. 834, § 2(part), 2007) 
Sec. 9.28.040. - Designation of skateboard parks. 
    The city council shall designate by resolution any skateboard park in the city permissible for skateboarding. 
(Code 1969, § 9.28.040; Ord. No. 834, § 2(part), 2007) 
Sec. 9.28.050. - Signs. 
    The recreation manager shall erect and maintain visible regulatory signs consistent with standards for signs utilized by the public works department at any skateboard park owned and operated by the city. Such signs shall indicate, at a minimum, the hours of operation of the skateboard park, the rules adopted by city council resolution, and shall afford reasonable notice that any person riding a skateboard in the skateboard park must, at all times, wear a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads, and that any person failing to do so is in violation of the Barstow Municipal Code and is subject to citation under section 9.28.080. 
(Code 1969, § 9.28.050; Ord. No. 834, § 2(part), 2007) 
Sec. 9.28.060. - Prohibited areas for skateboards and coasting devices. 
(a)  Subject to subsection (c) of this section, no person shall operate or use any skateboard or coasting device while: 
(1)  Upon any parking facility, including parking lot, whether public or private, and upon private property where notification pursuant to subsection (c) of this section has been provided; and 
(2)  Upon any city-owned property including the city hall complex; provided, that notification similar to that found under subsection (c) of this section has been provided. 
(b)  The prohibitions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to a wheelchair, bicycles or areas designated by resolution as skateboard parks. 
(c)  Within the meaning of subsection (a) of this section, notification relating to private property shall mean notification by the owner or lessee or other person in charge of the property or premises which may be satisfied by direct verbal communication by any such person or by his duly designated agent, including peace officer or private patrolman, or by a sign or signs conspicuously posted on the property or premises giving notice of the activities prohibited. 
(Code 1969, § 9.28.060; Ord. No. 834, § 2(part), 2007) 
Sec. 9.28.070. - Nuisance. 
    No person shall use a skateboard or coasting device in a manner which creates a nuisance. For purposes of this section, the term "nuisance" is defined as any activity which: 
(1)  Threatens injury to a person or property; 
(2)  Creates an obstruction or presents a hazard to the free use of public or private property by pedestrians or motorists; 
(3)  Generates loud or unreasonable noise. 
(Code 1969, § 9.28.070; Ord. No. 834, § 2(part), 2007) 
Sec. 9.28.080. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $25.00 for a first conviction, and $50.00 for a second conviction within one year and $100.00 for each additional conviction within one year. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city police department or designated city personnel, at their sole discretion, from issuing warnings or causing a person to be removed or prevented from being on or within 300 feet of any skateboard park in lieu of a citation if such person is found to be in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 9.28.080; Ord. No. 834, § 2(part), 2007) 
CHAPTER 9.32. - TRESPASSING AND LOITERING 

Sec. 9.32.010. - Chapter application. 
    This chapter applies to the city. 
(Code 1969, § 9.32.010; Ord. No. 547, § 2(part), 1985) 
Sec. 9.32.020. - Loitering. 
    No person shall loiter or stand in any public highway, alley, sidewalk, or crosswalk or other public way, or otherwise occupy any portion thereof within the city, in such a manner as unreasonably to annoy or molest any person, thereon or as unreasonably to obstruct or interfere with the free passage of any person. 
(Code 1969, § 9.32.020; Ord. No. 547, § 2(part), 1985) 
Sec. 9.32.030. - Sitting or lying on public ways. 
    No person shall sit, lie or sleep in or upon any highway, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk or other public way within the city. The provisions of this section do not prohibit sitting upon a public highway, alley, sidewalk, or crosswalk or other public way open for pedestrian travel if: 
(1)  Necessitated by the physical disability of such person; 
(2)  Viewing a legally conducted parade; or 
(3)  On a bench lawfully installed for such purposes. 
(Code 1969, § 9.32.030; Ord. No. 547, § 2(part), 1985) 
Sec. 9.32.040. - Obstructing entrances. 
    No person shall loiter, stand, or sit in or at the entrance of any church, hall, a public business, or place of public assemblage within the city so as to obstruct such entrance. 
(Code 1969, § 9.32.040; Ord. No. 547, § 2(part), 1985) 
Sec. 9.32.045. - Unlawful loitering or solicitation. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the words, terms and phrases as defined in this section shall be construed as hereinafter set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
    Automated teller machine means any electronic information processing device used by a financial institution and its customers for the primary purpose of executing transactions solely between the financial institution and its customers. 
    Automated teller machine branch office means a branch office that consists exclusively of one or more automated teller machines. An automatic teller machine branch office of a bank may include: 
(1)  A night depository facility; and 
(2)  Personnel of the bank; provided that the personnel do not accept deposits, paychecks or make loans. 
    Loitering means to delay or linger without any lawful purpose for being on or near the property or for the purpose of committing a crime as opportunity may be discovered. 
    Solicitation means to ask or beg for money or something of value by spoken word, bodily gesture, or sign, as a donation or as consideration for a service or sale of goods. 
(b)  Loitering or solicitation prohibited. The following conduct is prohibited: 
(1)  Loitering or solicitation within 25 feet of any automated teller machine or automated teller machine branch office. 
(2)  Solicitation within 25 feet of any bus stop, taxi stand, or similar location, or on any public bus or similar transportation vehicle. 
(3)  Solicitation of a person who is occupying a motor vehicle (other than a commercial vehicle, or an emergency vehicle offering services to the public). 
(4)  Solicitation of a person standing in line to obtain entrance into a restaurant, bar or theater or for any other purpose. 
(5)  Solicitation of a person seated in an outdoor dining area. 
(Code 1969, § 9.32.045; Ord. No. 723, §§ 2, 3, 1996; Ord. No. 933-2015, § 1, 6-15-2015) 
Sec. 9.32.050. - Private property. 
    No person shall enter or remain upon any drive-in or take-out restaurant, automobile parking lot, shopping center property or any other place open to the public without the implied or expressed consent of the owner, his agent or person in lawful possession thereof, or with knowledge that such consent has been withdrawn, in such manner as unreasonably to annoy or molest any person thereon as unreasonably to obstruct or interfere with the free passage of any vehicle or person. Nor shall any person drive a motor vehicle or remain in a motor vehicle on any drive-in or take-out restaurant, automobile parking lot, shopping center property or any other place open to the public without the implied or expressed consent of the owner, his agent or person in lawful possession thereof, or with knowledge that such consent has been withdrawn, so as to unreasonably annoy or molest any person thereon or as unreasonably to obstruct or interfere with the free passage of any vehicle or person. 
(Code 1969, § 9.32.050; Ord. No. 547, § 2(part), 1985) 
Sec. 9.32.060. - Trespass by refusal to leave. 
    No person shall remain on any private property or business premises, after being notified by the owner or lessee or other person in charge thereof to remove therefrom. 
(Code 1969, § 9.32.060; Ord. No. 565, § 1(part), 1987) 
Sec. 9.32.070. - Trespass by prohibited entry. 
    No person, without permission, express or implied, of the owner or lessee or other person in charge of private property or business premises, shall enter upon such private property or business premises after having been notified by the owner or lessee or other person in charge thereof to keep off or keep away therefrom. 
(Code 1969, § 9.32.070; Ord. No. 565, § 1(part), 1987) 
Sec. 9.32.080. - Form of notification. 
    Within the meaning of sections 9.32.060 and 9.32.070, notification by the owner or lessee or other person in charge of the property or premises may be satisfied by direct verbal communication by any such person or by his duly designated agent, including a peace officer or private patrolman, or by sign conspicuously posted on the property or premises giving notice of the prohibition of the particular form of trespass involved. 
(Code 1969, § 9.32.080; Ord. No. 565, § 1(part), 1987) 
Sec. 9.32.090. - Exceptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply in any of the following instances: 
(1)  Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by the Unruh Civil Rights Act, Civil Code § 51, (which forbids a business establishment generally open to the public, from unreasonably and arbitrarily excluding any prospective customer, and from practicing any racial or other prohibited discrimination); 
(2)  Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by any other provision of law relating to unlawful discrimination against any person on account of color, race, religion, creed, ancestry or national origin; 
(3)  Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by Penal Code ch. 365 or any other provision of law relating to duties of innkeepers and common carriers; 
(4)  Where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of peaceful labor picketing or other lawful labor activities; 
(5)  Where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of any other exercise of a constitutionally protected right of freedom of speech such as, but not limited to, peaceful expressions of political or religious opinions, not involving conduct otherwise punishable criminally under such laws as Penal Code § 647c (obstruction of a street, sidewalk, or other public area), or Penal Code ch. 415 (fighting; noise; offensive words); 
(6)  Where the person who is upon another's private property or business premises is there under claim or color of legal right. This exception is applicable, but not limited to, the following types of situations involving disputes wherein the participants generally have civil remedies readily available to them: marital and post-marital disputes; child custody or visitation disputes; disputes regarding title to or rights in real property; landlord-tenant disputes; disputes between members of the same family or between persons residing upon the property concerned up until the time of the dispute; employer-employee disputes; business-type disputes such as those between partners; debtor-creditor disputes; and instances wherein the person claims rights to be present pursuant to order, decree or process of a court. 
(Code 1969, § 9.32.090; Ord. No. 565, § 1(part), 1987; Ord. No. 615, § 1(part), 1989) 
CHAPTER 9.33. - POLICE SERVICES FEE FOR REPEAT MINOR CURFEW AND LOITERING VIOLATORS 

Sec. 9.33.010. - Purpose. 
    The city finds and determines that minors who are repeatedly detained and supervised by police personnel for violating curfew and daytime loitering laws impose an extraordinary burden on the manpower and resources of the police department because juveniles taken into custody by police personnel must be supervised in an unsecured area of the police department until they are released to a parent or guardian. Police officers who supervise minors who have been detained are then unavailable to carry out police duties in the field and this decreases the level of police protection whereby decreasing public safety in the community. The purpose of this chapter is to defray the reasonable costs that the city incurs to provide extraordinary police services to respond to, detain and supervise repeat curfew and daytime loitering violators. 
(Code 1969, § 9.33.010; Ord. No. 730, § 2(part), 1996) 
Sec. 9.33.020. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
    Repeat curfew and daytime loitering violator means any minor: 
(1)  Who has been detained and taken into custody by city police personnel on more than one occasion in a 12-month period for violating section 9.04.020 or section 9.32.020; or 
(2)  Who has been adjudicated by any juvenile court determining that the minor violated section 9.04.020, any similar municipal ordinance of any city or section 9.32.025, referenced above on more than one occasion in a 12-month period. 
    Responsible party means any parent, legal guardian, or other person in charge or control of repeat curfew violator. 
(Code 1969, § 9.33.020; Ord. No. 730, § 2(part), 1996) 
Sec. 9.33.030. - Police service fee established; debt to city. 
(a)  A responsible party shall be liable for police services fee whenever the city's police personnel respond to, detain and supervise a repeat curfew or daytime loitering violator. The city council shall establish the amount of the police services fee by resolution. 
(b)  The police services fee charged to a responsible party shall be a debt to the city by the responsible party. Any responsible party owing money to the city pursuant to this chapter shall be liable in an action brought by the city in its own name to recover such amount including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Code 1969, § 9.33.030; Ord. No. 730, § 2(part), 1996) 
Sec. 9.33.040. - Billing. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designee shall notify the finance department in writing of: 
(1)  The name and address of the responsible party; 
(2)  The date and time of the initial violation and the repeat violation of section 9.04.020 or section 9.32.025; 
(3)  The names of the police personnel who responded to, detained and supervised the repeat curfew or daytime loitering violator; and 
(4)  The date that the repeat curfew or daytime violator was reprimanded by the county juvenile court for the repeat violation. 
(b)  The finance department will bill the responsible party for the police services fee established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 9.33.040; Ord. No. 730, § 2(part), 1996) 
Sec. 9.33.050. - Appeal. 
    Any responsible party who receives a bill from the finance department pursuant to this chapter may within 15 days after receiving such bill, file a written request with the city clerk appealing the bill. The written appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and the specific factual basis for the appeal. The responsible party is deemed to have received the bill on the third day following the date that the finance department caused the bill to be placed in the United States mail. The city manager or his designee shall review any written appeal filed with the city clerk pursuant to this chapter and shall prepare written decision on the appeal within 30 days from the date that the written appeal is received by the city clerk. All decisions by the city manager or his designee shall be final. 
(Code 1969, § 9.33.050; Ord. No. 730, § 2(part), 1996) 
CHAPTER 9.34. - MOTORCYCLES AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES 

Sec. 9.34.010. - Violation; posted property. 
    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to enter upon or go across any "posted property" without the written permission of the owner, tenant, or occupant in legal possession or control thereof. Every person who so enters upon such "posted property" without such written permission is guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which he enters upon or goes across or remains upon such "posted property." 
(Code 1969, § 9.34.010; Ord. No. 615, § 1(part), 1989) 
Sec. 9.34.020. - Incorporation of Vehicle Code § 27150. 
    Vehicle Code § 27150 of the state is incorporated by reference. 
(Code 1969, § 9.34.020; Ord. No. 411, § 1(part), 1976) 
Sec. 9.34.030. - Noise level. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle whose noise level is in excess of that provided under state law. 
(Code 1969, § 9.34.030; Ord. No. 411, § 1(part), 1976) 
State Law reference- Noise limits for vehicles, Vehicle Code § 27200 et seq. 
Sec. 9.34.040. - Spark arrester and muffler. 
    Any motor vehicle operated within the city shall be equipped with a spark arrester and also with a muffler as defined in Vehicle Code § 27150. No person shall operate a motor vehicle unless it is so equipped with a spark arrester and muffler. 
(Code 1969, § 9.34.040; Ord. No. 411, § 1(part), 1976) 
Sec. 9.34.050. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to operation of vehicles upon property used for raceways or racing facilities in accordance with a license or permit issued by the city pursuant to chapter 9.36. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply on land that is vacant or unimproved private property unless the land is immediately adjacent and contiguous to residential property, or enclosed by fence, or under cultivation, or posted with signs forbidding trespass displayed at intervals of not less than three to a mile along all exterior boundaries and at all roads and trails entering private land. 
(c)  This chapter does not apply to any entry, in the course of duty, of any peace officer or other duly authorized public officer, nor does it apply to the lawful use of an established and existing right-of-way for public road purposes. 
(Code 1969, § 9.34.050; Ord. No. 411, § 1(part), 1976; Ord. No. 615, § 1(part), 1989) 
CHAPTER 9.36. - MOTORCYCLE AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLE EVENTS 

Sec. 9.36.010. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
    Event means any gathering of more than ten off-road vehicles or motorcycles for a recreational outing such as, but not limited to, hound and hare races, rallies, closed course races, hill-climbs and enduro races. 
    Off-road vehicle means any motor driven vehicle designed to be utilized on other than improved roadways for recreational purposes such as, but not limited to, dune buggies. 
(Code 1969, § 9.36.010; Ord. No. 341, § 1(part), 1971) 
Sec. 9.36.020. - Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to organize, conduct or participate in an off-road vehicle or motorcycle event within the corporate limits of the city, unless a permit for such event has first been issued by the chief of police as hereafter provided. 
(Code 1969, § 9.36.020; Ord. No. 341, § 1(part), 1971) 
Sec. 9.36.030. - Application. 
    Applications for a permit to organize or conduct an off-road vehicle or motorcycle event shall be in the form of a letter requesting permission to organize and conduct an event. The letter shall describe the proposed event and shall state the name and address of the sponsor or organizer of the proposed event. The letter shall state the approximate number of off-road vehicles and motorcycles expected to be participating in the event and the provisions which will be made for adequate sanitary facilities to serve the participants and spectators of the event. Said letter shall be accompanied by evidence that the written permission of the owners of any private property upon which the event is proposed to be conducted has been obtained by the sponsor or organizer. 
(Code 1969, § 9.36.030; Ord. No. 341, § 1(part), 1971) 
Sec. 9.36.040. - Findings. 
    Within five days of receipt of an application, the chief of police shall examine the application. Upon finding that adequate provisions for sanitary facilities are proposed and that the permission of the owners of all private property upon which the event will be conducted has been obtained, the chief of police shall grant a permit for the event. 
(Code 1969, § 9.36.040; Ord. No. 341, § 1(part), 1971) 
CHAPTER 9.42. - CERTAIN BODILY FUNCTIONS PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC 

Sec. 9.42.010. - Urination and defecation prohibited; where. 
    Any person who, in any public park, street, alley, highway, public meeting, assembly, or other public place, or in the immediate neighborhood thereof and in view from the same places, urinates or defecates, is guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, that this section shall not be applicable to the act of urinating or defecating in a proper receptacle in a restroom or bathroom in any enclosed structure. 
(Code 1969, § 9.42.010; Ord. No. 530, § 1, 1984) 
CHAPTER 9.45. - TEMPORARY USES 

Sec. 9.45.010. - Intent. 
    The intent of this chapter is to provide for the short-term placement of activities in temporary facilities or outdoors, except as otherwise provided. 
(Code 1969, § 9.45.010; Ord. No. 791, § 2(part), 2003) 
Sec. 9.45.020. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the indicated meanings, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
    Applicant means any person, business or organization seeking a temporary use permit to conduct or sponsor an event governed by this chapter. For a local special event sale or special event sale, the applicant shall be the business conducting the local special event sale or special event sale. 
    Block party means a festive gathering on a residential or commercial street or area requiring the closure of a street, or a portion thereof, to vehicular traffic and the use of the street for the festivity. 
    Carnival means the exhibiting or conducting of a travel show or entertainment open to the public. 
    Local special event sale means an off-site sale conducted by a business legally operating elsewhere in the city. Each applicant shall be limited to a maximum of one event per calendar year, which shall not exceed a total of three days. 
    Off-road vehicle race means any organized sporting event or rally where motorized vehicles are utilized in a contest of speed, or in a competitive trial of speed, skill or recreational event. 
    Outdoor sale in conjunction with a permanent retail facility means an on-site sale conducted by a business legally operating at that location. Such events shall be limited to a maximum of four events per calendar year, three days per event maximum. 
    Permit application fee means the fee to be paid by the applicant at the time that the application is filed with the city manager, pursuant to the application fee schedule. 
    Special event sale means an off-site sale by a business not operating in the city. Each applicant shall be limited to a maximum of one event per calendar year, which shall not exceed a total of three days. 
(Code 1969, § 9.45.020; Ord. No. 791, § 2(part), 2003) 
Sec. 9.45.030. - Temporary uses permitted. 
    No use listed shall be conducted on any parcel of land or within any public right-of-way, including sidewalks and parking lots, unless approval of a temporary use permit has been granted for that use. The following is an exclusive listing of the temporary uses that may be permitted subject to the granting of a temporary use permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If a proposed temporary use is not listed, then the applicant must first obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 19.30: 
(1)  Public rights-of-way, including sidewalks and parking lots: 
a.  Any non-motorized race, walkathon, bike-a-thon or similar event; 
b.  Block party; 
c.  Parade and other constitutionally protected expression; 
d.  Street fair; 
e.  Temporary commercial movie filming in conjunction with motion picture, television program or commercial; and 
f.  Similar events which the city manager determines to be compatible with the purposes of this chapter, and with the zone and surrounding land uses. 
(2)  Districts zoned for residential use: 
a.  Community fair in public park; 
b.  Concert in public park; 
c.  Parade and other constitutionally protected expression; 
d.  Youth, charitable or nonprofit organization project; 
e.  Yard, estate, moving or garage sale if required a temporary use permit by chapter 5.80 (Yard Sales); and 
f.  Similar events which the city manager determines to be compatible with the purposes of this chapter, and with the zone and surrounding land uses. 
(3)  Districts zoned for commercial and industrial uses: 
a.  Auction; 
b.  Carnival, circus and similar traveling amusement event; 
c.  Christmas tree or pumpkin lot; 
d.  Local special event sale; 
e.  Off-road race (check points); 
f.  Outdoor concert; 
g.  Outdoor sale in conjunction with a permanent retail facility; 
h.  Parade and other constitutionally protected expression; 
i.  Special event sale; 
j.  Youth, charitable or nonprofit organization project; and 
k.  Similar events which the city manager determines to be compatible with the purposes of this chapter, and with the zone and surrounding land uses. 
(Code 1969, § 9.45.030; Ord. No. 791, § 2(part), 2003) 
Sec. 9.45.040. - Application procedure. 
(a)  A temporary use permit shall be approved prior to the commencement of any temporary use. Application for a temporary use permit shall be made on an approved application form secured from the city. Such application shall require the information necessary for review of the application by appropriate city departments and shall be accompanied by a fee established by city council resolution to cover the costs for processing the temporary use permit and the cost to provide specific services for the temporary use. Such information required shall include, but not be limited to, the name, address, telephone number and signature of the applicant and property owner, a location map and a plan for the proposed temporary use. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this section, all applications shall be submitted not less than 20 days nor more than 12 months before the date of the proposed temporary use. 
(c)  If an application for a permit to conduct an event related to a constitutionally protected expression is submitted less than 20 days before the proposed event date, it shall be accepted upon a showing of good cause. Good cause will be demonstrated if: 
(1)  The circumstance that gave rise to the permit application did not reasonably allow the participants to file an application within the time prescribed by this chapter; and 
(2)  The event is for the purpose of constitutionally protected expression. 
The city manager shall make this determination of good cause and act on the application if good cause is found within the time period specified in section 9.45.050(b). If an application for a permit to conduct an event that is not related to a constitutionally protected expression is submitted less than 20 days before the proposed event date, it will be accepted upon a showing of good cause. What constitutes good cause shall be determined by the city manager in his reasonable discretion. 
(d)  An application for a temporary use permit to conduct an event that is not for the purpose of constitutionally protected expression shall be accompanied by a non-refundable permit application fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 9.45.040; Ord. No. 791, § 2(part), 2003) 
Sec. 9.45.050. - Action on application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed application for a temporary use permit, the city manager shall circulate the application to all affected city departments for review. 
(b)  The city manager shall approve, conditionally approve or deny an application on the grounds specified in section 9.45.070. Such action on the application shall occur in a timely manner. Action on an application for a temporary use permit for the purpose of constitutionally protected expression shall be made within two business days after the applicant has submitted the complete application to the city manager. The city manager may impose reasonable conditions necessary to mitigate potential adverse impacts as provided in section 9.45.060; provided, however, that the city manager will not consider the content of any constitutionally protected speech in his determination whether to approve the application or impose specific conditions on an approved application, unless there is a threat of immediate and substantial harm to persons or property. 
(c)  If an application is denied or approved with conditions other than those acceptable by the applicant, the city manager shall inform the applicant in writing of the grounds for denial or the reasons for imposing the conditions and the right of the applicant to appeal pursuant to section 9.45.090. If the application is approved, the applicant shall be notified of the permit conditions at the time the application is approved and the applicant's right to appeal the permit conditions. 
(d)  The decision by the city manager to approve an application for a temporary use permit that involves constitutionally protected expression shall be a final decision not subject to further appeal; provided, however, if the conditions imposed on the temporary use permit, then the applicant may do so pursuant to the provisions of section 9.45.090. 
(e)  If the city manager determines that good cause does not exist for a late application or within two business days after receipt of the late application, the city manager shall inform the applicant of the reason for the determination regarding lack of good cause and the applicant's right to appeal. 
(Code 1969, § 9.45.050; Ord. No. 791, § 2(part), 2003) 
Sec. 9.45.060. - Imposition of conditions on permit. 
(a)  The city manager may impose reasonable conditions necessary to mitigate potential adverse impacts of the temporary use permit. These conditions may include any of the following: 
(1)  Restrictions on the sites used for temporary events so they will not be located in required on-site parking spaces or remove parking necessary to serve adjoining uses required on the day of the event; 
(2)  Requirements for sanitary facilities for all employees, attendants and participants of a temporary use event during its operational hours as approved in accordance with public health standards; 
(3)  Limitations on temporary uses to their specific zoning districts in which they are listed as permitted; 
(4)  Limitations on the number of local special event sales and special event sales held within the city by: imposing conditions of approval upon a permit; limiting the total number of such events at a specific location during any calendar year; restricting the location of such events to specific locations that are appropriate for such events or denying the approval of such events where the public interest so requires; 
(5)  Regulation on the hours of operation and days, including limitation on the duration of a temporary use event to a shorter time period than requested; 
(6)  Reasonable conditions to accommodate pedestrians or vehicular traffic, including restricting an event to a portion of a street; 
(7)  Requirements for street closure and/or traffic control in accordance with a traffic control plan; 
(8)  Requirements for first aid or emergency facilities; 
(9)  Compliance with animal protection ordinances and law; 
(10)  Reasonable restrictions on the use of amplified sound; 
(11)  Payment of deposit to ensure proper clean-up of property after cessation of the temporary use; 
(12)  Compliance with city ordinances in obtaining any required permit or license; 
(13)  Conditions concerning adequate security for the event; and/or 
(14)  For events which do not involve constitutionally protected expression, the city may require that the applicant provide insurance to indemnify the city and its officers, officials, employees and agents from liability and provide an appropriate level of insurance to protect the city and its officers, officials, employees and agents from liability relating to the temporary use. The applicant shall provide the insurance within the time period specified by the city manager. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the city manager or the city to impose conditions on the issuance of a temporary use permit that would improperly restrict or would otherwise improperly interfere with constitutionally protected expression. Conditions imposed by the city manager for a permit for constitutionally protected expression shall be limited to those conditions which fully comply with the allowable restrictions on constitutionally protected expression. 
(Code 1969, § 9.45.060; Ord. No. 791, § 2(part), 2003) 
Sec. 9.45.070. - Grounds for denial of application. 
    The city manager shall deny an application for a temporary use permit or impose conditions to mitigate the adverse impact upon a determination that one or more of the following exists: 
(1)  Information contained on the application, or supplemental information requested from the applicant, is found to be materially false or misleading; 
(2)  The applicant fails to complete the application form after having been notified of the additional information or documents requested; 
(3)  The city manager has received an earlier application to hold another event at the same time and place as requested by the applicant, or so close in time and place as to cause substantial adverse impacts; 
(4)  The time or route of the event is likely to substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the event site or route, substantially disrupt the use of a street when it is subject to great traffic congestion or unduly impede the operation of emergency vehicles, city service or city functions; 
(5)  For a proposed event that does not involve constitutionally protected expression, the event would have a detrimental impact on adjacent public or private property, adjoining businesses, traffic, congestion, aesthetics, parking and/or the public health, safety or welfare; and/or 
(6)  The temporary use permit is not otherwise authorized by this chapter based on the restrictions on temporary use permits imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 9.45.070; Ord. No. 791, § 2(part), 2003) 
Sec. 9.45.080. - Approval by planning commission. 
    At the discretion of the city manager, any application for a temporary use permit that does not involve constitutionally protected expression may be referred to the planning commission for approval. If such referral occurs, then the planning commission shall assume all of the obligations of the city manager in reviewing and considering whether to approve an application for a temporary use permit. 
(Code 1969, § 9.45.080; Ord. No. 791, § 2(part), 2003) 
Sec. 9.45.090. - Appeals. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in section 9.45.050, appeals from the decision of the city manager pursuant to this chapter shall be made in writing and filed with the city manager within ten days from the date of the disputed decision. The appeal shall be filed on an approved appeals form secured from the city clerk and shall include the date of appeal, the grounds for the appeal and a fee as provided by resolution duly adopted by the city council. The planning commission shall consider the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided that the appeal was filed at least five business days before that planning commission meeting. The decision of the planning commission shall be final. 
(b)  If the planning commission was the original decision maker regarding the temporary use permit pursuant to section 9.45.080, then the appeals pursuant to this section shall be made to the city council instead of the planning commission. Under these circumstances, the decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Code 1969, § 9.45.090; Ord. No. 791, § 2(part), 2003) 
CHAPTER 9.48. - PUBLIC CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 9.48.010. - Prohibitions; exceptions. 
    No person shall consume an alcoholic beverage, or have in his possession, any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, upon any street, alley, sidewalk, public or private parking lot, in or immediately adjacent to a public restroom, any public park, or other public place within the city except: 
(1)  In or on the property of an establishment, business place, or other location properly licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages under the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the state; or 
(2)  When permitted in writing by the city manager or designee for any special event held pursuant to chapter 9.45 and under such terms and conditions and restrictions as the city manager or designee may impose. 
(Code 1969, § 9.48.010; Ord. No. 669, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 683, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 844, § 3, 2008) 
State Law reference- Possession of open receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage in city owned park prohibited, Business and Professions Code § 25620. 
Sec. 9.48.020. - Adjacent to retail establishment. 
(a)  No person who has in his possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, shall enter, be or remain on the posted premises of, including the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee, licensed pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with section 23000) of the California Business and Professions Code. 
(b)  As used in subsection (a) of this section, the term "posted premises" means those premises which are subject to licensure under any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage license and the parking lot immediately adjacent to the licensed premises. 
(c)  Every retail establishment licensed pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with section 23000) of the California Business and Professions Code shall post its premises with clearly visible notices, in a form and manner approved by the city, indicating to the patrons of the licensee and the parking lot that the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(Code 1969, § 9.48.020; Ord. No. 669, § 2, 1991) 
CHAPTER 9.50. - ROBERT A. SESSIONS SPORTS PARK 

Sec. 9.50.010. - Rules and regulations-Adoption by resolution. 
    The city council may establish by resolution rules and regulations governing use of the city-owned Robert A. Sessions Sports Park. 
(Code 1969, § 9.50.010; Ord. No. 771, § 1(part), 2001) 
Sec. 9.50.020. - Same-Posting. 
    A copy of the rules and regulations governing the use and operation of the Robert A. Sessions Sports Park shall be posted in three public places and publicized in the manner designated for ordinances and shall be permanently posted at the entrance to the Robert A. Sessions Sports Park. 
(Code 1969, § 9.50.020; Ord. No. 771, § 1(part), 2001) 
Sec. 9.50.030. - Violations and penalties. 
    Violation of rules and regulations governing the use and operation of the Robert A. Sessions Sports Park shall, in addition to any other remedies authorized by law, be punishable as set forth in section 1.01.150. Notwithstanding any provision of section 1.01.150 to the contrary, such violations shall constitute a misdemeanor and any such violation may be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. Any person violating any of the rules and regulations governing the use of the Robert A. Sessions sports park adopted by the city council shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of the park rules and regulations is committed, continued, or permitted. 
(Code 1969, § 9.50.030; Ord. No. 771, § 1(part), 2001) 
CHAPTER 9.52. - CITY BMX TRACK 

Sec. 9.52.010. - Rules and regulations; adoption by resolution. 
    The city council may establish by resolution rules and regulations governing use of the city's BMX track. 
(Code 1969, § 9.52.010; Ord. No. 744, § 1(part), 1998) 
Sec. 9.52.020. - Rules and regulations; posting. 
    A copy of the rules and regulations governing the use and operation of the city's BMX track shall be posted in three public places and publicized in the manner designated for ordinances and shall be permanently posted at the entrance to the city's BMX track. 
(Code 1969, § 9.52.020; Ord. No. 744, § 1(part), 1998) 
Sec. 9.52.030. - Violations and penalties. 
    Violation of rules and regulations governing the use and operation of the city's BMX track shall, in addition to any other remedies contained therein or in the Barstow Municipal Code, be punishable as set forth in section 1.01.150. Notwithstanding any provision of section 1.01.150 to the contrary, such violations shall constitute a misdemeanor and any such violation may be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. Any person violating any of the rules and regulations governing the use of the city BMX track adopted by the city council shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of the park rules and regulations is committed, continued, or permitted. 
(Code 1969, § 9.52.030; Ord. No. 744, § 1(part), 1998) 
CHAPTER 9.60. - LOUD PARTIES AND GATHERINGS 

Sec. 9.60.010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the recovery of costs incurred by the city as a direct result of multiple responses by city police to loud parties and gatherings on private property. 
(Code 1969, § 9.60.010; Ord. No. 758, § 1(part), 2000) 
Sec. 9.60.020. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended, the words set forth below shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter: 
    Loud party or gathering means a party or gathering on private property that, due to unreasonable noise, interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of one or more neighboring properties. 
    Person responsible for the loud party or gathering includes all of the following: 
(1)  The owner of the property where the loud party or gathering takes place; 
(2)  The tenant of the property where the loud party or gathering takes place; 
(3)  The organizer of the loud party or gathering. 
    Police services fee means the actual costs incurred by the city on the following items: 
(1)  The services of city police arising from a second or subsequent response to a loud party or gathering at a particular location within a 12-hour period; 
(2)  Injuries to city police arising from a second or subsequent response to a loud party or gathering at a particular location within a 12-hour period; 
(3)  Damage to public property arising from a second or subsequent response by city police to a loud party or gathering at a particular location within a 12-hour period. 
(Code 1969, § 9.60.020; Ord. No. 758, § 1(part), 2000) 
Sec. 9.60.030. - Issuance of warning. 
    City police initially responding to a loud party or gathering on private property may issue a written warning to the person responsible for the loud party or gathering. Such warning shall contain the substance of the following statement: 
"If Barstow police are required to respond again to this location due to a loud party or gathering within the next 12 hours, then the person(s) responsible for such party or gathering shall be assessed a police services fee in accordance with Barstow Municipal Code chapter 9.60." 
(Code 1969, § 9.60.030; Ord. No. 758, § 1(part), 2000) 
Sec. 9.60.040. - Assessment of police services fee. 
(a)  If city police are required to respond to a loud party or gathering at a particular location for a second or subsequent time within a 12-hour period after a written warning has been issued pursuant to section 9.60.030, then for each such response a police services fee shall be assessed against the person responsible for the loud party or gathering. Each person responsible for the loud party or gathering shall be jointly and severally liable for the police services fee; provided, however, that if any such person is a minor, then the parents or legal guardians of such minor shall be jointly and severally liable in the minor's place. 
(b)  An itemized bill shall be sent to every person assessed a police services fee. In no event, shall the amount of such bill exceed $1,500.00. 
(c)  A police services fee shall be paid in full within 15 days of the billing date unless a written appeal is filed in accordance with section 9.60.050. 
(Code 1969, § 9.60.040; Ord. No. 758, § 1(part), 2000) 
Sec. 9.60.050. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person assessed a police services fee may, by filing a written request within 15 days of the billing date, appeal the amount of such fee to the city manager. The city manager shall conduct a hearing on timely-filed appeals, and may affirm or reduce the amount of the fee. No reduction shall be granted unless the appellant establishes either: 
(1)  An accounting error has been committed; or 
(2)  There are mitigating circumstances warranting leniency. 
(b)  The decision of the city manager shall be in writing and shall be final. The full amount of any police service fee assessment upheld by the city manager shall be paid within 15 days of the city manager's decision. 
(Code 1969, § 9.60.050; Ord. No. 758, § 1(part), 2000) 
Sec. 9.60.060. - Nonpayment. 
    If the full amount of a police services fee is not paid in full within the time allotted, then the city may collect the debt through any available legal remedy. 
(Code 1969, § 9.60.060; Ord. No. 758, § 1(part), 2000) 
Sec. 9.60.070. - Effect of chapter. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to preclude city police from taking any action, including making arrests and issuing citations, necessary to abate any violation of law occurring at a loud party or gathering. 
(Code 1969, § 9.60.070; Ord. No. 758, § 1(part), 2000) 
CHAPTER 9.62. - SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF NUISANCE VEHICLES 

Sec. 9.62.010. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the words, terms and phrases as defined in this section shall be construed as hereinafter set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
    Owner means the last registered legal owner of record of the vehicle that is used to dump refuse and waste, recyclables and solid waste and/or used to solicit acts of prostitution, and/or acquire or attempt to acquire a controlled substance, as shown in records of the department of motor vehicles or similar state agency. 
    Recyclables is as defined in section 6.20.030. 
    Refuse and waste is as defined in section 6.28.030(5). 
    Solid waste is as defined in section 6.20.030. 
    Vehicle means a vehicle as defined in California Vehicle Code § 670. 
(Code 1969, § 9.62.010; Ord. No. 798, § 1(part), 2004) 
Sec. 9.62.020. - Nuisance vehicles. 
    Any vehicle used to illegally dump refuse and waste, recyclables and solid waste in violation of sections 8.20.340(c) and 8.20.410 is declared a nuisance, and the vehicle shall be subject to seizure and forfeiture as provided in this chapter. Any person or his servant, agent, or employee who owns, leases, possesses, conducts, uses or maintains any vehicle (hereinafter referred to as "the vehicle"), used for any of the purposes or acts set forth in this section is guilty of a nuisance. 
(Code 1969, § 9.62.020; Ord. No. 798, § 1(part), 2004) 
Sec. 9.62.030. - Declaration by court. 
    Upon proof that the vehicle was used for any of the purposes set forth in section 9.62.020, the court shall declare the vehicle a nuisance and order that the vehicle be forfeited, sold and the proceeds distributed as set forth in section 9.62.120. 
(Code 1969, § 9.62.030; Ord. No. 798, § 1(part), 2004) 
Sec. 9.62.040. - Right, title and interest in vehicle. 
    All right, title and interest of the vehicle described in section 9.62.020 shall vest in the city upon commission of the act giving rise to the nuisance under this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 9.62.040; Ord. No. 798, § 1(part), 2004) 
Sec. 9.62.050. - Process. 
    Vehicles subject to forfeiture under this chapter may be seized by any peace officer upon process issued by any court having jurisdiction over the vehicle. Seizure without process may be made if any of the following situations exist: 
(1)  The seizure is incident to an arrest or a search pursuant to a search warrant; 
(2)  There is probable cause to believe that the property was used in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 9.62.050; Ord. No. 798, § 1(part), 2004) 
Sec. 9.62.060. - Receipts. 
    Receipts for vehicles seized pursuant to this chapter shall be delivered to any person arrested out of whose possession such vehicle was seized, in accordance with Penal Code § 1412. 
(Code 1969, § 9.62.060; Ord. No. 798, § 1(part), 2004) 
Sec. 9.62.070. - Evidence. 
    A vehicle seized pursuant to section 9.62.050, where appropriate, may be held for evidence. The city attorney shall institute and maintain the proceedings. 
(Code 1969, § 9.62.070; Ord. No. 798, § 1(part), 2004) 
Sec. 9.62.080. - Forfeiture. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (h) of this section, if the city attorney determines that the factual circumstances warrant that the vehicle used to commit the act or acts described in section 9.62.020 is subject to forfeiture, the city attorney shall file a petition for forfeiture with the superior court of the county. 
(b)  A petition for forfeiture under this section shall be filed as soon as practicable, but in any case within one year of the seizure of the vehicle which is subject to forfeiture. 
(c)  The city attorney shall cause a notice of the seizure and of the intended forfeiture proceedings, as well as notice stating that any interested party may file a verified claim, with the superior court in the county, to be served by personal delivery or by registered mail upon any person who has an interest in the vehicle. Whenever a notice is delivered pursuant to this section, it shall be accompanied by a claim form as described in section 9.62.100, with instructions for the filing and service of a claim. Notice shall also be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The city attorney shall provide notice of the proceedings under this subsection, including the following information: 
(1)  A description of the vehicle; 
(2)  The date and place of seizure; 
(3)  The violation of law alleged with respect to forfeiture of the vehicle; 
(4)  The instruction for filing and servicing a claim with the city attorney pursuant to section 9.62.100 and time limits for filing a claim. 
(d)  An investigation shall be made by the city police department as to any claimant to a vehicle whose right, title, interest, or lien is of record in the department of motor vehicles or appropriate federal agency. If the police department finds that any person, other than the registered owner, is the legal owner thereof, and such ownership did not arise subsequent to the date and time of arrest or notification of the forfeiture proceedings or seizure of the vehicle, it shall forthwith send a notice to the legal owner at his address appearing on the records of the department of motor vehicles or appropriate federal agency. 
(e)  All notices shall set forth the time within which a claim of interest in the vehicle seized or subject to forfeiture is required to be filed pursuant to section 9.62.100. 
(f)  With respect to a vehicle used to commit the act or acts described in section 9.62.020 for which forfeiture is sought and as to which forfeiture is contested, the city shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in the manner described in section 9.62.020. Trial shall be before the court or jury. The presiding judge of the superior court shall assign the action brought pursuant to this chapter for trial. 
(g)  Upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used to commit the act or acts described in section 9.62.020, the court shall declare the vehicle a nuisance and order that the vehicle be seized, if not previously seized and held by the police department, forfeited and sold and the proceeds distributed in accordance with this chapter. 
(h)  If no claims are filed, the city attorney shall prepare a written declaration of forfeiture of the vehicle to the court and dispose of the vehicle in accordance with this chapter. A written declaration of forfeiture signed by the city attorney under this section shall be deemed to provide good and sufficient title to the forfeited vehicle. The city attorney ordering forfeiture pursuant to this section shall provide a copy of the declaration of forfeiture to any person who received notice of the forfeiture proceedings. 
(i)  If a claim is timely filed, then the city attorney shall file a petition for forfeiture pursuant to this section within 30 days of the receipt of the claim. 
(Code 1969, § 9.62.080; Ord. No. 798, § 1(part), 2004) 
Sec. 9.62.090. - Innocent parties; return of vehicle. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the police department shall return a seized vehicle upon the filing of a timely claim pursuant to section 9.62.100 and upon a showing by the claimant that: 
(1)  The vehicle is owned by two or more persons and there is a community property interest in the vehicle by a person other than the person who used or maintained the vehicle for the purpose of committing the act or acts described in section 9.62.020, and the vehicle is the sole vehicle available to the person's immediate family; 
(2)  The property is owned by the employer of the person who used or maintained the vehicle for the purpose of committing the act or acts described in section 9.62.020 and the employer files and serves on the city attorney a declaration or affidavit under penalty of perjury that he had no knowledge of the subject acts; or 
(3)  The vehicle is owned by a rental car agency with a duly executed contract with the person who used or maintained the vehicle for the purpose of committing the act or acts described in section 9.62.020. 
(Code 1969, § 9.62.090; Ord. No. 798, § 1(part), 2004) 
Sec. 9.62.100. - Interest claim. 
(a)  Any person claiming an interest in the vehicle seized pursuant to section 9.62.020 must, at any time within ten days from the date of the notice of seizure, file with the superior court of the county a claim, verified in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure ch. 446, stating his interest in the vehicle. An endorsed copy of the claim shall be served by the claimant on the city attorney within ten days of the filing of the claim. 
(b)  If a verified claim is filed, the forfeiture proceeding shall be set for hearing on a day not less than 30 days therefrom. 
(c)  The hearing shall be before the court or jury. 
(d)  The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedures shall apply to proceedings under this chapter unless otherwise inconsistent with the provisions or procedures set forth in this chapter. However, in proceedings under this chapter, there shall be no joinder of actions, coordination of actions, except for forfeiture proceedings, or cross-complaints, and the issues shall be limited strictly to the questions related to this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 9.62.100; Ord. No. 798, § 1(part), 2004) 
Sec. 9.62.110. - Alternative settlement procedures. 
    Any person, or his servant, agent or employee who owns, possesses, leases, conducts, uses or maintains any vehicle for the purpose of committing the act or acts described in section 9.62.020, and whose vehicle has been seized in accordance with this chapter may request to execute a voluntary settlement agreement with the city for the return of the vehicle. Such request shall be made in writing to the police department or the city attorney. The minimum amount of the settlement agreement shall be sufficient to cover all of the city's reasonable administrative costs, including attorney's fees and personnel time for the seizure and forfeiture action. The actual amount shall be at the sole and absolute discretion of the city council after receiving a recommendation from the city attorney. The executed settlement agreement shall be accompanied by the appropriate settlement fee amount in the form of a money order, cash or cashier's check. All settlement funds shall be distributed as set forth in section 9.62.120. 
(Code 1969, § 9.62.110; Ord. No. 798, § 1(part), 2004) 
Sec. 9.62.120. - Sale of vehicles. 
    In all cases where a vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter is forfeited to the city, the vehicle shall be sold and the proceeds of the sale shall be distributed and appropriated as follows: 
(1)  To the bona fide or innocent purchaser, conditional vendor, mortgagee or lien holder of the vehicle, if any, up to the amount of his interest in the vehicle, when the court of city attorney declaring the forfeiture and sale of the vehicle orders a distribution to that person; 
(2)  To the city for all expenditures made or incurred by it in connection with the publication of the notices set forth in this chapter, and sale of the vehicle, including expenditures for any necessary repairs, storage or transportation of any vehicle seized under this chapter; 
(3)  The remaining funds shall be placed in the general fund, subject to appropriate accounting controls and financial audits for all deposits and expenditures; 
(4)  All the funds placed in the general fund pursuant to this chapter shall not supplant any funds that would, in the absence of this chapter, be made available to support the law enforcement and prosecutorial efforts of the police department. 
(Code 1969, § 9.62.120; Ord. No. 798, § 1(part), 2004) 
Sec. 9.62.130. - Nonexclusive remedy. 
    This chapter is not the exclusive regulation or penalty for the act or acts described in section 9.62.020. It supplements and is in addition to any other related sections of the Barstow Municipal Code, as well as other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1969, § 9.62.130; Ord. No. 798, § 1(part), 2004) 
CHAPTER 9.64. - USE OF PUBLIC PARKS AND FACILITIES 

Sec. 9.64.010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of public parks and recreation facilities in the city, with certain exceptions, for the optimum use and enjoyment of residents, children and visitors of the city. The city wishes to ensure that city parks are safe, clean, well-maintained and accessible to adults and children for recreational purposes. In addition, the city council wishes to clarify that dogs must be restrained in public parks and that consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages in public parks is prohibited. 
(Code 1969, § 9.64.010; Ord. No. 844, § 1(part), 2008) 
Sec. 9.64.020. - Definitions. 
    The definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of the words used in this chapter as follows, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
    Camp means to pitch or occupy camp facilities and/or use camp paraphernalia. 
    Camp facilities means and includes, but is not limited to tents, huts or temporary shelters. 
    Camp paraphernalia means and includes, but is not limited to tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment, except for umbrellas and canopies used for shade. 
    Park facilities means those park facilities designated by the parks and recreation department as requiring a use of facilities permit. 
    Public park means the following: 
(1)  H Avenue Soccer Fields located at 500 Avenue H, Barstow. 
(2)  Cora Harper Fitness Center located at 841 Barstow Road, Barstow. 
(3)  Dana Park located at 850 Barstow Road, Barstow. 
(4)  Eda Henderson Pool located at 300 Avenue G, Barstow. 
(5)  Fogelsong Park located at 300 Avenue G, Barstow. 
(6)  Lillian Park located at 901 Bigger Street, Barstow. 
(7)  Lower Dana Park (Pepsi Park) located at 840 Barstow Road, Barstow. 
(8)  Stunacle Park located at 1434 Sage Drive, Barstow. 
(9)  Stringham Park located at 1601 E. Rimrock Road, Barstow. 
(10)  Any park annexed into the city limits after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
    Public park shall not include the Dana Park Skate Park, Robert E. Sessions Sports Park, Panamint Park, Barstow Heights Park and Jasper Park. 
    Store means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location. 
    Vehicle means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1969, § 9.64.020; Ord. No. 844, § 1(part), 2008) 
Sec. 9.64.030. - Prohibited conduct in city parks. 
    No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Remain, stay or loiter in any public park or the parking lot of any public park in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day, without written permission from the city manager or except for any activity permitted in writing by the city manager. 
(2)  Ride, operate or use any skateboard, as defined in section 9.28.020, in any public park or the parking lot of a public park in the city, except for those areas designated by city council resolution for skateboarding activity pursuant to chapter 9.28. 
(3)  Stand, drive or park any vehicle on any landscaped area of a public park, without the written permission of the parks and recreation department. 
(4)  Drive, hit or putt any golf ball or use any golf club in any public park or upon any pathway or trail of any public park, except in such areas that may be designated by the city manager for such purpose. 
(5)  Camp, occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia in or on a public park or the parking lot of a public park, except with an approved use of facilities permit. 
(6)  To store personal property, including but not limited to camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in or on a public park or the parking lot of a public park. 
(7)  No overnight parking is allowed in any parking lot of any public park in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day. Vehicles in violation of this subsection shall be towed at owner's expense. 
(Code 1969, § 9.64.030; Ord. No. 844, § 1(part), 2008; Ord. No. 863-2010, § 1, 4-5-2010) 
Sec. 9.64.040. - Facilities use permits; priority. 
    Any person obtaining a use of facilities permit from the city parks and recreation department shall have priority in the use of park facilities. 
(Code 1969, § 9.64.040; Ord. No. 844, § 1(part), 2008) 
CHAPTER 9.66. - UNMANNED AIRCRAFT 

Sec. 9.66.010. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, "unmanned aircraft" means a device that flies and is operated without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 942-2015 , § 1, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 9.66.020. - Operation and recording. 
(a)  No person shall operate an unmanned aircraft within 50 feet of a public right-of-way. 
(b)  No person shall operate an unmanned aircraft in a manner that harasses, startles, or annoys pedestrians or vehicles, or threatens their safety and welfare. 
(c)  No person shall operate an unmanned aircraft over any private real property located in the city in which the resident and/or owner of the subject real property has a reasonable expectation of privacy (including, but not limited to, a private residence or office, and its surrounding yard, parking lot, or landscaping). 
(d)  No person shall use an unmanned aircraft to record or transmit any visual image or audio recording of any person or private real property located in the city under circumstances in which the subject person or owner of the subject real property has a reasonable expectation of privacy (including, but not limited to, inside a private residence or office, and inside an enclosed yard). 
(e)  No person shall use an unmanned aircraft to peek in the door or window of any inhabited building or structure without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 942-2015 , § 1, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 9.66.030. - Model aircraft. 
    This chapter shall not prohibit the use of any model aircraft which is flown in compliance with section 336 of the Federal Aviation Administration Modernization and Reform Act of 2012 and which does not transmit or record visual images or audio recordings of any person or real property located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 942-2015 , § 1, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 9.66.040. - Use by public safety agencies. 
    This chapter shall not prohibit the use of any unmanned aircraft by law enforcement or public safety agencies: 
(a)  If a warrant is issued authorizing the use of an unmanned aircraft; or 
(b)  For the purpose of providing emergency management, fire, or police protection services in response to a life threatening emergency, or for surveying the condition of persons or property during a duly declared state of emergency; or 
(c)  Under circumstances where a warrant would not otherwise be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 942-2015 , § 1, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 9.66.050. - Interference with emergency response. 
    No person shall, through use of an unmanned aircraft, interfere with the lawful efforts of a firefighter or other public safety officer to extinguish a fire or respond to a medical or other emergency. 
(Ord. No. 942-2015 , § 1, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 9.66.060. - City-owned unmanned aircraft. 
    Unmanned aircraft owned and operated by the city or by city-contracted agent/agency is exempt from the provisions of this chapter while lawfully operated by city employees or city-contracted agent/agency engaged in city business, including but not limited to surveying and mapping property, inspecting infrastructure, monitoring traffic, and recording local events. This section does not apply to use of unmanned aircraft by city public safety agencies, which must comply with section 9.66.040 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 942-2015 , § 1, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 9.66.070. - Penalties. 
    Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in section 1.01.110 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 942-2015 , § 1, 12-21-2015) 
CHAPTER 9.70. - FIREWORKS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- State Fireworks Law, Health and Safety Code § 12500 et seq. 

Sec. 9.70.010. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, are defined as follows, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
    Citation means an administrative citation issued pursuant to this chapter to remedy a violation. 
    Citee means any person served with an administrative citation charging him as a responsible person for violation. 
    Code enforcement officer (CEO) means any employee or agent of the city designated by the city council to enforce any provision of this chapter. 
    Dangerous fireworks means the same as in Health And Safety Code §§ 12505 and 12561 and the relevant sections of title 19, Code of Regulations, subchapter 6, which are hereby incorporated by reference. 
    Fireworks stand means any building, counter, or other structure of a temporary nature used in the sale, offering for sale, or display for sale of safe and sane fireworks. The term "fireworks stand" also means "temporary consumer fireworks retail sales facility" as used in chapter 7 of NFPA 1124. 
    Hearing officer means the person appointed by the city manager to serve as the hearing officer for administrative hearings hereunder. 
    Issuance or issued means the following: 
(1)  The preparation and service of an administrative fine citation to a citee in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with article III (commencing with § 415.10) of chapter 4 of title 5 of part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure; 
(2)  Mailing of administrative fine citation to the citee by certified mail with return receipt, to the address shown on the official records of the county assessor; or 
(3)  By personally serving the responsible party by personal delivery of the administrative fine citation or by substituted service. Substituted service may be accomplished as follows: 
a.  By leaving a copy at the recipient's dwelling or usual place of abode, in the presence of a competent member of the household, and thereafter mailing by first class mail, postage prepaid, a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left; or 
b.  In the event the responsible party cannot be served by first class mail, postage prepaid, or cannot be personally served and has a property manager or rental agency overseeing the premises, substituted service may be made upon the property manager or rental agency or may be affected by posting the property with the administrative fine citation and mailing a copy by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the responsible party in violation at the address of the property where the violation exists. 
    NFPA means the National Fire Protection Association. 
    NFPA 1124 means the National Fire Protection Association's "Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles," 2006 edition. 
    Non-profit organization means any non-profit association, charity or corporation organized primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare, civic betterment or charitable purposes which have been issued a tax-exempt certificate as required under the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state or a group which is an integral part of a recognized national organization having such tax-exempt status. 
    Persons means a natural person or a legal entity that is also an owner, tenant, lessee and/or other person with any right to possession or control of the property where a violation of this Code occurred. 
    Principal and permanent meeting place means, but is not limited to, a permanent structure, playing field, geographic area or service population which resides in or is located within the city. 
    Public display of fireworks means an entertainment feature where the public is admitted or permitted to view the display or discharge of fireworks, including but not limited to, those defined above. 
    Qualified applicants means any group or organization which has met all of the following criteria for a continuous period of not less than one full year preceding submittal of an application for a permit to sell required by this chapter and which continues to meet the criteria for the duration of any permit to sell issued by the city pursuant to this chapter: 
(1)  The organization shall be a non-profit organization pursuant to Internal Revenue Code subsections 501(c)3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 19, 23 or 26, subsection 501(d), subsection 501(e), or a group which is an integral part of a recognized national organization having such tax-exempt status; 
(2)  The organization shall be organized primarily for veterans, patriotic, welfare, civic betterment, educational, youth development or charitable purposes; 
(3)  The organization must have its principal and permanent meeting place within the city; 
(4)  The organization must be one which provides direct and regular community services and benefits to the residents of the city; 
(5)  The organization has not been found by any court of competent jurisdiction or city administrative hearing officer to be in violation of any civil or criminal local, state or federal law relating to fireworks within 24 calendar months prior to the organization's submittal of an application for a permit to sell; and 
(6)  The organization has not had a permit to sell revoked within 24 months prior to the organization's submittal of an application for a permit to sell. 
    Responsible person means a person who causes a violation of this chapter to occur or allows a violation to exist or continue, by his action or failure to act, or whose agent, employee or independent contractor causes a violation to occur, or allows a violation to exist or continue. There is a rebuttable presumption that the record owner of a residential parcel, as shown on the county's latest equalized property taxes assessment rolls, and lessee of a residential parcel has a notice of any violation existing on said property. For purposes of this chapter, there may be more than one responsible person for a violation. Any person, irrespective of age, found in violation of any provision of this chapter may be issued a citation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Every parent, guardian or other person, having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of 18 years, who knows or reasonably should know that a minor is in violation of this chapter, may be issued a citation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, in addition to any citation that may be issued to the offending minor. 
    Safe and sane fireworks (a.k.a. "state-approved fireworks") means "safe and sane fireworks" as set forth in Health and Safety Code §§ 12529 and 12562 and the relevant sections of title 19, Code of Regulations, subchapter 6, which are hereby incorporated by reference. 
    Violation or violates refers to any violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.010), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.010), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.020. - General prohibition against possession, sale or use of fireworks. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall possess, sell, use, display or explode any dangerous fireworks including, but not limited to, any rocket, firecracker, Roman candle, squib, torpedo, wire core sparkler, wooden core sparkler, black cartridge, aerial shell or other combustible device or explosive substance or any kind of fireworks, by whatsoever name known, or any altered safe and sane fireworks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.020), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.020), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.030. - Exceptions for certain public displays and/or special effects. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to cause, allow, permit, aid, abet, or suffer any discharge of dangerous fireworks (including a public display) or any use of special effects without having first obtained a city business license and paid the adopted business license fee as per section 5.08.210. 
(b)  The city manager shall have authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for those activities contained in Health and Safety Code § 12640, including supervised public displays of fireworks by a jurisdiction, fair association, amusement park, other organization, or for the use of fireworks by artisans in pursuit of their trade. Each such use or display shall be handled by a licensed pyrotechnic operator (as defined by Health and Safety Code § 12527), and shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the city manager or his designee, after proper investigation, will not be hazardous or endanger any person. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.030), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.030), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.040. - Liability insurance for certain public displays. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation applying for a public display permit shall concurrently furnish to the city proof of coverage by a policy of public liability and property damage insurance. The policy shall provide limits of bodily injury and property damage liability of not less than $5,000,000.00 combined single limits for each occurrence annually for payments of damages to persons or property which may result from or be caused by such public display of fireworks, or any negligence on the part of the licensee or his agents, servants, employees and/or subcontractors presenting such public display. 
(b)  Any licensed pyrotechnic operator responsible for the public display of fireworks within the city limits shall furnish the city manager a certificate of insurance for each policy required, executed by the company issuing said policy and approved as to form by the city attorney. Such policies shall contain a provision which includes the "City of Barstow" as an additional insured and declares said insurance to be primary and that no other insurance carried by an insured party shall be called upon for contribution. Such insurance policies shall contain an endorsement that the company issuing such policy or policies will not allow the same to be canceled without serving, by first class mail, ten days' notice of cancellation upon the city clerk for the city. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the failure of the licensed pyrotechnic operator to carry such policy or policies in force and to properly renew said insurance during the time covered by such business license shall automatically revoke the business license as of the date of expiration of such insurance policy or policies. A payment of the full amount of the business license fee required by this chapter shall be made to the city before any such revoked business license may be reinstated. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.040), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.040), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.050. - Appeals for certain public displays. 
    The decision of the city manager or the city manager's designated representative in acting on an application for a business license to conduct a public display of fireworks in accordance with the provision of this chapter shall be subject to an appeal by the applicant to the city manager. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city manager within ten days after the date of the decision regarding such business license permit. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the city manager of the city manager's designated representative shall be final and conclusive. The applicant may appeal the decision of the city manager to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days after the date of the city manager's decision. Upon failure to file such a notice within the ten days, the action of the city manager shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.050), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.050), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.060. - Exception for safe and sane fireworks. 
    It shall not be unlawful to possess, sell, use, display or discharge, within the city, those fireworks that are defined and classified as "safe and sane fireworks" (a.k.a. "state-approved fireworks") in the California State Fireworks Law (Health and Safety Code § 12500 et seq., and the relevant sections of title 19, Code of Regulations, subchapter 6) during that time period beginning at 12:00 noon on June 28 and ending at 10:00 p.m. on July 5 of that same year. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell safe and sane fireworks within the city without having first applied for and received a permit authorizing the sale of safe and sane fireworks from the city. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.060), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.060), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.070. - Prerequisite for issuance of permit for safe and sane fireworks. 
    The following are the prerequisites required prior to the issuance of a permit for safe and sane fireworks: 
(1)  No qualified applicant shall submit more than one fireworks lottery application for the opportunity to be selected for a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks within the city. The fireworks lottery application shall serve to qualify applicants based on their tax-exempt status and verification of the organization's principal and permanent meeting place. If more than one application is submitted on behalf of any qualified applicant, all such requests shall be voidable at the discretion of the city manager. Any attempt to transfer an application shall void any and all applications filed by or on behalf of both the transferor/non-profit organization and the transferee/non-profit organization. 
(2)  Qualified applicants who are selected and/or issued a safe and sane fireworks permit shall be ineligible in the subsequent year. 
(3)  Should a conflict appear between two or more non-profit organizations regarding a location for a safe and sane fireworks stand, such issue shall be resolved by the city manager, or the city manager's designee, examining the following facts, criteria and/or materials in the descending order of priority: 
a.  The past history of the location, including what non-profit organization and/or licensed fireworks wholesaler has occupied, controlled and/or had permission to utilize this location for a safe and sane fireworks stand; 
b.  Which organization filed its fireworks lottery application with the city first along with all of the requisite documentation attached thereto. 
(4)  The maximum number of permits which may be issued and the maximum number of safe and sane fireworks stands that will be permitted pursuant to this chapter during any one calendar year shall not exceed six permits. Should the number of fireworks lottery applicants exceed the number of available stands, the qualified applicants shall be selected using a lottery process. Should the number of qualified applicants submitting a fireworks lottery application be fewer than six, applicants deemed qualified will move directly to the formal application process. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.070), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.070), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.080. - Application for sale of safe and sane fireworks. 
    All fireworks lottery applications submitted for consideration to sell safe and sane fireworks shall be in writing to the community development department on forms supplied by the city. Applications may be filed beginning April 1 of each year up to and including April 15 of the same year, at which time the filing period for that year will be closed. Fireworks lottery applications which are deemed qualified will be notified no later than April 20 of the same year. Should the number of qualified applicants exceed six, a lottery process will be conducted no later than April 30 of the same year. Non-profit organizations selected through the lottery process shall then complete and submit a formal application for sale of safe and sane fireworks to the community development department beginning May 1 of each year up to and including May 15 of the same year. Failure to submit all requisite information as contained in this section by May 15, shall automatically disqualify the non-profit organization from issuance of a safe and sane fireworks permit. Formal applications shall set forth the proposed location of the fireworks stand being applied for, and other information as may be required by the city. In addition, the following provision shall apply towards the formal application process for the sale of safe and sane fireworks: 
(1)  Formal applications shall be accompanied by an assurance that, if the permit is issued to the applicant, the applicant shall, at the time of receipt of such permit, deliver to the city a certificate evidencing an occurrence-based policy of insurance naming the City of Barstow as an additional insured thereunder, with the following minimum limits: $1,000,000.00 public liability and property damage, and general aggregate coverage of $2,000,000.00. No policy will be acceptable which contains a provision allowing a deductible amount. A copy of the requisite state retail sales permit must also be attached. 
(2)  Formal applications shall include an indemnification agreement completed and signed by the manufacturer and/or wholesaler of the fireworks agreeing to defend, indemnify, and hold the city harmless from any claims, liability, litigation, damages, or other injuries resulting from the use of safe and sane fireworks. 
(3)  Each formal application shall include a copy of the approved state fire marshal's permit issued to the non-profit organization. 
(4)  Each formal application shall include a copy of the temporary sales tax permit issued by the California State Board of Equalization. 
(5)  Each formal application for a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks shall state the zoning of the real property on which the fireworks stand is to be located, which zoning classification shall be obtained from the planning department for the city. 
(6)  Each formal application shall set forth the proposed location of the fireworks stand, the name, address and telephone number of one or more responsible adults who will be in charge of and responsible for the fireworks stand during the period safe and sane fireworks are sold, displayed or stored at such location, and notarized permission from the owner of record upon which said proposed stand will be located. 
(7)  A building/temporary use permit application shall be submitted for approval for the construction and placement of the temporary fireworks stand as part of the formal application process. The cost of the building/temporary use permit shall be waived in association with the issuance of a safe and sane fireworks permit. 
(8)  All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and sales from and/or storage at any other building or structure is prohibited except as defined in this chapter. Temporary stands shall be subject to the following provisions: 
a.  A minimum distance of 200 feet shall be maintained between all fireworks stands. 
b.  Fireworks stands shall be erected under the supervision of the building official, who shall require that stands be constructed in a manner that will reasonably ensure the safety of attendants and patrons. Occupants will not be allowed to utilize the fireworks stands to sell fireworks without the approval of an inspection of the temporary stand by the building official or his designee. In addition, a permit to operate shall be received from the fire district following an inspection for compliance with this chapter and state fire marshal requirements. 
c.  No stand shall have a floor area in excess of 400 square feet. 
d.  Each stand must have at least two exits, and each stand in excess of 40 feet in length must have at least three exits spaced approximate equal distance apart and in no case shall the distance between exits exceed 25 feet. 
e.  Each stand shall be provided with a 21/2-gallon water pressure type fire extinguisher which must be mounted at each exit. The extinguisher must bear evidence that it has been inspected by a state-licensed agency. Extinguishers shall be in good working order and easily accessible. 
f.  All extension cords and wiring shall comply with the Uniform Electrical Code. 
g.  All temporary fireworks stands shall be removed from the temporary location they were installed at by 12:00 p.m. on July 11, and all accompanying debris and litter shall be cleared from such location by the same date and time. Failure to comply with this provision will subject the permittee that operated the temporary fireworks stand to paying administrative fines as outlined in section 9.70.220. 
(9)  Applicants for such permits shall be notified by May 25 of each calendar year by the city manager of the approval or disapproval of such applications for such permit. All organizations whose permits have been approved shall have up to and including June 15 of that year to pick up such permit. 
(10)  Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable public safety and administrative fee of $400.00. This application fee shall be in addition to any fee or tax imposed by this chapter. 
(11)  The original copy of the formal application shall be retained by the community development department and one copy shall be transmitted to the city manager. 
(12)  The continued validity of any city permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the requirement that at least one or more representatives of each non-profit organization, preferably those responsible adults listed on the permit application, shall attend a mandatory safe and sane fireworks stand operator safety seminar conducted by the fire department and the licensed fireworks wholesaler that is supplying the safe and sane fireworks to the non-profit organization. Said seminar shall occur during the formal application, between May 1 but no later than May 15. Failure of a non-profit organization to have a responsible individuals attend the safety seminar shall void their formal application for safe and sane fireworks permit and disqualify the non-profit organization from obtaining a safe and sane fireworks permit. 
(13)  Qualified applicants who are issued a safe and sane fireworks permit shall be ineligible for consideration of issuance for a safe and sane fireworks permit in the subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.080), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.080), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.090. - Submittal of financial summary. 
(a)  On or before August 31 of any year authorized pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall submit to the city manager a financial summary of total sales from fireworks, on a form supplied by the city, which shall include the following information: 
(1)  Total gross receipts from the fireworks stand operated by the permittee; 
(2)  All expenses incurred and paid in connection with the purchase of fireworks and the sale thereof; 
(3)  Total net receipts from fireworks stand operated by permittee; 
(4)  A summary of to whom and for what purpose of the net proceeds were or will be disbursed; and 
(5)  A copy of the most recent report filed by the permittee to the state board of equalization. 
(b)  The filing of such a financial summary with the city shall be a condition precedent to the granting of any subsequent permit. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.090), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.090), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.110. - Denial of application for sale of safe and sane fireworks. 
    The city manager shall issue permits to sell safe and sane fireworks unless: 
(1)  The city manager finds, in writing, that the applicant failed to provide sufficient plans, information and/or other data necessary to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter; 
(2)  The city manager finds, in writing, that the applicant falls within the provisions of any subsection of this chapter; or 
(3)  The city manager determines that the number of qualified applicants exceeds the number of permissible permits under subsection 9.70.070. After conducting the lottery selection process, the city manager will advise, in writing, all qualified applicants of their permit status no later than April 30. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.110), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.110), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.120. - Deadlines for applications and other filings. 
    If the deadline for submitting any type of application, payment of any administrative fine, filing of a notice of appeal, etc., called for within this chapter falls on a day city hall is closed, the deadline shall automatically be extended to the close of business of the next day city hall is open. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.120), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.120), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.130. - Temporary sales tax permit required. 
    Qualified applications permitted to sell safe and sane fireworks in the city are required to obtain a temporary sales tax permit from the local office of the California State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.130), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.130), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.140. - Operations of fireworks sale stand. 
    Except as provided herein, fireworks stands shall comply with Chapter 7 of NFPA 1124. 
(1)  All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted from within a temporary fireworks stand, and the retail sales from any other building or structure is hereby prohibited. 
(2)  No person shall knowingly sell fireworks to any person under the age of 18. For purposes of this section, bona fide evidence of age and identity of purchaser is a document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government which contains a photograph of the purchaser including, but not limited to, a valid California driver's license or identification card issued to a member of the armed forces. 
(3)  The sale of safe and sane fireworks shall begin no earlier than 12:00 noon on June 28 and shall not continue after 10:00 p.m. on July 5 of the same year. Sale of fireworks shall be permitted only from 12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m. on June 28 and from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily on June 29 through July 5. 
(4)  No person other than the permitted non-profit organizations or the non-profit organization with whom they have a joint venture shall operate the stand for which the permit is issued or share or otherwise participate in the profits of the operation of such stand. In addition, no person other than the individuals who are members of the permittee and/or joint venture non-profit organizations or the wives, husbands, parents or adult children of such members shall sell or otherwise participate in the sale of safe and sane fireworks at such stand. 
(5)  No person under the age of 18 shall sell or participate in the sale of safe and sane fireworks within such stand. 
(6)  No person shall be paid any consideration by the permittee non-profit organizations or any wholesaler/distributor of safe and sane fireworks for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of safe and sane fireworks at such stand; provided, however, compensation may be paid for licensed security personnel during sale or non-sale hours and to the party authorizing the location of the stand on its property. The city manager may revoke the fireworks storage permit and/or local business license of any fireworks wholesaler/distributor violating the terms of this section. 
(7)  All unsold stock of fireworks in the hands of the permittee after 10:00 p.m. on July 5 shall be returned to the wholesaler/distributor and removed from the city within ten days. On closing of the safe and sane fireworks stand, all litter shall be removed from the premises. 
(8)  Each safe and sane fireworks stand must post its city permit to sell safe and sane fireworks, temporary sales tax permit from the state board of equalization, state fire marshal retail sales permit and proof of insurance in a prominent place inside the safe and sane fireworks stand. 
(9)  No person shall smoke within 25 feet of the safe and sane fireworks stand. No person shall light, cause to be lighted or permit to be lighted any safe and sane fireworks or combustible material within 50 feet of any safe and sane fireworks stand. 
(10)  No signage related to the sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be placed on any public property or in the city's right-of-way. Signage is limited to placement upon said private property where the temporary stand is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.140), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.140), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.150. - Revocation of permit and appeals process. 
(a)  The city manager or the city manager's designee may revoke, immediately and without notice or hearing, the permit of any permittee who violates any provisions of this chapter. If the revocation occurs between June 22 and July 5, the city manager shall inform the permittee that the permittee may seek review of the decision on the next business day. At the earliest opportunity on the next business day after the revocation, the city manager shall provide the permittee with written notice that their fireworks permit has been revoked and include in that notice the name of the permittee and a brief statement of the grounds for revocation. The city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall meet with the permittee on that day, upon the permittee's request, to review the city manager's decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final. If the revocation occurs before or after the specified period, the appeal procedures of subsection (b) of this section shall apply. 
(b)  The city manager, or the city manager's designee, may revoke the permit of any permittee who violates any provision of this chapter. Such revocation shall not take effect for five days, during which time the permittee may seek review of the city manager's decision by submitting a written request for review. The city manager shall prepare a written notice that the permittee's fireworks permit has been revoked and include in that notice the name of the permittee and a brief statement of the grounds for revocation. The city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall meet with the permittee to review the city manager's decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final. Furthermore, any permittee whose permit has been revoked pursuant to this section shall be barred from receiving a permit under this chapter for up to five years from the date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.150), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.150), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.160. - Limitations on places and hours of safe and sane fireworks use. 
    Limitations on the discharge of safe and sane fireworks are outlined below: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to discharge any safe and sane fireworks except during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on the days on which said safe and sane fireworks may be sold. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite, discharge, project or otherwise fire or use, any safe and sane fireworks, or permit the ignition, discharge or projection thereof, upon or over or onto the property of another without his consent or to ignite, discharge, project or otherwise fire or make use of any safe and sane fireworks within ten feet or any residence, dwelling or other structure used as a place of habitation by human beings. 
(3)  The use of safe and sane fireworks in the city shall be limited to private property except as otherwise provided herein. No safe and sane fireworks shall be discharged on public, semipublic or private open areas such as parking lots, vacant property or in public streets or rights-of-way. No fireworks shall be discharged in the high fire hazard areas as identified by fire district. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.160), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.160), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.170. - Supervision of minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person having the care, custody or control of a minor (under 18 years old) to permit such minor to discharge, explode, fire or set off any dangerous fireworks, at any time, or to permit such minor to discharge or set off any safe and sane fireworks unless such minor does so under the direct supervision of a person over 18 years of age and during the hours and on the days permitted by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.030), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.170), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.180. - Wholesale permit. 
    Except as provided herein, no manufacturer, importer, exporter or wholesaler of fireworks shall offer for sale or sell at wholesale any fireworks of any kind without having first applied for and received a business license for wholesale distribution from the city. All applications for a business license to distribute fireworks shall abide by the following regulations: 
(1)  Be made in writing and accompanying a business license application and the adopted business license fee as per section 5.08.130. 
(2)  Be made on an annual basis between March 1 and March 31 of each calendar year. 
(3)  Be accompanied by a certificate evidencing an occurrence-based policy of insurance naming the "City of Barstow" as an additional insured thereunder, with the following minimum limits: $1,000,000.00 public liability and property damage, and general aggregate coverage of $2,000,000.00. No policy will be acceptable which contains a provision allowing a deductible amount. 
(4)  Contain such other information as may be required by the city. 
(5)  Contain a statement that fireworks shall not be furnished, sold, distributed or placed in the possession of any person or organization in the city, or for sale, use or distribution in the city, unless such person or organization holds a valid and unrevoked permit from the city to so possess, sell, use or distribute such fireworks. 
(6)  Wholesale storage of safe and sane fireworks by fireworks wholesalers licensed by the office of the state fire marshal shall be in a building meeting the requirements of chapter 6 of NFPA 1124, so long as said fireworks wholesaler has not been found to be in violation of any terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.180), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.180), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.190. - Seizure of fireworks. 
    The city manager, or the city manager's designee, may seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of the permittee or licensed fireworks wholesaler, whichever is applicable, all stock of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this chapter when such violation creates an imminent threat to public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.190), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.190), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.200. - Fireworks wholesaler public education plan. 
    Each fireworks distributor/wholesaler who is supplying one or more of the Barstow non-profit organizations who are permittees under this chapter, shall annually submit a public education plan to the city by no later than 5:00 p.m. on June 1. Said public education plan should outline the public safety and education efforts for that year that have been initiated, supported and/or delivered by each fireworks distributor/wholesaler within the city. Said public education plan should include, but is not limited to, samples of all the materials and the extent of distribution of all of the safety and education materials discussed in that wholesaler's/distributor's plan. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.200), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.200), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.210. - Illegal fireworks operation plan and after-action report. 
(a)  On or before May 1 of every year, both the city's police and fire departments must present to the city council an operation plan for the 30-day period surrounding the Fourth of July (June 17 through July 16) for that year. Said operation plan should include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Identification of areas within the city where illegal fireworks were a problem in the previous year; 
(2)  A detailed explanation of the deployment of fire and law enforcement personnel to deal with those troublesome areas as well as with the balance of the city; 
(3)  A report on the apparatus and personnel who will be on duty for the period of June 17 through July 16 of that year, and more particularly, on July 1 through July 5, inclusive; and 
(4)  Recommendations on and discussion of what, if any, dedicated illegal fireworks enforcement patrols there should be for that year and all other relevant information and statistics deemed necessary by the city council. 
(b)  By no later than September 1 of that same year, both police and fire departments must report back to the city council with an after-action report. That report should include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  An evaluation of the success or failure of that department's operation plan for that year including a listing of any significant fireworks-related incidents, both dangerous fireworks and safe and sane fireworks; 
(2)  Relevant incident statistics for the period of June 17 through July 16, arrest and citation statistics for all crimes, but more particularly for the possession, sale and/or use of dangerous fireworks, altered safe and sane fireworks and misuse of safe and sane fireworks outside the strict limitations of this chapter; and 
(3)  A report on how many calls there were regarding suspected dangerous fireworks, how many of those calls either of the departments responded to, how many of those calls resulted in seizures and/or administrative fine citations, the status of payment of those administrative fines, and how many fireworks seizures resulted in no citations and if so, why. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.210), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.210), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.220. - Administrative fines and penalties. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  This chapter authorizes the imposition of administrative fines on any person who violates any provision of this chapter in order to encourage and obtain compliance with the provisions of this chapter for the benefit and protection of the entire community. This chapter governs the imposition, enforcement, collection and administrative review of all administrative fines, related to: the possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of those fireworks classified as "dangerous fireworks" in Health and Safety Code § 12500 et seq., with the exception of a pyrotechnic licensee when operating pursuant to that license; and the use of safe and sane fireworks as defined in Health and Safety Code § 12500 et seq. on or at dates, times and/or locations other than those permitted by this chapter. Said administrative fines are imposed under authority of Government Code § 53069.4, Health and Safety Code § 12557, and police power of the city. 
(2)  The issuance of citations imposing administrative fines may be performed at the discretion of the officials of the city authorized hereunder; and the issuance of a citation to any person constitutes but one remedy of the city to redress violations of this Code by any person. By adopting this chapter, the city does not intend to limit its authority to employ any other remedy, civil or criminal, to redress any violation of this Code by any person, which this city may otherwise pursue. 
(3)  The imposition of fines related to dangerous fireworks under this chapter shall be limited to persons who posses, sell, use and/or display, or the seizure of, less than 25 pounds (gross weight) of such dangerous fireworks. 
(4)  Fines collected pursuant to this chapter related to dangerous fireworks shall not be subject to Health and Safety Code § 12706, which section provides that certain fines collected by a court of the state be deposited with, and disbursed by, the county treasurer. However, the city shall provide cost reimbursement to the state fire marshal pursuant to regulations to be adopted by the state fire marshal addressing the state fire marshal's cost for the transportation and disposal of dangerous fireworks seized by the city, which costs will be part of any administrative fine imposed. Unless and until said regulations have been adopted by the state, the city shall hold in trust $250.00 or 25 percent of any fine collected, whichever is greater, to cover the cost reimbursement to the state fire marshal for said cost of transportation and disposal of the dangerous fireworks. 
(5)  Because of the serious threat of fire or injury posed by the use of dangerous fireworks that can result from persistent or repeated failures to comply with the provisions of this Code and the effect of such conditions or activities on the safety and the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties and to the public health, safety and welfare, this chapter imposes strict civil liability upon the owners of residential real property for all violations of this Code existing on their residential real property. Each contiguous use, display and/or possession shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to a separate administrative fine. 
(6)  At least 50 percent of the fines collected pursuant to this chapter must be placed in a segregated fund entitled "Barstow Illegal Fireworks Enforcement Fund." The sole and exclusive purpose of this fund is to pay for increased fire and police deployment, protection and investigation of and against illegal fireworks in the city for the 30-day period surrounding the Fourth of July (June 17 through July 16). 
(b)  Issuance of administrative citations. 
(1)  Whenever a code enforcement officer (CEO) determines that a violation of the Code has occurred, the CEO may issue an administrative citation on a city-approved form listing the Code violation and the amount of the administrative fine required to be paid by the responsible person in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name, mailing address, date of birth, CDL number, and home or business telephone number of the responsible person charged with any violation of this Code; 
b.  The address or description of the location of the violation; 
c.  The date or dates on which the person violated this Code; 
d.  The section or sections of this Code that were violated; 
e.  A description of the violation(s); 
f.  The amount of the administrative fine for each violation, the procedure in place to pay the fines, and any late fee and interest charges, if not timely paid, and notice that if the city is required to take action to collect such fines, the responsible person may be charged costs and attorney's fees; 
g.  Notice of the procedure to request an administrative hearing to contest the citation (including the form to be used, how to obtain the form, and the period within which the request must be made in order for it to be considered timely); 
h.  The name and signature of the CEO who issued the citation and the name and signature of the citee, if he or she is physically present and will sign the citation at the time of its issuance. The refusal of a citee to sign a citation shall not affect its validity or any related subsequent proceedings, nor shall signing a citation constitute an admission that a person is responsible for a violation of the Code; and 
i.  Any other information deemed necessary by the director for enforcement or collection purposes. 
(c)  Administrative fines. 
(1)  Each person who violates any provision of this Code as it relates to the possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of dangerous fireworks shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided below: 
Number of Offenses in One-Year Period Administrative 
Penalty Amount Late Charge Total Penalty Amount Plus Late Charge First $1,000.00 $100.00 $1,100.00 Second $2,500.00 $250.00 $2,750.00 Third $5,000.00 $500.00 $5,500.00  
(2)  Each person who uses safe and sane fireworks on or at dates, times and/or locations other than those permitted by this chapter shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided below: 
Number of Offenses in One-Year Period Administrative 
Penalty Amount Late Charge Total Penalty Amount Plus Late Charge First $100.00 $10.00 $110.00 Second $250.00 $25.00 $275.00 Third $500.00 $50.00 $550.00  
(3)  In the case of a violation of any of the provisions listed above, the administrative fine shall be due and payable within 30 calendar days from the issuance of the administrative fine citation, and the citee shall be required to abate the violation, and surrender all dangerous fireworks to the CEO, immediately. For penalties not paid in full within that time, a late charge in the amount set forth above is hereby imposed and must be paid to the city by the citee. Fines not paid within the time established by this chapter shall accrue interest at the prevailing established rate. On the second and each subsequent time that a person is issued a citation for the same violation in any 12-month period, the fine is increased as indicated above and the citee shall be liable for the amount of the new fine until it is paid, in addition to being responsible for payment of previous fines. 
(4)  All administrative fines and any late charges and interests due shall be paid to the city at such a location or address as stated on the citation, or as may otherwise be designated by the city manager. Payment of any fine or fines shall not excuse the citee from complying with the provision of the Code so violated. The issuance of the citation and/or payment of any fine shall not bar the city from employing any other enforcement action or remedy to obtain compliance with the provisions of the Code so violated including the issuance of additional citations and/or criminal prosecution. 
(5)  Upon confirmation of the citation or when the citation is deemed confirmed, all unpaid administrative fines, late fees and/or interests shall constitute a judgment which may be collected in any manner allowed by law for collection of judgments including but not limited to recordation to create a lien on any real property owned by the responsible person. The city shall be entitled to recover its attorney's fees and costs incurred in collecting any administrative fines, late charges and/or interests. 
(6)  Payment of the administrative fine shall not excuse or discharge a citee from the duty to immediately abate and correct a violation of this chapter, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or a repeated occurrence of a violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Right to an administrative hearing. 
(1)  Any citee may contest the violation, or that he is a responsible person, by filing a request for an administrative hearing on a city-approved form with the city clerk within 30 calendar days from the issuance date of a citation. If the city clerk does not receive the request in the required time period, the citee shall have waived a right to a hearing and the citation shall be deemed confirmed and final. 
(2)  No fees shall be charged for the filing of a request for a hearing. 
(3)  Citees shall deposit the full amount of the penalty listed on the citation on or before the request for a hearing is filed. Failure to deposit the full amount of all penalties within the required time period, or the tender of a non-negotiable check, shall render a request for an administrative hearing incomplete and untimely. Penalties that are deposited with the city shall not accrue interest. Penalties deposited shall be returned to the person who deposited them in if the citation is overturned. 
(4)  A request for a hearing shall contain the following: 
a.  The citation number; 
b.  The name, address, telephone number and any facsimile numbers and e-mail addresses of each person contesting the citation; 
c.  A statement of the reason why a citation is being contested; 
d.  The dates and signature of the citee. 
(5)  The city shall notify all persons who filed a request for a hearing in writing by first class mail of the date, time and place set for the hearing at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Service of this notice is deemed complete at time of mailing. The failure of a citee to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate the citation or any hearing, city action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter. 
(6)  The hearing shall be conducted within 60 days of the date a timely and complete request is received by the city clerk. 
(7)  If the CEO submits an additional written report concerning the citation to the city for consideration at the hearing, the CEO shall also serve a copy of such report by first class mail on the person requesting an administrative hearing no less than seven calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Failure to receive said report shall not invalidate the citation or any hearing, city action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
(e)  Administrative hearing procedures. 
(1)  The hearing officer designated or appointed by the city manager shall hear all requests for administrative hearings of administrative fines in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
(2)  Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish a violation and responsibility therefor by a preponderance of evidence. The citation is prima facie evidence of the violation, however, and the CEO who issued the citation is not required to attend or participate at the hearing. The citee and CEO, if present, shall have an opportunity to present evidence and witnesses and to cross examine witnesses. A citee may bring an interpreter to the hearing provided there is no expense to the city therefor. The hearing officer may question any person who presents evidence or who testifies at any hearing. 
(3)  A citee may appear at the hearing in person or by written declaration executed under penalty of perjury. Said declaration and any documents in support thereof shall be tendered to and received by the city at least seven business days prior to the hearing. If the citee fails to attend or does not submit a written declaration in a timely manner, he shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing. In such an instance, the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and not render a decision. In such instances, the citation shall be deemed confirmed. 
(4)  Hearings may be continued once at the request of a citee or the officer who issued the citation. The hearing officer may also continue the hearing for cause. 
(f)  Hearing decision right of appeal. 
(1)  After considering all the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or overturn the citation and shall state the reasons therefor. 
(2)  The hearing officer shall serve citee by first class mail with a copy of the written decision. The date the decision is deposited with U.S. Postal Service shall constitute the date of its service. The failure of a citee to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate any hearing, city action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  Decisions of the hearing officer may be appealed to the city council within 30 days after the date of their service. Each decision shall contain a statement advising the citee of this appeal right and the procedure for its exercise. A citee shall file a notice of appeal with the city within 20 calendar days after the date of service of the hearing officer's decision. 
(4)  If a hearing officer's decision is not appealed in a timely manner, the decision shall be deemed confirmed. 
(5)  The city council is the sole reviewing authority and an appeal from a hearing officer's decision is not appealable to the superior court. If a responsible person prevails on appeal, the city shall reimburse his fine deposit within 30 calendar days of the city council's decision on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.220), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.220), 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 9.70.230. - Concurrent authorities. 
    This chapter is not the exclusive regulation for fireworks within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, regulations and ordinances heretofore and hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. Any provisions of this Code in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. This chapter supersedes any conflicting provisions of the Uniform Fire Code and Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 898-2013, § 1(9.70.230), 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 929-2014, § 1(9.70.230), 10-20-2014) 
CHAPTER 9.72. - ACCOUNTABILITY FOR SOCIAL HOSTS OF MINORS 

Sec. 9.72.010. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section unless, from the particular context, some other meaning is clearly intended. 
    Alcohol means any ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Alcoholic beverage includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
    Controlled substance means a drug or substance whose possession and use are regulated under the federal Controlled Substances Act. Such term does not include any drug or substances for which the individual found to have consumed such substance has a valid prescription issued by a licensed medical practitioner authorized to issue such a prescription. 
    Extraordinary police services means the assignment of police officers and the provision of services by city police or law enforcement during a second or subsequent response to a gathering after the distribution of a written notice that the gathering is in violation of this chapter or another provision of law, or during a first response if a law enforcement officer investigating a gathering determines that the gathering is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, or constitutes a nuisance of an immediate nature such that a first written warning notice is not feasible. 
    Extraordinary police services fee means the actual costs incurred by the city for the following items: 
(1)  The services of city police or law enforcement arising from a response to a gathering; 
(2)  Injuries to city police or law enforcement arising from a response to a gathering; 
(3)  Damage to public property, and the use of any city-owned equipment, arising from a response to a gathering. 
    Gathering is a party or event where a group of three or more persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity. 
    Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the legal guardian of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by order of a court. 
    Minor means any person less than 21 years of age. 
    Parent means a person who is the natural parent, adopted parent, or step-parent of a minor. 
    Person responsible means the person who knows or should reasonably know that the subject premises are being used to host, allow, or permit a gathering. There is a rebuttable presumption that the following persons, in order of priority, are the persons responsible for a gathering: 
(1)  The owner of the premises where the gathering takes place; 
(2)  The tenant of the premises where the gathering takes place; and/or 
(3)  The person who hosted, permitted, organized, or allowed the gathering. 
(4)  In the event that the person responsible is a juvenile (under 18 years of age), then the parent or guardian of that juvenile. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, parks, streets, highways, and common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
(Ord. No. 903-2013, § 1(9.72.010), 4-15-2013) 
Sec. 9.72.020. - Consumption unlawful. 
    Except as permitted by state or federal law, it is unlawful for any minor to: 
(1)  Consume at any public place or any places open to the public, any alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or controlled substance; or 
(2)  Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or controlled substance; regardless of whether consumption is under the supervision of the minor's parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 903-2013, § 1(9.72.020), 4-15-2013) 
Sec. 9.72.030. - Hosting, permitting, or allowing a gathering where minors consume alcoholic beverages, marijuana, and other controlled substances prohibited. 
(a)  Except as permitted by state or federal law, it is unlawful for any person to allow the consumption of an alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or a controlled substance by a minor in the course of a gathering where the person responsible knows or reasonably should have known that he has hosted, permitted, or allowed a gathering to take place where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or a controlled substance. 
(b)  It is the duty of any person having control of any premises who knows or reasonably should know that he has hosted, permitted, or allowed a gathering to take place at said premises to take all reasonable steps necessary to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or controlled substances by any minor during the course of the gathering. Reasonable steps include, but are not limited to, the following actions: 
(1)  Controlling access to alcoholic beverages, marijuana, and controlled substances on the premises; 
(2)  Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages, marijuana, and controlled substances available at the gathering; 
(3)  Verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting driver's licenses or other government-issued identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or controlled substances while at the gathering; and 
(4)  Supervising the activities of minors while at the gathering. 
(c)  Whenever a person having control of a premises is present on the premises at the time that a minor is found in possession of, or consuming, any alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or controlled substance on the premises, that fact shall be prima facie evidence that such person had or should have had the knowledge specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  A person who hosts, permits, or allows a gathering to take place shall be deemed to have actual or constructive knowledge that a minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or controlled substances if the person has not taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or controlled substances by minors as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  A person responsible may be liable for an extraordinary police services fee if extraordinary police services are necessary to respond to a gathering. 
(f)  A person responsible shall not be in violation of this chapter if he seeks immediate assistance from the city police department, or other law enforcement agency, to remove any person who refused to abide by the hosts' performance of the duties imposed by this chapter or to terminate a gathering because the person responsible has been unable to prevent minors from consuming or possessing alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or controlled substances despite taking all reasonable steps to do so; provided that such request is made prior to any other complaint to law enforcement regarding the gathering. 
(Ord. No. 903-2013, § 1(9.72.030), 4-15-2013) 
Sec. 9.72.040. - Chapter not applicable at the following places. 
(a)  This chapter shall not apply to any location or place regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control or its successor agency. 
(b)  This chapter shall not apply to any conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs involving a minor and his parent or guardian as permitted by article I, section 4 of the California Constitution or the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 903-2013, § 1(9.72.040), 4-15-2013) 
Sec. 9.72.050. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of section 1.01.150. 
(b)  Violation of this chapter may be enforced or punished in any manner prescribed by law, or through any other process or procedure allowed by this Code or any other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 903-2013, § 1(9.72.050), 4-15-2013) 
Title 10 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State preemption of local ordinances on matters covered Vehicle Code § 21; rules of the road, Vehicle Code § 21000 et seq.; powers of local authorities, Vehicle Code § 21100 et seq. 

CHAPTER 10.04. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 10.04.010. - Definitions of words and phrases. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this title, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.010; Ord. No. 256, § 1, 1967) 
Sec. 10.04.020. - Motor Vehicle Code definitions to be used. 
    Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the State Vehicle Code, and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. Whenever any words or phrases that are used in this title are defined by this chapter and also defined in the State Vehicle Code, then any amendment to the words or phrases as defined in the State Vehicle Code shall also apply herein. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.020; Ord. No. 256, § 1.1, 1967) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vehicle Code §§ 100-680. 
Sec. 10.04.030. - Central traffic district. 
    The term "Central traffic district" means all streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: All that area bounded by the west right-of-way line of First Street on the west, the north right-of-way line of Main Street on the north, the east right-of-way line of Barstow Road on the east and the south right-of-way line of Williams Street on the south. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.030; Ord. No. 256, § 1.2, 1967) 
Sec. 10.04.040. - Coach. 
    The term "coach" means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley, or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.040; Ord. No. 256, § 1.3, 1967) 
Sec. 10.04.060. - Curb. 
    The term "curb" means the lateral boundary of the roadway, whether such curb be marked by curbing construction or not so marked. The term "curb" does not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.060; Ord. No. 256, § 1.5, 1967) 
Sec. 10.04.070. - Divisional island. 
    The term "divisional island" means a raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. A raised median is a divisional island. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.070; Ord. No. 256, § 1.6, 1967; Ord. No. 617, § 1, 1989) 
Sec. 10.04.080. - Holidays. 
(a)  Within the meaning of this title, holidays are January 1, February 12, the third Monday in February, the last Monday in May, July 4, the first Monday in September, the second Monday in October, November 11, the fourth Thursday in November and December 25. 
(b)  Holidays occurring on Saturday shall be observed on the preceding Friday and those occurring on Sunday shall be observed on the following Monday. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.080; Ord. No. 256, § 1.7, 1967; Ord. No. 617, § 2, 1989) 
Sec. 10.04.085. - Limited access roadway. 
    The term "limited access roadway" means any arterial or collector streets other than local residential streets as defined and established by resolution of the city council on the circulation element of the city general plan. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.085; Ord. No. 617, § 6, 1989) 
Sec. 10.04.090. - Loading zone. 
    The term "loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.090; Ord. No. 256, § 1.8, 1967) 
Sec. 10.04.100. - Official time standard. 
    Whenever certain hours are named herein, they mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.100; Ord. No. 256, § 1.9, 1967) 
Sec. 10.04.110. - Parkway. 
    The term "parkway" means that portion of a street within the right-of-way other than the roadway or sidewalk. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.110; Ord. No. 256, § 1.10, 1967; Ord. No. 617, § 4, 1989) 
Sec. 10.04.120. - Parking meter. 
    The term "parking meter" means a mechanical device installed within or upon the curb or sidewalk area, immediately adjacent to a parking space, for the purpose of controlling the period of time occupancy of the parking meter space by any vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.120; Ord. No. 256, § 1.11, 1967) 
Sec. 10.04.130. - Passenger loading zone. 
    The term "passenger loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.130; Ord. No. 256, § 1.12, 1967) 
Sec. 10.04.140. - Pedestrian. 
    The term "pedestrian" means any person who is afoot or who is using a means of conveyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.140; Ord. No. 256, § 1.13, 1967; Ord. No. 617, § 3, 1989) 
Sec. 10.04.150. - Police officer. 
    The term "police officer" means every officer of the police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.150; Ord. No. 256, § 1.14, 1967) 
Sec. 10.04.155. - Sidewalk access ramp. 
    The term "sidewalk access ramp" means the adequate and reasonable access for the safe and convenient movement of physically handicapped persons across curbs at marked or unmarked crosswalks. A wheelchair ramp is a sidewalk access ramp. 
(Code 1969, § 10.04.155; Ord. No. 617, § 5, 1989) 
CHAPTER 10.09. - TRIP REDUCTION AND TRAVEL DEMAND MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Congestion management programs generally, Government Code § 65088 et seq. 

Sec. 10.09.010. - Purpose. 
(a)  The San Bernardino Associated Governments as Congestion Management Agency adopted the congestion management program (CMP) on November 4, 1992. The CMP requires each local jurisdiction to adopt and implement a trip reduction and travel demand management ordinance that promotes alternative transportation methods. 
(b)  The trip reduction and travel demand management ordinance codified in this chapter is intended to satisfy the legal requirements of chapter 6 of the congestion management program. 
(Code 1969, § 10.09.010; Ord. No. 694, § 2(part), 1993) 
Sec. 10.09.020. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to all employers located within the city limits who employ 200 or more employees when 50 or more arrive at worksites during the peak travel period. 
(Code 1969, § 10.09.020; Ord. No. 694, § 2(part), 1993) 
Sec. 10.09.030. - Trip reduction. 
(a)  The city will assist the Mojave Desert Air Quality Management District (MDAQMD) in identifying employers with 200 or more employees. This data will assist the district in measuring the effectiveness of trip reduction as a means to reduce vehicle emissions in the Southeast Desert Air Basin (SEDAB), and provide evidence to support the district's determination whether or not to implement Rule 1701-Employer Based Trip Reduction. 
(b)  Continue to support both the city and county dial-a-ride and the fixed route service to the local area population for the purpose of shopping, medical and commuting. 
(c)  Continue to support public information programs which promote the use of alternative modes of transportation such as those provided through commercials on local television stations and availability of bus schedules at various locations throughout the city. The city will continue to encourage public information programs which promote the use of alternate modes of transportation. 
(d)  Continue to promote land use regulations which have the potential to reduce vehicle trips (VT) and/or vehicle miles travelled (VMT), such as the MU (mixed use) land use district which permits mixed residential and commercial uses. 
(Code 1969, § 10.09.030; Ord. No. 694, § 2(part), 1993) 
Sec. 10.09.040. - Travel demand management. 
(a)  Definition. Travel demand management involves the implementation of strategies and programs which reduce traffic congestion, vehicle miles travelled (VMT), and/or vehicle trips (VT), which result in reduction of mobile source emissions. The following are measures being implemented by the city. Control measures implemented by the city, prior to being imposed by any other regulatory agency, will result in the city taking credit for trip reduction and corresponding improvements in the roadway and intersection level of service on the city's CMP network. 
(b)  Measures. 
(1)  New development is required to comply with the city's standard requirement of installing public sidewalks. This improvement provides for pedestrian use as an alternate transportation mode, and serves as a link to other transportation systems which encourage their use, thus reducing traffic congestion, VMT and VT. The city shall continue to install sidewalks in those limited areas of the city where development existed prior to the requirements for sidewalks with the 1911 Bond Act and Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds. 
(2)  The city (as the city area transit and dial-a-ride) provides multiple occupancy vehicle service to the city and surrounding county area. Approximately 85 miles of roads are covered by the current route and monthly ridership exceeds 12,000. This service reduces traffic congestion, VMT and VT. The fixed route network will be periodically evaluated to determine appropriate changes and expansion based upon new development and levels of ridership. 
(3)  Traffic signal coordination and timing are being used to increase roadway efficiency and capacity during peak travel periods, resulting in improved vehicle movement. New signals are being installed by the city and by private development at locations where traffic volumes warrant and as determined by the city's traffic engineer. These improvements also result in improved vehicle movement. 
(4)  The city continuously reviews new development to determine if additional travel lanes for acceleration/deceleration purposes are needed, and prepares studies on existing streets to determine if travel lane restriping can be made to improve traffic flow and level of service. 
(5)  The city has received funding for the renovation of the Harvey House as a multi-modal transportation center. The center is located next to the Santa Fe Amtrak Station in city. The center currently accommodates Amtrak and Greyhound bus line passengers. The center is also the future site for the dial-a-ride and fixed bus route system. 
(6)  The city participated in the preparation of the Mojave Desert Air Quality Management District's Rule 1701-Employer Based Trip Reduction. The rule encourages participation in home-to-work commute alternatives by employers with 200 or more employees, when 50 or more employees arrive at work sites during the peak travel period. The district is currently evaluating the effectiveness of the rule in terms of emission reduction. The city will cooperate with the district during this evaluation period. 
(Code 1969, § 10.09.040; Ord. No. 694, § 2(part), 1993) 
CHAPTER 10.12. - ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE 

Sec. 10.12.010. - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
    Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in Vehicle Code chs. 10.04-10.64. 
(Code 1969, § 10.12.010; Ord. No. 256, § 3, 1967) 
Sec. 10.12.020. - Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic. 
    No person other than an officer of the police department, or members of the fire department or a person authorized by the chief of police, or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city engineer. 
(Code 1969, § 10.12.020; Ord. No. 256, § 3.1, 1967) 
Sec. 10.12.030. - Obedience to police or authorized officers. 
    No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal, or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the fire department, or a person authorized by the chief of police or by law. 
(Code 1969, § 10.12.030; Ord. No. 256, § 3.2, 1967) 
Sec. 10.12.040. - Traffic regulations apply to persons riding bicycles or animals. 
    Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway has all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by chapters 10.04 through 10.56, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1969, § 10.12.040; Ord. No. 256, § 3.3, 1967) 
Sec. 10.12.050. - Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers. 
    No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of chapters 10.04 through 10.64. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of chapters 10.04 through 10.64, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of chapters 10.04 through 10.64, constitutes interference or obstruction. 
(Code 1969, § 10.12.050; Ord. No. 256, § 3.4, 1967) 
Sec. 10.12.060. - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
    This title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, any county or city, and it is unlawful for any operator to violate any of the provisions of chapters 10.04 through 10.64, except as otherwise permitted in Vehicle Code chapters 10.04 through 10.64. 
(Code 1969, § 10.12.060; Ord. No. 256, § 3.5, 1967) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Vehicle Code § 21052. 
Sec. 10.12.070. - Exemption of certain vehicles. 
(a)  The provisions of chapters 10.04 through 10.64 regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the State Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. 
(b)  The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his willful disregard of the safety of others. 
(c)  The provisions of chapters 10.04 through 10.64 regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office department while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. 
(Code 1969, § 10.12.070; Ord. No. 256, § 3.6, 1967) 
Sec. 10.12.080. - Report of damage to certain property. 
(a)  The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including, but not limited to, any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall, within 24 hours after such accident, make a written report of the accident to the police department. 
(b)  This report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of the vehicle or animal, the license number of the vehicle, and briefly describe the property damage in the accident. 
(c)  The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he shall make a report as required in subsection (a) of this section within 24 hours after regaining ability to make such report. 
(Code 1969, § 10.12.080; Ord. No. 256, § 3.7, 1967) 
CHAPTER 10.16. - CONTROL DEVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Power of local authority to place and maintain such traffic signs, signals and other traffic control devices upon streets and highways as may be required, authorized, or necessary to properly indicate and carry out the provisions of state law or local traffic ordinances or to warn or guide traffic, Vehicle Code § 21351. 

Sec. 10.16.010. - Authority to install traffic control devices. 
(a)  The city engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title. 
(b)  Whenever the State Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the city engineer is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto. 
(c)  The city engineer may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic; but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations, and rules as set forth in this title or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the council with the advice and consent of the planning commission. 
(Code 1969, § 10.16.010; Ord. No. 256, § 4, 1967; Ord. No. 746, § 4(part), 1999) 
Sec. 10.16.020. - Traffic control signs required for enforcement purposes. 
    No provision of the State Vehicle Code or of chapters 10.04 through 10.64 for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1969, § 10.16.020; Ord. No. 256, § 4.1, 1967) 
Sec. 10.16.030. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
    The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with this chapter unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted to the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. 
(Code 1969, § 10.16.030; Ord. No. 256, § 4.2, 1967) 
Sec. 10.16.040. - Installation of traffic signals. 
(a)  The city engineer is directed to determine and report to the planning commission those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
(b)  The city engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determinations shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards commonly accepted in the traffic engineering field. 
(Code 1969, § 10.16.040; Ord. No. 256, § 4.3, 1967; Ord. No. 746, § 4(part), 1999) 
Sec. 10.16.050. - Lane marking. 
    The city engineer is authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. 
(Code 1969, § 10.16.050; Ord. No. 256, § 4.4, 1967) 
Sec. 10.16.060. - Distinctive roadway markings. 
    The city engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the State Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and marking shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the state department of public works pursuant to provisions of the State Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1969, § 10.16.060; Ord. No. 256, § 4.5, 1967) 
Sec. 10.16.070. - Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue traffic control devices. 
    The city engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the State Vehicle Code or this title whenever he determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or obtain with the advice and consent of the planning commission. 
(Code 1969, § 10.16.070; Ord. No. 256, § 4.6, 1967; Ord. No. 746, § 4(part), 1999) 
Sec. 10.16.080. - Unauthorized painting of curbs. 
    No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any city resolution or ordinance pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1969, § 10.16.080; Ord. No. 256, § 4.7, 1967) 
CHAPTER 10.18. - WORK AREA TRAFFIC CONTROL HANDBOOK 

Sec. 10.18.010. - Adopted. 
    The document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated "Work Area Traffic Control Handbook," latest edition, published by Building News, Inc., 3055 Overland Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, as amended by this chapter, is and the same is adopted by reference as the work area traffic control handbook of the city for regulating the design, erection and placement of all traffic control devices to be observed by all those who perform work in or near a public street to provide safe and effective work areas, and to warn, control, protect and expedite vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1969, § 10.18.010; Ord. No. 455, § 1, 1979; Ord. No. 497, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 539, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 617, § 8, 1989) 
CHAPTER 10.20. - TURNING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Power of local authority to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections to regulate or prohibit turning movements at such intersections, Vehicle Code § 22101; authority of city to enact ordinances prohibiting the making of any turning movement by any vehicle at any intersection or between any designated intersections, Vehicle Code § 22113. 

Sec. 10.20.010. - Authority to place turning markers; intersections; multiple lanes. 
    The city engineer is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right- or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance with the advice and consent of the planning commission. 
(Code 1969, § 10.20.010; Ord. No. 256, § 5, 1967; Ord. No. 746, § 4(part), 1999) 
Sec. 10.20.020. - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
    The city engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn, and shall, with the advice and consent of the planning commission, place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Code 1969, § 10.20.020; Ord. No. 256, § 5.1, 1967; Ord. No. 746, § 4(part), 1999) 
Sec. 10.20.030. - Signal controlled intersections; right turns. 
(a)  No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is sign posted giving notice of such restriction as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The city engineer shall, with the advice and consent of the planning commission, post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he determines that the making of right turns against traffic signal "stop" indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. 
(Code 1969, § 10.20.030; Ord. No. 256, § 5.2, 1967; Ord. No. 746, § 4(part), 1999) 
CHAPTER 10.24. - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authorities in charge of any highway may designate any highway, roadway, part of a roadway, or specific lanes upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction at all or such times as shall be indicated by official traffic control devices, Vehicle Code § 21657. 

Sec. 10.24.010. - The city engineer to sign one-way streets and alleys. 
    Whenever any city ordinance or resolution designates any one-way street or alley, the city engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1969, § 10.24.010; Ord. No. 256, § 6, 1967) 
CHAPTER 10.28. - SPECIAL STOPS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Power of local authority to designate any highway under its jurisdiction as a through highway and erect stop signs at entrances thereto or designate any intersection under its exclusive jurisdiction as a stop intersection and erect stop signs at one or more entrances of such intersection, Vehicle Code § 21354. 

Sec. 10.28.010. - The city engineer to erect stop signs. 
(a)  Whenever any city ordinance or resolution designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city engineer shall erect and maintain stops signs as follows. 
(b)  A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting a through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances to other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated; provided, however, stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when the entrance is controlled by an official traffic control signal. Such sign shall conform with, and be placed as provided in, the State Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1969, § 10.28.010; Ord. No. 256, § 7, 1967) 
Sec. 10.28.020. - Stop at through streets or stop sign. 
(a)  Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be through streets for the purposes of this section. 
(b)  This section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the council. 
(c)  This section shall apply at those highway railway grade crossings established by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1969, § 10.28.020; Ord. No. 256, § 7.1, 1967) 
Sec. 10.28.030. - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
    The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. 
(Code 1969, § 10.28.030; Ord. No. 256, § 7.2, 1967) 
CHAPTER 10.32. - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 

Sec. 10.32.010. - Driving through funeral procession. 
    No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the police department. 
(Code 1969, § 10.32.010; Ord. No. 256, § 8, 1967) 
Sec. 10.32.020. - Clinging to moving vehicle. 
    No person shall attach himself with his hands, or to catch on, or hold on to with his hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. 
(Code 1969, § 10.32.020; Ord. No. 256, § 8.1, 1967) 
State Law reference- A person riding upon any motorcycle, motorized bicycle, bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle prohibited from attaching themselves to any streetcar or vehicle, Vehicle Code § 21203. 
Sec. 10.32.030. - Commercial vehicles using private driveways. 
    No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of the driveway is prohibited. For the purpose of this section, the term "commercial vehicle" means a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of three-quarter ton. 
(Code 1969, § 10.32.030; Ord. No. 256, § 8.2, 1967) 
Sec. 10.32.040. - Riding or driving on sidewalk. 
    No person shall ride, drive, propel, or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that the sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the city engineer. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon the sidewalk area during the hours from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1969, § 10.32.040; Ord. No. 256, § 8.3, 1967) 
Sec. 10.32.050. - New pavement and markings. 
    No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across the pavement or marking, or when any device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
(Code 1969, § 10.32.050; Ord. No. 256, § 8.4, 1967) 
Sec. 10.32.060. - Obedience to barriers and signs. 
    No person, public utility or city department shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the city engineer, or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or city department. 
(Code 1969, § 10.32.060; Ord. No. 256, § 8.5, 1967) 
Sec. 10.32.070. - No entrance into intersection that would obstruct traffic. 
    No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1969, § 10.32.070; Ord. No. 256, § 8.6, 1967) 
Sec. 10.32.080. - Limited access. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. 
(Code 1969, § 10.32.080; Ord. No. 256, § 8.7, 1967) 
Sec. 10.32.090. - Restrictions on use of freeways. 
    No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor driven cycle, or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a freeway, as defined by state law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along any street so designated except in space set aside for the use of pedestrians, provided official signs are in place giving notice of the restrictions. 
(Code 1969, § 10.32.090; Ord. No. 256, § 8.8, 1967) 
CHAPTER 10.36. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 10.36.010. - City engineer to establish marked crosswalks. 
(a)  The city engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at all intersections within the central traffic district. 
(b)  Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at such intersections outside the district and other places within or outside the district where the planning commission determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than 400 feet in length and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at midblock. 
(d)  The city engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. 
(Code 1969, § 10.36.010; Ord. No. 256, § 9, 1967; Ord. No. 746, § 4(part), 1999) 
State Law reference- Power of local authority to establish crosswalks between intersections, Vehicle Code § 21106. 
Sec. 10.36.020. - When pedestrians must use crosswalks. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district. 
(Code 1969, § 10.36.020; Ord. No. 256, § 9.1, 1967) 
Sec. 10.36.030. - Pedestrians on bridges, overpasses, underpasses or viaducts. 
(a)  No person or pedestrian shall walk, run, stop, stand or sit on the roadway of a bridge, overpass, underpass or viaduct, except when permitted by the city engineer. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Vehicle Code § 21956, every person or pedestrian shall walk on the sidewalks or on designated walkways. 
(c)  The sidewalks or designated walkways may be on one or both sides of the roadway. 
(d)  The city engineer is authorized to designate a portion of the bridge, overpass, underpass or viaduct for pedestrian walkway. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to persons involved in the removal of disabled vehicles or to workers involved with the repair and maintenance of the bridge, overpass, underpass or viaduct. 
(Code 1969, § 10.36.030; Ord. No. 636, § 1, 1990) 
CHAPTER 10.40. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking of vehicles, Vehicle Code § 22500 et seq. 

Sec. 10.40.010. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or city ordinances prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.010; Ord. No. 256, § 10, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.020. - Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.020; Ord. No. 256, § 10.1, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.030. - City engineer to place and maintain no stopping zones and no parking areas. 
    The city engineer is authorized to place, with the advice and consent of the planning commission, and to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined in this chapter. When curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.030; Ord. No. 256, § 10.2, 1967; Ord. No. 675, § 1, 1992; Ord. No. 746, § 4(part), 1999) 
Sec. 10.40.040. - No parking areas. 
    No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing a vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal: 
(1)  Within any divisional island, unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings. 
(2)  On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when the area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(3)  In any area where the planning commission determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when the area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(4)  In any area established by resolution of the council as a no parking area, when the area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(5)  Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track. 
(6)  In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property. 
(7)  On any street or highway where the use of the street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of the vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the effective time of such no parking. 
(8)  At any place within 20 feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the midblock end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(9)  At any place within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in any district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface, except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.040; Ord. No. 256, § 10.3, 1967; Ord. No. 332, § 1, 1971; Ord. No. 746, § 4(part), 1999) 
Sec. 10.40.050. - Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited. 
    No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of 72 hours. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.050; Ord. No. 256, § 10.4, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.060. - Parking for demonstration. 
    No operator of any vehicle shall park the vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale, unless authorized by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.060; Ord. No. 256, § 10.5, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.070. - Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets. 
    No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street in order to facilitate prompt removal of the vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.070; Ord. No. 256, § 10.6, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.080. - Washing or polishing vehicles. 
    No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street, when a charge is made for such service. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.080; Ord. No. 256, § 10.7, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.090. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The city engineer is authorized with the advice and consent of the planning commission to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in such designated place. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.090; Ord. No. 256, § 10.8, 1967; Ord. No. 746, § 4(part), 1999) 
Sec. 10.40.100. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
(a)  The city engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet or, with the advice and consent of the traffic committee, upon one side of a street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon such street in violation of any sign or marking. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.100; Ord. No. 256, § 10.9, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.110. - Parking on grades. 
    No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any district without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.110; Ord. No. 256, § 10.10, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.115. - Parking commercial vehicles in residential districts prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park any commercial vehicle having an unladen vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or more on any street or portion thereof in a residential district. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.115; Ord. No. 553, § 1, 1986) 
Sec. 10.40.120. - Unlawful parking; peddlers and vendors. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or food stuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating car or vehicle, on any portion of any street except that vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution. 
(b)  No person shall park or stand for a period longer than ten minutes on any street any lunch wagon, eating cart or vehicle, or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy, ice cream or other articles of food are sold or offered for sale without first obtaining permission to do so from the traffic committee which designates the specific location in which the cart shall stand. 
(c)  No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for the vehicle or wagon without first obtaining permission to do so from the planning commission which shall designate the specific location where the vehicle may stand. 
(d)  Whenever permission is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart on any location other than that designated in the permit. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.120; Ord. No. 256, § 10.11, 1967; Ord. No. 746, § 4(part), 1999) 
Sec. 10.40.130. - Emergency parking signs. 
(a)  Whenever the city engineer determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the city engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. These signs shall remain in place only during the existence of the emergency and the city engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
(b)  When signs authorized by this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of the signs. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.130; Ord. No. 256, § 10.12, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.140. - Display of warning devices when commercial vehicle disabled. 
    Every motor truck having an unladen weight of 4,000 pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon any street or highway during darkness, shall be equipped with and carry at least two flares or two red lanterns or two warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors shall be of a type approved by the state highway patrol. When any vehicle above mentioned or any trailer or semitrailer is disabled upon streets or highways and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of 200 feet during darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated above shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately 100 feet in advance of, and 100 feet to the rear of, the disabled vehicle by the driver thereof. The continuous flashing of at least four approved Class A-Type 1 turn signal lamps, at least two toward the front and at least two toward the rear of the vehicle, shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section until the devices mentioned above can be placed in the required locations. The warning signals herein mentioned shall be displayed continuously during darkness while the vehicle remains disabled upon the street or highway. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.140; Ord. No. 256, § 10.13, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.150. - The city engineer to erect signs and place curb markings. 
    Whenever any city ordinance or resolution designates any street or portion thereof, or any public parking lot, as a limited time parking zone, the city engineer shall place and maintain signs or curb markings giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.150; Ord. No. 256, § 11, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.160. - 24-minute parking. 
(a)  Green curb marking means no standing or parking for a period of time longer than 24 minutes at any time between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, except Sundays and holidays. 
(b)  When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle adjacent to any legible curb marking or sign in violation thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.160; Ord. No. 256, § 11.1, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.170. - One-hour parking. 
    When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than one hour. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.170; Ord. No. 256, § 11.2, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.180. - Two-hour parking. 
    When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than two hours. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.180; Ord. No. 256, § 11.3, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.190. - Parking parallel to one-way streets. 
(a)  Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
(b)  In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking. 
(c)  The planning commission is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and the city engineer shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(d)  The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case the vehicle may be backed up to the curb, provided that the vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.190; Ord. No. 256, § 11.4, 1967; Ord. No. 746, § 4(part), 1999) 
Sec. 10.40.200. - Diagonal parking. 
(a)  On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle except: 
(1)  At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of the allotted space. 
(2)  With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of the curb. 
(b)  This section shall not apply when the vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in section 10.40.190 shall be complied with. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.200; Ord. No. 256, § 11.5, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.210. - Parking space markings. 
(a)  The city engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted. 
(b)  When parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.210; Ord. No. 256, § 11.6, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.220. - No stopping zones. 
(a)  The city engineer shall designate established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited. 
(b)  During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop the vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the council as no stopping zones. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.220; Ord. No. 256, § 11.7, 1967) 
Sec. 10.40.230. - Vehicles transporting hazardous waste and materials. 
(a)  A vehicle transporting hazardous waste or material or substance as identified in title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations for which the display of placards or marking is required pursuant to Vehicle Code § 27903, must be attended at all times by its driver or a qualified representative of the motor carrier that operates it. Such vehicle shall not be parked on any highway, highway shoulder, street, alley, public way or public place, or within five feet of the traveled portion thereof, within a residential zone or within 1,000 feet of any school or within 300 feet of any bridge or tunnel, except for brief periods when mechanical or equipment failure or disablement or malfunction of the vehicle, or the necessities of operation require the vehicle to be parked and make it impractical to park the vehicle in any other place. 
(b)  Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, termite and pesticide vehicles, fuel delivery vehicles, and vehicles delivering life support and health commodities, while servicing residential areas or schools, are exempt from the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. Additionally, such exempt vehicles need not be attended while the drivers are performing duties that are normally and necessarily performed by the operator of the vehicle or the provider of the service. 
(c)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  A motor vehicle is attended when the person in charge of the vehicle is in the vehicle, awake and not in a sleeper berth, or is within 100 feet of the vehicle and has it within his field of view. 
(2)  A qualified representative of a motor carrier is a person who: 
a.  Has been designated by the carrier to attend the vehicle. 
b.  Is aware of the nature of the hazardous waste and material or substance contained in the vehicle he attends. 
c.  Has been instructed on the procedures he must follow in emergencies concerning hazardous materials or substances. 
d.  Is authorized to move the vehicle and has the means and ability to do so. 
(d)  The rules of this section do not relieve a driver from any obligation imposed by federal, state or local laws relating to the transportation of hazardous materials or explosives, motor carrier safety regulations, or the placement of warning signs or devices when a motor vehicle is stopped on a public street or highway. 
(Code 1969, § 10.40.230; Ord. No. 612, § 1, 1989) 
CHAPTER 10.44. - LOADING AND UNLOADING 

Sec. 10.44.010. - Authority to establish loading zones. 
(a)  The planning commission is authorized to determine and the city engineer to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
(1)  At any place in the central traffic district or any business district. 
(2)  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
(b)  In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
(c)  Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within the zones. 
(d)  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in the zones. 
(Code 1969, § 10.44.010; Ord. No. 256, § 12, 1967; Ord. No. 746, § 4(part), 1999) 
Sec. 10.44.020. - Curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking regulations. 
    The city engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and the curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth: 
(1)  Red means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the State Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
(2)  Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers does not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than 20 minutes. 
(3)  White means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, and except as follows: 
a.  When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times. 
b.  When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions apply at all times, except when such theater is closed. 
(4)  When the city engineer as authorized under this chapter has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1969, § 10.44.020; Ord. No. 256, § 12.1, 1967) 
Sec. 10.44.030. - Effect of permission to load or unload. 
(a)  Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than 20 minutes. 
(b)  The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pick up of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
(c)  Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes. 
(d)  Within the total time limits above specified, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. 
(Code 1969, § 10.44.030; Ord. No. 256, § 12.2, 1967) 
Sec. 10.44.040. - Standing for loading or unloading only. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for the time permitted in section 10.44.030. 
(Code 1969, § 10.44.040; Ord. No. 256, § 12.3, 1967) 
Sec. 10.44.050. - Standing in passenger loading zone. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for the time specified in section 10.44.030. 
(Code 1969, § 10.44.050; Ord. No. 256, § 12.4, 1967) 
Sec. 10.44.060. - Standing in any alley. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. 
(Code 1969, § 10.44.060; Ord. No. 256, § 12.5, 1967) 
Sec. 10.44.070. - Coach zones to be established. 
(a)  The planning commission is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof. 
(b)  Coach zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. 
(Code 1969, § 10.44.070; Ord. No. 256, § 12.6, 1967; Ord. No. 746, § 4(part), 1999) 
CHAPTER 10.48. - RESTRICTED USE OF STREETS 

Sec. 10.48.020. - Truck routes. 
(a)  Whenever any city resolution designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the city engineer is authorized to designate such streets by appropriate signs as truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons. 
(b)  When any such truck routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on such routes and none other, except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons coming from a truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission; 
(2)  Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility; or 
(3)  Any bus or coach operating under franchise granted by the city council. 
(d)  Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons. 
(Code 1969, § 10.48.020; Ord. No. 256, § 13.1, 1967) 
Sec. 10.48.030. - Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets. 
(a)  Whenever any city resolution designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the city engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by the resolution. 
(b)  Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be streets, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission or pursuant to a franchise or certificate of convenience and necessity issued by the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 10.48.030; Ord. No. 256, § 13.2, 1967) 
Sec. 10.48.040. - Transportation permit. 
(a)  No person shall operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles or special mobile equipment of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in the State Vehicle Code on any highway or street without first obtaining a transportation permit from the city engineer. 
(b)  The type of permit may be single trip, annual, repetitive or direct crossing. 
(c)  The city engineer is authorized to issue or withhold any permit at his discretion. If the permit is issued, he is authorized to limit the number of trips or to establish seasonal or time and day limitations or designate certain routes within, which the vehicles described may be operated on the highways and streets indicated or otherwise to limit or prescribe conditions of operation of vehicle, when necessary to ensure against undue damage to the road foundations, surfaces or structures and may require the undertaking of other security as may be deemed necessary to protect the highways, streets and bridges from injury or to provide indemnity for any injury resulting from the operation of the vehicle. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the terms or conditions of the special permit. 
(e)  The permit application fees shall be the same as those currently in use by the state department of transportation. Additional services necessitated by unusually large or heavy loads, such as engineering investigations, police escorts, tree trimming or other services, shall be billed separately for each permit. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall relieve the operator or driver from any obligation imposed by federal state or local laws relating to this type of transportation. 
(Code 1969, § 10.48.040; Ord. No. 630, § 1, 1990) 
CHAPTER 10.56. - TRAINS 

Sec. 10.56.010. - Railway gates. 
    No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1969, § 10.56.010; Ord. No. 256, § 15, 1967) 
CHAPTER 10.64. - SPEED LIMITS 

Sec. 10.64.010. - Mountain View Street. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limits as hereinafter set forth are found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic, are reasonable and safe on the sections of Mountain View Street hereinafter described: 
(1)  30 miles per hour between Avenue A and Barstow Road. 
(2)  25 miles per hour between Barstow Road and Helen Runyon Drive/Seventh Avenue. 
(3)  35 miles per hour between Helen Runyon Drive/Seventh Avenue and East Main Street. 
(Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.010), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.020. - Armory Road. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limits as hereinafter set forth are found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic, are reasonable and safe on the sections of Armory Road hereinafter described: 
(1)  45 miles per hour between Barstow Road and Muriel Drive. 
(2)  40 miles per hour between Muriel Drive and Higgins Road. 
(3)  25 miles per hour between Higgins Road and Montara Road. 
(Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.020), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.030. - Main Street. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limits as hereinafter set forth are found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic, are reasonable and safe on the sections of Main Street hereinafter described: 
(1)  45 miles per hour between West City Limits and Laverne Avenue. 
(2)  45 miles per hour between Laverne Avenue and Avenue H. 
(3)  40 miles per hour between Avenue H and Otis Avenue. 
(4)  35 miles per hour between Otis Avenue and First Avenue. 
(5)  25 miles per hour between First Avenue and Barstow Road. 
(6)  35 miles per hour between Barstow Road and Muriel Drive. 
(7)  40 miles per hour between Muriel Drive and Coolwater Lane. 
(Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.030), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.040. - Virginia Way. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limits as hereinafter set forth are found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic, are reasonable and safe on the sections of Virginia Way hereinafter described: 25 miles per hour between Barstow Road and Muriel Drive. 
(Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.040), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.060. - Muriel Drive. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limits as hereinafter set forth are found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and are reasonable and safe on the sections of Muriel Drive hereinafter described: 
(1)  40 miles per hour between Armory Road and Rimrock Road. 
(2)  35 miles per hour between Armory Road and Virginia Way. 
(3)  25 miles per hour between Virginia Way and Mountain View Street. 
(Code 1969, § 10.64.060; Ord. No. 327(part), 1970; Ord. No. 407, § 1(part), 1975; Ord. No. 582, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.060), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.070. - Montara Road. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limit of 40 miles per hour is found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe on Montara Road between Frontage Road and Rimrock Road. 
(Code 1969, § 10.64.070; Ord. No. 327(part), 1970; Ord. No. 407, § 1(part), 1975; Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.070), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.080. - Barstow Road. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limits as set forth in this section are found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and are reasonable and safe on the sections of Barstow Road hereinafter described: 35 miles per hour between Interstate 15 and East Main Street. 
(Code 1969, § 10.64.080; Ord. No. 416, § 1, 1976; Ord. No. 677, § 1, 1992; Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.080), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.090. - First Avenue. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limits as hereinafter set forth are found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic, are reasonable and safe on the sections of First Avenue hereinafter described: 
(1)  35 miles per hour between Main Street and Irwin Road. 
(2)  50 miles per hour between Irwin Road and Old Highway 58. 
(Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.090), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.100. - Broadway Avenue. 
    It is determined that the prima facie speed limits as hereinafter set forth are found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and are reasonable and safe on the sections of Broadway Avenue hereinafter described: 40 miles per hour between the centerline of Armory Road and the centerline of Rimrock Road. 
(Code 1969, § 10.64.100; Ord. No. 568, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.100), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.110. - Rimrock Road. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limit as hereinafter set forth is found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movements of traffic and is reasonable and safe on the sections of Rimrock Road hereinafter described: 
(1)  45 miles per hour between Barstow Road and Montara Road. 
(2)  50 miles per hour between H Street and Barstow Road. 
(Code 1969, § 10.64.110; Ord. No. 635, § 2, 1990; Ord. No. 757, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.110), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.120. - Avenue G. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limit as hereinafter set forth is found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movements of traffic and is reasonable and safe on the section of Avenue G hereinafter described: 25 miles per hour between West Main Street and Flora Street. 
(Code 1969, § 10.64.120; Ord. No. 753, § 1, 1999; Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.120), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.130. - H Street. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limit as hereinafter set forth is found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movements of traffic and is reasonable and safe on the section of H Street hereinafter described: 50 miles per hour between Rimrock Road and Linda Vista Road. 
(Code 1969, § 10.64.130; Ord. No. 757, § 2, 2000; Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.130), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.140. - Roberta Street. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limit as hereinafter set forth is found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe on the section of Roberta Street hereinafter described: 35 miles per hour between East Main Street and Roberta Court. 
(Code 1969, § 10.64.140; Ord. No. 763, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.140), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.150. - Opal Avenue. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limit as hereinafter set forth is found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe on the section of Opal Avenue hereinafter described: 30 miles per hour between Armory Road and Rimrock Road. 
(Code 1969, § 10.64.150; Ord. No. 811, 2005; Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.150), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.160. - Yucca Avenue. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limits as hereinafter set forth are found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic, are reasonable and safe on the sections of Yucca Avenue hereinafter described: 
(1)  30 miles per hour between Mountain View Street and Main Street. 
(2)  35 miles per hour between Main Street and Riverside Drive. 
(Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.160), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.170. - Lenwood Road. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limits as hereinafter set forth are found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic, are reasonable and safe on the sections of Lenwood Road hereinafter described: 40 miles per hour between Tumbleweed Drive and High Desert Road. 
(Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.170), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 10.64.180. - Outlet Center Drive. 
    It is determined and declared that the prima facie speed limits as hereinafter set forth are found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic, are reasonable and safe on the sections of Outlet Center Drive hereinafter described: 65 miles per hour between 0.2 miles south of Mercantile Way to 2.2 miles south of Mercantile Way. 
(Ord. No. 899-2013, § 1(10.64.180), 3-18-2013) 
Title 12 - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city over streets, sidewalks and other public places, Government Code § 40401, Streets and Highways Code § 1800 et seq.; Improvement Act of 1911, Streets and Highways Code § 5000 et seq. 

CHAPTER 12.04. - STREET DEDICATIONS 

Sec. 12.04.010. - Dedication required. 
    No building or structure shall be erected, enlarged, or altered, and no property shall hereafter be improved for parking purposes, and no building permit shall be issued therefore, unless the one-half of the street which is located on the same side of the centerline of the street as such lot has dedicated rights-of-way for full width of the lot so as to meet the master plan and/or standards for such street. In addition to required dedication for street purposes, additional dedication for storm drain, sewer, water, or other utility purposes may also be required in connection with building permits where such dedication is necessary to prevent the flooding of adjacent or nearby properties or to permit connection to required utilities. 
(Code 1969, § 12.04.010; Ord. No. 795, § 2(part), 2004; Ord. No. 910-2013, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 12.04.020. - Required improvements. 
(a)  Any person, owner, lessee, or agent constructing or arranging for the construction of any parking lot; commercial, residential or industrial buildings; or building addition or alteration shall also provide for the construction or installation to established city standards as outlined in subsection (d) of this section, of sidewalks, curbs, gutters, street trees, adequate street lighting, street paving to the centerline of the street, required public utilities, and necessary drainage structures, unless such improvements already exist along all street frontages adjoining the lot on which the building or parking lot is to be constructed, enlarged, or altered. Exceptions to this section are as follows: 
(1)  This section shall not apply to additions made to a single-family residence where the square foot area of such additions does not exceed 50 percent of the area of the residential portion of the building existing prior to addition. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to additions made to multiple-family residential, commercial, industrial or institutional buildings or structures where the square foot area of such additions does not exceed 50 percent of the area of the of the building existing prior to addition. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to construction of or additions to garages, carports, storage buildings and similar nonresidential buildings, accessory to single-family residences, where such construction or addition does not exceed 500 square feet in area. 
(b)  For commercial and industrial subdivisions, installation of all required public off-site improvements shall be required by the property owner, lessee or agent, on the property where development activity will occur prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(c)  If the city initiates and installs public off-site improvements as part of a larger city-wide capital improvement project that would have otherwise been the responsibility of the property owner, the owner of the impacted property will be responsible for entering into a reimbursement agreement for the cost of all public improvements installed by the city which would have been the responsibility of the owner of the impacted property. The full amount due must be paid prior to issuance of any building or construction permits or occupancy permits for any improvements made by the property owner. Furthermore, the city shall record the reimbursement agreement against the property where a reimbursement agreement has been entered into. 
(d)  The city shall establish a master plan of required off-site public improvement standards for the following land use designations: 
(1)  Rural. 
(2)  Residential. 
(3)  Commercial. 
(4)  Industrial. 
All public improvements required under this section shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the city's established master plan of required off-site public improvement standards. The master plan will outline the specifications of the off-site public improvements required throughout the entire community. Any deviation from the established standard will require city council authorization and approval. 
(e)  The city engineer may require that plans be prepared by a registered civil engineer showing the line and grade of the public improvements required to be constructed by this section in conjunction with any construction. When such plans are required, no building permit shall be issued until the plans are approved by the city engineer. Further, no final certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the improvements required by this section have been constructed. 
(Code 1969, § 12.04.020; Ord. No. 795, § 2(part), 2004; Ord. No. 910-2013, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 12.04.021. - Reimbursement agreement for public improvements. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall be applied in instances when all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  If the city initiates and installs public off site improvements as part of a larger city-wide capital improvement project that would have otherwise been the responsibility of the property owner, the owner of the impacted property will be responsible for entering into a reimbursement agreement for all public improvements installed by the city which would have been the responsibility of the impacted property owner. 
(2)  The construction of the public right-of-way improvements would be required by section 12.04.020 if they had not already been constructed. 
(b)  In those instances where the city engineer deems it advisable to establish a reimbursement agreement for public right-of-way improvements, the city engineer shall prepare for city manager concurrence the proposed agreement and the estimated cost for each proposed reimbursee. The estimated cost will be established by the city engineer based off of the engineer's estimate for the actual cost of the improvements being constructed. 
(c)  The full amount due from any reimbursement agreement must be paid by the property owner to the city prior to issuance of any building or construction permits or occupancy permit for any improvements made by the property owner. Furthermore, the city shall record the reimbursement agreement against the property where a reimbursement agreement has been entered into. 
(d)  Should any property subject to a reimbursement agreement requirement be sold, the seller or sellers shall comply with the provisions of chapter 5.72 (Disclosure Upon Sale of Real Property). 
(e)  Alternatively, if the actual cost of the improvements being made are unavailable, the city may require that a property owner pay a fee-in-lieu for the cost of the public right-of-way improvements rather than enter into a reimbursement agreement. In those instances, the fee-in-lieu costs shall be developed based on the following unit cost schedule: 
Item Description Units Unit Cost Curb and Gutter - 8" L.F. $  18.00 Curb and Gutter - 8" (<500 LF) L.F. 20.00 Curb and Gutter - 6" L.F. 16.00 Curb and Gutter - 6" (<500 LF) L.F. 18.00 Curb Only - 8" L.F. 16.00 Curb Only - 6" L.F. 15.00 A.C. Dike 8" L.F. 10.00 A.C. Dike 8" (<500 LF) L.F. 12.00 A.C. Paving (Tons) TON 85.00 A.C. Overlay, 11/2" thick, PG 64-16 S.F. 0.95 Class II Aggregate Base TON 20.00 Concrete (Class A) C.Y. 550.00 Concrete Spandrel, one curb return side only EA. 4,000.00 Concrete Longitudinal Gutter, 6' wide EA. 175.00 Concrete Longitudinal Gutter, 12' wide EA. 350.00 Driveways (Residential) S.F. 8.50 Driveways (Commercial 6") S.F. 10.50 Sidewalk S.F. 5.00 Excavation (0-100) C.Y. 12.00 Excavation (101-1000) C.Y. 10.00 Excavation (1001-3000) C.Y. 8.00 Excavation (3001 +) C.Y. 5.00 Traffic Signs, STOP, XING, etc. EA. 275.00 Pavement Markings EA. 250.00 Striping L.F. 2.50 Street Name Sign EA. 350.00 Retaining Wall - 3' (8" block) L.F. 60.00 Retaining Wall - 4' (8" block) L.F. 65.00 Retaining Wall - 5' (8" block) L.F. 75.00 Retaining Wall - 6' (8" block) L.F. 80.00 Adjust Manhole to Grade EA. 750.00 Parkway Drain per APWA 151-1 Type 2 EA. 2,500.00 Street/Trench Repair S.F. 3.50 4" PVC Lateral per Standard, no street/trench repair L.F. 60.00 8" PVC Sewer Main L.F. 75.00 48" Diameter Manhole per Standard E.A. 4,500.00 Connect to Existing Manhole E.A. 2,500.00  
(f)  The unit cost schedule outlined in subsection (d) of this section shall be automatically adjusted each year on July 1 in an amount equivalent to the percentage change between calendar years in the consumer price index (CPI) for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County area as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
(g)  The unit cost schedule outlined in subsection (d) of this section shall also be used for estimating plan check fees, permit fees, required bonding amounts, and other related matters where infrastructure unit cost information data is required. 
(Ord. No. 910-2013, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 12.04.022. - No encroachment allowed without encroachment permit. 
    No building or structure shall hereafter be erected on any lot within a public easement or right-of-way unless an encroachment permit has been issued by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 910-2013, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
CHAPTER 12.08. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Regional notification center system for protection of underground systems, Government Code § 4216 et seq. 

Sec. 12.08.010. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases are definitive and shall be construed as hereinafter set forth for the purpose of this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City engineer means the city engineer of the City of Barstow. 
    Person means any person, firm, corporation, institution or government agency. 
    Street means any city street, alley, lane, court, easement, or right-of-way and includes rights-of-way reserved in patents issued by the Bureau of Land Management pursuant to Public Resources Code § 7705 et seq. 
(Code 1969, § 12.08.010; Ord. No. 237, § 1, 1966; Ord. No. 648, § 1, 1990) 
Sec. 12.08.020. - Permits required. 
(a)  No person shall make any excavation in, or construct, install or maintain any improvement, structure or encroachment in, on, over or under any street without first obtaining from the city engineer a permit therefor, or maintain the same without such permit or in violation of the terms or conditions thereof. Such permit shall be issued by the city engineer only upon written application therefor and payment of the required fees. The permit shall be issued only if the city engineer is satisfied that the use proposed is in the public interest and that there will be no substantial injury to the street or prolonged impairment of its use as the result thereof, and that the use is reasonably necessary for the performance of the functions of the applicant. 
(b)  The permit shall be revocable and the uses and installations thereunder subordinate to any prior right of the city to use the street for public purposes. The permit shall be conditional upon the right of the city to require the permittee to relocate or remove the structure or encroachment at the permittee's expense for the benefit of the city or to relocate the structure or encroachment at the permittee's expense where, in the opinion of the city engineer, the action is reasonably necessary to avoid a crossing conflict, for the benefit of any public district, public agency, or political subdivision. The permit shall be subject to the conditions the city engineer determines are necessary to ensure the safety of the traveling public and the restoration of the surface of the highway and the foundations thereof, and of the portions outside the traveled roadway. 
(c)  The city engineer may require such surety bond or deposit of money as is in his judgment necessary to secure performance of the conditions of the permit and the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  The city engineer may, for reasons of city convenience, arrange to do the work of replacement to pavement or restoration of the roadway at the expense of the permittee. If any permittee fails to refill any excavation or to restore the street to its condition prior to the excavation, the city engineer shall have the right to perform the work and collect in the name of the city the cost thereof. 
(e)  The city engineer shall have the right to remove any construction or encroachment installed or maintained in violation of this chapter and to restore the street to its condition prior to the excavation, construction or encroachment and collect in the name of the city the cost thereof. 
(f)  The city engineer shall require as a condition of the permit that all excavation and encroachment work be performed in compliance with the city's street trenching specifications and policies as adopted by city council resolution. 
(Code 1969, § 12.08.020; Ord. No. 237, § 2, 1966; Ord. No. 862-2010, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
State Law reference- Digging, taking, or carrying away any earth, soil, or stone from land in any city street, alley, avenue, or park, without the license of the city council, is a misdemeanor trespass, Penal Code § 602. 
Sec. 12.08.030. - Exceptions. 
    An excavation or encroachment may be made without first obtaining a permit for repair or replacement of a facility previously installed only when necessary for the immediate protection or preservation of life or property, and provided that the permit is obtained on the first business day thereafter, and further provided that the excavation is made in a manner to give full protection to the users of the street and city. 
(Code 1969, § 12.08.030; Ord. No. 237, § 3, 1966) 
Sec. 12.08.040. - Application. 
    Each application for a permit under this chapter shall be in writing and signed by the person desiring to construct, excavate or encroach, or his authorized agent. The application shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city engineer and contain or be accompanied by information he may require. Each permit shall be in writing, signed by the city engineer or his representative, on a form furnished by him. 
(Code 1969, § 12.08.040; Ord. No. 237, § 4, 1966) 
Sec. 12.08.050. - Fees. 
    A fee schedule may be adopted by the city council by resolution establishing permit fees and inspection fees for the various types of excavations, construction and encroachments. The permit fee shall be paid at the time the application is filed and the inspection fees paid before the permit is issued. 
(Code 1969, § 12.08.050; Ord. No. 237, § 5, 1966) 
Sec. 12.08.060. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following shall be exempt from payment of the permit and inspection fees: 
(1)  Every public district, public agency or political subdivision having lawful authority to use the street for the purpose specified. 
(2)  Street improvements under special assessments or improvement district proceedings conducted by the city council. 
(3)  Street improvements and other public facilities installed pursuant to a specific contract with the city in which the cost is borne by the city. 
(b)  A public utility which holds a franchise from the city or the state authorizing the use of public highways is not required to obtain a permit for maintenance or construction operations not involving excavation in a street other than as usual and necessary for the installation of poles, guys, and anchors, at locations outside of the existing or future curblines and outside existing or future sidewalk area, improved or unimproved. This exemption shall not waive the right of the city engineer to disapprove the location of poles, guys and anchors and to resolve conflicts between the public utilities and property owners fronting on the street. 
(Code 1969, § 12.08.060; Ord. No. 237, § 6, 1966) 
Sec. 12.08.070. - Blanket permits. 
    The city engineer may issue to any applicant a blanket permit for a series of excavations or encroachments of the same type and may prescribe a procedure for the payment of fees on a monthly basis for such a blanket permit. This section shall be broadly applied to reduce administrative costs of both city and applicant. 
(Code 1969, § 12.08.070; Ord. No. 237, § 7, 1966) 
Sec. 12.08.080. - Validity of permits. 
    All permits issued hereunder shall be void 30 days after issuance unless an extension of time has been granted by the city engineer or his authorized agent. 
(Code 1969, § 12.08.080; Ord. No. 237, § 8, 1966) 
Sec. 12.08.090. - Contractors; certificate of liability insurance. 
    Except as may be waived or modified by the city manager, any contractor performing any construction activities under city contract or involving city property or rights-or-way shall furnish the city with a policy or certificate of liability insurance in which the city is the named insured or is named as an additional insured with the contractor. The city shall be the insured or named as an additional insured covering the work, whether liability is attributable to the contractor or the agency. The policy shall insure the city, its officers, employees, and agents while acting within the scope of their duties on the work, against all claims arising out of or in connection with the work. The insurance shall be in amounts as prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 12.08.090; Ord. No. 563, § 1, 1987) 
CHAPTER 12.12. - RIGHT-OF-WAY LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 12.12.010. - Purpose. 
    In order to promote the development of the city, vehicle and pedestrian safety and traffic movement, the city regulates all plants, planters or rocks in or overhanging any street or alley right-of-way. 
(Code 1969, § 12.12.010; Ord. No. 273, § 1, 1968) 
Sec. 12.12.020. - Sight distance and height clearance. 
    Every person owning or in possession of any real property abutting any street or alley in the city street system shall: 
(1)  Keep all trees in or overhanging a street right-of-way trimmed clear of branches or foliage to a height of 91/2 feet above curb height. 
(2)  Keep all shrubs within the street right-of-way trimmed to a height not to exceed 30 inches above curb height. 
(3)  Keep all shrubs overhanging any sidewalk or street trimmed clear of sidewalk or street. 
(4)  Keep all shrubs overhanging an alley right-of-way trimmed clear of right-of-way. 
(5)  Keep all trees overhanging an alley right-of-way trimmed clear of branches or foliage to a height of 12 feet above right-of-way. 
(6)  The following items now and hereafter are prohibited in any street or alley right-of-way in the city street system: 
a.  Plants not listed in section 12.12.030. 
b.  Trees within 25 feet of existing or planned curb returns. 
c.  Cactus plants. 
d.  Built-up planters of wood, rock, cement or metal. 
(Code 1969, § 12.12.020; Ord. No. 273, § 2, 1968; Ord. No. 417, § 1, 1976) 
Sec. 12.12.030. - Permitted plants in a street right-of-way. 
    The following trees and shrubs may be planted in a street right-of-way: 
(1)  Trees. 
a.  Oleander. 
b.  Modesto ash. 
c.  Crepe myrtle. 
d.  Oak. 
e.  London plane. 
f.  Purple leaf plum. 
g.  Palm. 
h.  Sawleaf zelkoua. 
i.  Maidenhair. 
j.  Chinese pistachio. 
k.  Other trees that may be approved by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  Shrubs and groundcovers. 
a.  Junipers (low growing). 
b.  Ivy. 
c.  Lippia. 
d.  Ice plant. 
e.  Bacharris pilularis. 
f.  Other shrubs that may be approved by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 12.12.030; Ord. No. 273, § 3, 1968) 
Sec. 12.12.040. - Specific planting plans. 
    The city council may, from time to time, upon request of a majority of property owners on both sides of a block or by the city council on its own motion, adopt by resolution a specific planting plan. This plan shall designate a specific type plant which may be planted in certain street rights-of-way and may also designate other specific requirements pertaining to the care, treatment, watering and maintenance of plants. Any specific planting plan adopted by resolution of the city council shall require a permit as provided by chapter 12.08 before any plant is placed in the street right-of-way. 
(Code 1969, § 12.12.040; Ord. No. 273, § 4, 1968) 
Sec. 12.12.050. - Notice to correct violation. 
(a)  Written notice shall state the section violated in this chapter, the work necessary to remedy the violation and the time within which the work must be performed. The time to perform the work shall not be less than ten days. If at the end of the time specified in the notice, the work has not been performed, the city may perform the work to correct the violation of this chapter. Written notice shall be by mail to the abutting property owner or person having charge of the real property abutting the violation of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city engineer or his authorized representative to enforce the provisions of this chapter 
(Code 1969, § 12.12.050; Ord. No. 273, § 5, 1968) 
CHAPTER 12.16. - BANNERS 

Sec. 12.16.010. - Scope of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter apply to the making of applications for and the granting and control of permits for the placing, erection, maintaining, and removal of banners extending over, upon or along any street or any portion thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 12.16.010; Ord. No. 312, § 1(part), 1970) 
Sec. 12.16.020. - Application. 
    An applicant for a banner permit shall complete and file with the chief building inspector an application which shall contain the following: 
(1)  The location, dimensions, and purpose of banner. 
(2)  A facsimile of the proposed banner, including any legend or written matter. 
(3)  The proposed date and the time of day when said banner will be installed. 
(4)  The proposed date and time of day when said banner will be removed. 
(5)  Such other information as the chief building inspector may require. 
(Code 1969, § 12.16.020; Ord. No. 312, § 1(part), 1970) 
Sec. 12.16.030. - Purpose of permit. 
    Permits issued under this chapter shall be granted only to civic organizations or public bodies for the purpose of bringing to the attention of the public events which are of a general public interest. No permit shall be issued to further political, religious or private purposes. 
(Code 1969, § 12.16.030; Ord. No. 312, § 1(part), 1970) 
Sec. 12.16.040. - Duration. 
    No permit shall be granted for a period of more than 40 days. 
(Code 1969, § 12.16.040; Ord. No. 312, § 1(part), 1970) 
Sec. 12.16.050. - Insurance. 
    An applicant shall submit proof of public liability and property damage to the chief building inspector in an amount of not less than $100,000.00 for any one person killed or injured, and $250,000.00 total liability for any one accident, and an amount of not less than $50,000.00 for property damage. 
(Code 1969, § 12.16.050; Ord. No. 312, § 1(part), 1970) 
Sec. 12.16.060. - Installation. 
    The installation of any banner shall be under the supervision of an inspector appointed by the chief building inspector. 
(Code 1969, § 12.16.060; Ord. No. 312, § 1(part), 1970) 
Sec. 12.16.070. - Removal. 
    A permittee, upon the removal of any banner for which a permit under this chapter has been issued, shall remove from the street all material and debris resulting from the installation, maintenance or removal of any banner within 24 hours after the removal of a banner. 
(Code 1969, § 12.16.070; Ord. No. 312, § 1(part), 1970) 
CHAPTER 12.20. - STREET/FACILITY NAMING AND PROPERTY NUMBERING 

Sec. 12.20.010. - Intent and purpose. 
    Because of the confusion that has resulted by the use of two property numbering systems and the lack of a street-naming program, which has adversely affected the delivery of mail, the provision of emergency services, and the ability of visitors and residents alike to find a certain address, there is established a program and procedure for the naming of streets and the numbering of properties within the city. 
(Code 1969, § 12.20.010; Ord. No. 429, § 1(part), 1977; Ord. No. 914-2013, § 1(12.20.010), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 12.20.020. - Base lines. 
    Main Street shall constitute the base line for the numbering of properties along all streets running northerly and southerly and First Avenue shall constitute the base line for the numbering of properties along all streets running easterly and westerly. The base point shall be the intersection formed by the two base lines mentioned herein. 
(1)  Each building north of Main Street and facing a street running in a northerly direction shall carry a number, address and the prefix "North (N)" indicating a location north of the base street. 
(2)  Each building south of Main Street and facing a street running in a southerly direction shall carry a number, address and the prefix "South (S)" indicating a location south of the base street. 
(3)  Each building east of First Avenue and facing a street running in an easterly direction shall carry a number, address and the prefix "East (E)" indicating a location east of the base street. 
(4)  Each building west of First Avenue and facing a street running in a westerly direction shall carry a number, address and the prefix "West (W)" indicating a location west of the base street. 
(Code 1969, § 12.20.020; Ord. No. 429, § 1(part), 1977; Ord. No. 914-2013, § 1(12.20.020), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 12.20.030. - Streets and avenues. 
    The city shall initiate a street and avenue system as follows: 
(1)  All streets running for the greater course of their length north and south shall carry the new suffix "avenue." 
(2)  All streets running for the greater course of their length east and west shall carry the new suffix "street." 
(Code 1969, § 12.20.030; Ord. No. 429, § 1(part), 1977; Ord. No. 914-2013, § 1(12.20.030), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 12.20.040. - Even and odd property numbering. 
    All buildings on the north and east side of a street running from the base point shall bear odd numbers. All buildings on the south and west side of a street running from the base point shall bear even numbers. 
(Code 1969, § 12.20.040; Ord. No. 429, § 1(part), 1977; Ord. No. 914-2013, § 1(12.20.040), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 12.20.050. - Nonconforming property numbering. 
    All buildings within the corporate limits of the city shall carry a city property number consistent with a city numbering system. Existing buildings utilizing a county property number for addressing purposes shall be renumbered consistent with the city numbering system. 
(Code 1969, § 12.20.050; Ord. No. 429, § 1(part), 1977; Ord. No. 914-2013, § 1(12.20.050), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 12.20.060. - Property identification. 
(a)  The property identification (address) shall be limited to numerals and letters that depict the numeric address, apartment or unit designation (A, B, C, etc.), and building designation (such as BLDG A, B, C, etc.) only. 
(b)  All buildings within the city shall bear a set of numerals/letters for the purpose of property identification (address). The numerals/letters used shall be approved by the Barstow Fire Protection District and shall be made of a durable and clearly visible material. 
(c)  The numerals/letters described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be conspicuously placed as approved by the Barstow Fire Protection District. 
(d)  As part of any new construction, or when significant remodeling is conducted in the general area of the location for the address, an illuminated address shall be installed. To minimize electrical usage, a photo sensor may be incorporated into the power supply to illuminate the address only when dark. As an alternative, and only when electrical power is not available, a solar powered illuminated address shall be utilized, and as approved by the Barstow Fire Protection District. Illuminated addresses shall be continuously maintained and functional. The size of the address numbering shall be approved by the Barstow Fire Protection District. 
(e)  Painting of curb address for each corresponding property shall require written permission of the owner or occupant of the property. 
(1)  Paint shall be water base latex or equal with black numbers and white background. Paint may be reflective. 
(2)  The closest portion of the numeric address shall be one of the following: 
a.  Within five feet, but not less than two feet, of the highest portion of any driveway approach, and immediately in front of the applicable property; 
b.  Within two feet of any portion of another authorized address for the same property or center; 
c.  If there is no curb ramp, set in at least ten feet from both sides of the property lines; or 
d.  Approved by the city engineer. 
(3)  No logo or other marking shall be included with the address. 
(4)  The address shall be black and four inches tall for eight-inch curbs, and three inches tall for six-inch curbs. The stroke of the numerals/letters shall be three-quarters inch in width. For curb sizes not listed, the city engineer shall review and approve the numeral/letter size provided that the stroke of the numerals/letters does not exceed four inches in height. 
(5)  The address shall be painted on a solid white background area that extends two inches beyond the address for eight-inch curb or 11/2 inches for six-inch curb, except that the background shall be extended up to seven inches horizontally if a marking described in subsection (e)(4) of this section is also painted. For curb sizes not listed, the city engineer shall review and approve the size of the address provided that the size of the background area does not exceed eight inches in height. 
(6)  The address shall be maintained in good quality. Should the address become faded or worn, the property owner shall cause the address to be repainted or removed within two weeks of notification. 
(7)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, no address may be painted over any curb that a governmental agency has caused to have been painted, unless expressly authorized by the city engineer. 
(Code 1969, § 12.20.070; Ord. No. 429, § 1(part), 1977; Ord. No. 914-2013, § 1(12.20.060), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 12.20.070. - Proposed street names. 
    All proposed streets, to the extent feasible, shall bear names that reflect a high desert environment. New street names may include, but shall not be limited to desert flora and fauna, desert Indian tribes, parks and monuments, historical figures and features, and desert geological and geographical names. 
(1)  Names shall be unique and discernible. Similar sounding or duplicate street names shall not be considered. 
(2)  Street names shall be selected to either recognize natural or historical features related to the Barstow community or to recognize individuals or families that have made a lasting and significant contribution to the betterment of the city. 
(3)  Names with the same theme are suggested for naming streets in an entire subdivision, as a means of general identification. 
(4)  Discriminatory or derogatory names shall not be allowed. 
(5)  Names for public and private streets in a new subdivision shall be proposed by the developer, recommended by the planning commission, and approved by the city council. The street names shall be adopted by the city when the final subdivision map for the development is recorded. 
(Code 1969, § 12.20.080; Ord. No. 429, § 1(part), 1977; Ord. No. 914-2013, § 1(12.20.070), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 12.20.080. - Compliance. 
    All building numbers and street names assigned under the provisions of this chapter shall become effective no later than one year from passage by the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 12.20.090; Ord. No. 429, § 1(part), 1977; Ord. No. 914-2013, § 1(12.20.080), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 12.20.090. - Base map prepared. 
    The city shall have prepared a base map showing the revisions to street names and property numbering assigned under the provisions of this chapter. The base map or attachment thereto shall provide any additional information that will aid public and private agencies in the normal course of their daily communications. 
(Code 1969, § 12.20.100; Ord. No. 429, § 1(part), 1977; Ord. No. 914-2013, § 1(12.20.090), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 12.20.100. - Modernization of street names. 
    The city shall be responsible for the renaming of existing streets or the naming of all proposed streets that will serve the purpose of address clarification or otherwise benefit the general welfare of the city and its residents. The modernization or renaming of existing streets shall be pursuant to section 12.20.110. 
(Code 1969, § 12.20.060; Ord. No. 429, § 1(part), 1977; Ord. No. 914-2013, § 1(12.20.100), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 12.20.110. - Street and facility naming authority. 
    The city council shall have the final authority to name and rename all city streets, parks and facilities, and to designate commemorative street names and plaques. 
(1)  Streets. 
a.  The authority for street naming and renaming shall reside with the city council or as a result of an approval and recordation of a subdivision map. 
b.  Under extraordinary circumstances, the city council may, with a super majority vote of at least four city council members, revoke the current name of any city street or city-owned facility. 
c.  It is the intent of this policy to prohibit the changing of street names that have existing homes or businesses using the street name in their address, except under extraordinary circumstances with a super majority vote of at least four city council members and written approval of all impacted property owners. 
d.  Any such change of name of a street shown on any map filed in the office of the county recorder shall be by resolution of the city council and the resolution shall be recorded with the county recorder. 
(2)  Facilities. 
a.  City facilities are defined as park, buildings or recreational facilities. 
b.  For new facilities, the naming process shall begin as early in the project development process as possible. 
c.  Facility names shall be selected to either recognize natural or historical features related to the Barstow community or to recognize individuals or families that have made a lasting and significant contribution to the betterment of the city. 
d.  Areas within city facilities that can also be recognized include points of entry; rooms/patios within a city building; facility features (such as columns or fountains); walkways; bikeways; trails or recreational facilities (such as group picnic areas, sports fields or water features). 
(3)  Commemorative street names and plaques. 
a.  Commemorative street name signs are supplemental to the street name and will not change the street address. The existing street name shall be retained and a supplemental sign or plaque shall be installed beneath the existing street name signage. 
b.  Names for commemorative street name signs shall be selected to either recognize natural or historical features related to the Barstow community or to recognize individuals or families that have made a lasting and significant contribution to the betterment of the city. 
c.  Commemorative plaques shall be placed in common areas such as public benches or at public facilities. 
d.  Names for commemorative plaques shall be selected to recognize individuals or families that have made a lasting and significant contribution to the betterment of the city. 
(4)  Street and facility naming procedure. Requests for naming and/or changing the name of a city street or facility shall be submitted to the city manager's office in writing on the city's street and facility naming application form. 
a.  If the proposed street or facility name is in recognition of an individual or family, the applicant is required to provide clear evidence that the individual to be honored has made a significant and lasting contribution to the betterment of the city. 
b.  Upon receipt of the application, the city manager or his designee shall review the application and conduct any applicable research. 
c.  Following that review, the city manager or his designee shall place the item on a future city council agenda for formal review and consideration by the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 12.20.110; Ord. No. 429, § 1(part), 1977; Ord. No. 914-2013, § 1(12.20.110), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 12.20.120. - Street dedication. 
(a)  Street dedication for the purpose of this chapter shall mean the dedication of a street in honor of, or in memory of, an individual or family meeting the criteria identified in section 12.20.140. Streets may also be dedicated in memory of or in honor of a prisoner of war, an individual killed in action, or other person who contributed to the city, community, or the United States through acts of benevolence or service. 
(b)  Said dedications shall be approved by the city council by resolution. Dedications may be as follows: 
By street: identified at a street intersection by a similar street sign, mounted beneath the existing street sign. Said dedication will not rename the street, but will identify "In Memory of" or "In Honor of." Said sign shall be similar in design, but shall have a brown background with white letters to further distinguish that it is not a street name sign. Street dedications shall be limited to one-block unless otherwise approved by the city council. The size of the sign shall be no larger than the size of the street sign and shall be the same or similar construction and materials. 
(Ord. No. 914-2013, § 1(12.20.120), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 12.20.130. - Facility naming authority. 
(a)  The city council shall be the naming authority for all facilities owned by the city. Said naming shall be adopted by resolution. The resolution for the proposed facility name shall include, as applicable, the specific site, structure, field, etc., for which the proposed name pertains. 
(b)  The city council shall be the naming authority for any park facility. 
(c)  No site, structure, field, etc., shall be renamed when it has previously been named in honor of an individual or family unless it will serve the purpose of address clarification or otherwise benefit the general welfare of the city and its residents. Actual costs for the reproduction of said signs, placards, monument, etc., and staff time, labor and materials shall be borne by the applicant, group or organization sponsoring the request. 
(Ord. No. 914-2013, § 1(12.20.130), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 12.20.140. - Qualifications. 
    Qualification for any street name or renaming, dedication of a block, site, structure, field, etc., is limited to local residents who either died in the line of service (military, police or fire), who were detained as a prison of war, or who made significant contributions to the community. The qualifications will be reviewed by the agency responsible for the naming of the street or facilities as identified under sections 12.20.110, 12.20.120 and 12.20.130. Additional qualifying criteria include the following: 
(1)  City-controlled property may be renamed in honor of local residents who died in the line of service (military, police or fire) or made significant contributions to the community. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, the term "local resident" means a person who resided in the city for at least ten years, or resided in the city when taken prisoner of war or when he died in service. 
(3)  When determining whether to rename city-controlled property pursuant to section 12.20.110, 12.20.120 or 12.20.130, the party making the determination shall consider all factors he deems relevant, including whether some or all of the following accurately describe the person for whom the city-controlled property is proposed to be renamed: 
a.  The person made lasting and significant contributions to the protection of natural or cultural resources of the city; 
b.  The person made substantial contributions to the betterment of a specific facility or park consistent with the established standards for the facility; 
c.  The person made substantial contributions to the advancement of commensurate types of recreational opportunities with the city; 
d.  The person is associated with an economic development or redevelopment activity; 
e.  The person had a positive impact on the lives of the city's residents; and 
f.  The person volunteered for ten or more years of service to the community. 
(Ord. No. 914-2013, § 1(12.20.140), 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 12.20.150. - Duplication of names. 
    Upon the dedication of a street, site, facility, field, etc., or renaming of a street, the name shall not be used for any other dedication or renaming. 
(Ord. No. 914-2013, § 1(12.20.150), 9-16-2013) 
CHAPTER 12.24. - MEDIAN DEVELOPMENT FEE 

Sec. 12.24.010. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Developer means any person, firm, property owner, or entity receiving approval from the city for a new development. 
    New development means any addition, extension, conversion, or enlargement of an existing structure, or any new construction requiring a building permit. 
(Code 1969, § 12.24.010; Ord. No. 604, § 1(part), 1989) 
Sec. 12.24.020. - Reference to infrastructure element. 
    Whenever this chapter refers to the infrastructure element of the general plan or to the circulation or flood control provisions thereof, it shall mean the infrastructure element of the general plan and the circulation and flood control provisions thereof heretofore adopted by the city pursuant to chapter 3 of Title 7 of the Government Code, together with any additions or amendments thereto hereafter adopted. 
(Code 1969, § 12.24.020; Ord. No. 604, § 1(part), 1989) 
Sec. 12.24.030. - Findings. 
(a)  The city council finds and determines that the adoption of a Lenwood Specific Plan (a component of the city general plan) median development fee ordinance will raise revenues sufficient to enable the city to provide for the construction of median improvements to accommodate the needs generated by the development of land within the subject area particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the west 1/4 corner of Section 17 Township 9 North, Range 2 West S.B.B. & M., thence easterly to the east 1/4 corner of section 16 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence southerly to the south 1/4 corner of Section 16 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence easterly to the northeast corner of Section 21 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence southerly to the east 1/4 corner of Section 21 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence easterly to the center of Section 22 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence southerly along a continuous line to the south 1/4 corner of Section 27 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence westerly to the southwest corner of Section 28 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence northerly along a continuous line to the northwest corner of Section 21 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence westerly to the southwest corner of Section 17 Township 9 North, Range 2 West in the City of Barstow, County of San Bernardino, State of California. 
(b)  The city council finds, as determined in the Lenwood Specific Plan on file in the office of the city planner, that new development within the subject area will impact upon the need for median improvements. 
(c)  The city council finds and declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter contains a fair and equitable method of determining the extent to which a property would be benefited and establishes a fair and equitable method for distribution of costs for subject area median improvements. 
(d)  The city council finds and declares that the Lenwood Specific Plan median improvements are needed in order to further implement the general plan of the city and further the health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 12.24.030; Ord. No. 604, § 1(part), 1989) 
Sec. 12.24.040. - Purposes. 
(a)  In order to better provide medians to the subject area, the city must impose a fee. This fee shall be known as the Lenwood Specific Plan median development fee. 
(b)  The purpose of this chapter is to require developers of property in the subject area to pay a fee which is related directly to the incremental financial burden imposed upon the city by capital outlay for construction of median improvements described in the Lenwood Specific Plan. 
(c)  The median development fee is the most practical and equitable method of financing the construction of said median facilities. This fee is intended to recover all costs incurred by the city in providing for subject median facilities. 
(d)  This fee is imposed on development projects within the Lenwood Specific Plan for the construction of median improvements within local and collector streets that intersect Lenwood Road. The purpose of these medians is to provide traffic control (left turn pockets) and landscape entry treatments. All development projects within the subject area will benefit from these median improvements, since adequate traffic control and project identity is necessary to develop any land within the area. This will prevent piecemeal, fragmented development of the planning area, by ensuring that median control is established in advance of development on adjacent properties. It will also spread the cost equally among all the property owners who benefit from proper planning for vehicular access, rather than impose the burden on one or more adjacent property owners. This fee will not be used for repair or maintenance of existing street improvements. 
(e)  The cost of the facilities has been computed by Cotton-Beland Associates and Parsons, Brinkerhoff, Quade and Douglas, consultants to the city, and is contained within section 2.6 of the Lenwood Specific Plan. 
(Code 1969, § 12.24.040; Ord. No. 604, § 1(part), 1989) 
Sec. 12.24.050. - Requirements and applicability. 
(a)  Each developer of a new development located in the subject area shall pay to the city as a condition precedent to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for such new development, a median development fee. 
(b)  Such development fee shall be calculated on the basis of acre. Said fee shall include annual adjustments to offset inflationary conditions. The annual adjustment shall be made in conformance with the annual change in the California Construction Cost Index, as published by the state business and transportation agency. Further, such annual adjustments shall be made on July 1 of each year. 
(c)  The city engineer shall determine actual charges in accordance with the following: 
Number of acres × $175.00 × annual adjustment = fee. 
(d)  If a developer elects to provide for any portion of the median facilities described in the plan at said developer's expense, such expense shall be credited against the median development fee. Such credits shall be determined by the city. In the event the developer's expense exceeds the development fee for such development, the city may, at its option, enter into a reimbursement agreement with developer for the excess costs. 
(Code 1969, § 12.24.050; Ord. No. 604, § 1(part), 1989) 
Sec. 12.24.060. - Disposition/allocation of funds. 
    The sums derived from the collection of the median development fee shall be held in trust by the treasurer of the city and shall be distributed according to the fiscal and budgetary provisions of the city and subject to the following conditions and limitations. The proceeds from the development fee, including earnings from investments thereof, shall be used only for the payment of expenses related to the construction of median facilities and appurtenances described in the plan. Such expense shall include the payment or repayment of design, construction, and/or administrative expenses related thereto. 
(Code 1969, § 12.24.060; Ord. No. 604, § 1(part), 1989) 
CHAPTER 12.28. - TRAFFIC SIGNALIZATION DEVELOPMENT FEE 

Sec. 12.28.010. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Developer means any person, firm, property owner, or entity receiving approval from the city for a new development. 
    New development means any addition, extension, conversion, or enlargement of an existing structure, or any new construction requiring a building permit. 
(Code 1969, § 12.28.010; Ord. No. 605, § 1(part), 1989) 
Sec. 12.28.020. - Reference to infrastructure element. 
    Whenever this chapter refers to the infrastructure element of the general plan or to the circulation or flood control provisions thereof it shall mean the infrastructure element of the general plan and the circulation and flood control provisions thereof heretofore adopted by the city pursuant to chapter 3 of Title 7 of the Government Code, together with any additions or amendments thereto hereafter adopted. 
(Code 1969, § 12.28.020; Ord. No. 605, § 1(part), 1989) 
Sec. 12.28.030. - Findings. 
(a)  The city council finds and determines that the adoption of a Lenwood Specific Plan (a component of the city general plan) traffic signalization development fee ordinance will raise revenues sufficient to enable the city to provide for the construction of traffic signalization improvements to accommodate the needs generated by the development of land within the subject area particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the west 1/4 corner of Section 17 Township 9 North, Range 2 West S.B.B. & M., thence easterly to the east 1/4 corner of Section 16 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence southerly to the south 1/4 corner of Section 16 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence easterly to the northeast corner of Section 21 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence southerly to the east 1/4 corner of Section 21 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence easterly to the center of Section 22 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence southerly along a continuous line to the south 1/4 corner of Section 27 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence westerly to the southwest corner of Section 28 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence northerly along a continuous line to the northwest corner of Section 21 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence westerly to the southwest corner of Section 17 Township 9 North, Range 2 West in the City of Barstow, County of San Bernardino, state of California. 
(b)  The city council finds, as determined in the Lenwood Specific Plan on file in the office of the city planner, that new development within the subject area will impact upon the need for traffic signalization. 
(c)  The city council finds and declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter contains a fair and equitable method of determining the extent to which a property would be benefited and establishes a fair and equitable method for distribution of costs for subject area median improvements. 
(d)  The city council finds and declares that the Lenwood Specific Plan traffic signalization improvements are needed in order to further implement the general plan of the city and further the health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 12.28.030; Ord. No. 605, § 1(part), 1989) 
Sec. 12.28.040. - Purposes. 
(a)  In order to better provide traffic signals to the subject area, the city must impose a fee. This fee shall be known as the Lenwood Specific Plan traffic signalization development fee. 
(b)  The purpose of this chapter is to require developers of property in the subject area to pay a fee which is related directly to the incremental financial burden imposed upon the city by capital outlay for construction of the traffic signal improvements described in the Lenwood Specific Plan. 
(c)  The traffic signalization development fee is the most practical and equitable method of financing the construction of said signal facilities. This fee is intended to recover all costs incurred by the city in providing for subject signal facilities. 
(d)  This fee is imposed on development projects within the Lenwood Specific Plan for the construction of traffic signals and traffic control devices at signalized intersections. These signalized intersections are shown in Figure 5 of the Lenwood Specific Plan. 
(e)  Traffic volumes generated by future development projects should be shared equally among project proponents in the subject area. It is inequitable to impose the burden of traffic signals on only those projects located at intersections or on property adjacent to the intersections, since traffic is generated by all development projects within the subject area and said traffic uses the entire length of the Lenwood Road and will use many of the local and collector streets within the area. 
(f)  The cost of these facilities has been computed by Cotton-Beland Associates and Parsons Brinkerhoff, Quade and Douglas, consultants to the city, and is contained within section 2.6 of the Lenwood Specific Plan. 
(Code 1969, § 12.28.040; Ord. No. 605, § 1(part), 1989) 
Sec. 12.28.050. - Requirements and applicability. 
(a)  Each developer of a new development located in the subject area shall pay to the city as a condition precedent to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for such new development, a traffic signalization development fee. 
(b)  Such development fee shall be calculated on the basis of acre. Said fee shall include annual adjustments to offset inflationary conditions. The annual adjustment shall be made in conformance with the annual change in the California Construction Cost Index, as published by the state business and transportation agency. Further, such annual adjustments shall be made on July 1 of each year. 
(c)  The city engineer shall determine actual charges in accordance with the following: 
Number of acres × $312.50 × annual adjustment = fee. 
(d)  If a developer elects to provide for any portion of the signal facilities described in the plan at said developer's expense, such expense shall be credited against the traffic signalization development fee. Such credits shall be determined by the city. In the event the developer's expense exceeds the development fee for such development, the city may, at its option, enter into a reimbursement agreement with developer for the excess costs. 
(Code 1969, § 12.28.050; Ord. No. 605, § 1(part), 1989) 
Sec. 12.28.060. - Disposition/allocation of funds. 
    The sums derived from the collection of the traffic signalization development fee shall be held in trust by the treasurer of the city and shall be distributed according to the fiscal and budgetary provisions of the city and subject to the following conditions and limitations. The proceeds from the development fee, including earnings from investments thereof, shall be used only for the payment of expenses related to the construction of signal facilities and appurtenances described in the plan. Such expense shall include the payment or repayment of design, construction, and/or administrative expenses related thereto. 
(Code 1969, § 12.28.060; Ord. No. 605, § 1(part), 1989) 
CHAPTER 12.36. - FLOOD CONTROL CHANNEL DEVELOPMENT FEE 

Sec. 12.36.010. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Developer means any person, firm, property owner, or entity receiving approval from the city for a new development. 
    New development means any addition, extension, conversion, or enlargement of an existing structure, or any new construction requiring a building permit. 
(Code 1969, § 12.36.010; Ord. No. 606, § 1(part), 1989) 
Sec. 12.36.020. - Reference to infrastructure element. 
    Whenever this chapter refers to the infrastructure element of the general plan or to the circulation or flood control provisions thereof it shall mean the infrastructure element of the general plan and the circulation and flood control provisions thereof heretofore adopted by the city pursuant to chapter 3 of Title 7 of the Government Code, together with any additions or amendments thereto hereafter adopted. 
(Code 1969, § 12.36.020; Ord. No. 606, § 1(part), 1989) 
Sec. 12.36.030. - Findings. 
(a)  The city council finds and determines that the adoption of a Lenwood Specific Plan (a component of the city general plan) flood control channel development fee ordinance will raise revenues sufficient to enable the city to provide for the construction of flood control channel improvements to accommodate the needs generated by the development of land within the subject area particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the west 1/4 corner of Section 17 Township 9 North, Range 2 West S.B.B. & M., thence easterly to the east 1/4 corner of Section 16 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence southerly to the south 1/4 corner of Section 16 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence easterly to the northeast corner of Section 21 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence southerly to the east 1/4 corner of Section 21 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence easterly to the center of Section 22 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence southerly along a continuous line to the south 1/4 corner of Section 27 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence westerly to the southwest corner of Section 28 Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence northerly along a continuous line to the northwest corner of Section 2l Township 9 North, Range 2 West, thence westerly to the southwest corner of Section 17 Township 9 North, Range 2 West in the City of Barstow, County of San Bernardino, state of California. 
(b)  The city council finds, as determined in the Lenwood Specific Plan on file in the office of the city planner, that new development within the subject area will impact the need for flood control channel development. 
(c)  The city council finds and declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter contains a fair and equitable method of determining the extent to which a property would be benefited and establishes a fair and equitable method for distribution of costs for subject area flood control channel construction. 
(d)  The city council finds and declares that construction of the flood control channel is needed in order to further implement the general plan of the city and further the health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 12.36.030; Ord. No. 606, § 1(part), 1989) 
Sec. 12.36.040. - Purposes. 
(a)  In order to better provide effective flood control to the subject area, the city must impose a fee. This fee shall be known as the Lenwood Specific Plan flood control channel development fee. 
(b)  The purpose of this chapter is to require developers of property in the subject area to pay a fee which is related directly to the incremental financial burden imposed upon the city by capital outlay for construction of the flood control channel described in the Lenwood Specific Plan (alternative 2.a). 
(c)  The flood control channel development fee is the most practical and equitable method of financing the construction of said flood control improvements. This fee is intended to recover all costs incurred by the city in providing for the subject area flood control channel. 
(d)  This fee is imposed on development projects within the Lenwood Specific Plan for the construction of flood control facilities to serve and benefit said projects. Without the construction of these facilities, these projects cannot be built, since virtually the entire subject area is within the 100-year floodplain established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). This facility is also part of the city's adopted capital improvement program. 
(e)  The cost of this facility has been computed by Cotton-Beland Associates and Parsons, Brinkerhoff, Quade and Douglas, consultants to the city, and is contained within Section 2.6 of the Lenwood Specific Plan. 
(Code 1969, § 12.36.040) 
Sec. 12.36.050. - Requirements and applicability. 
(a)  Each developer of a new development located in the subject area shall pay to the city as a condition precedent to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for such new development, a flood control channel development fee. 
(b)  Such development fee shall be calculated on the basis of acre. Said fee shall include annual adjustments to offset inflationary conditions. The annual adjustment shall be made in conformance with the annual change in the California Construction Cost Index, as published by the state business and transportation agency. Further, such annual adjustments shall be made on July 1 of each year. 
(c)  The city engineer shall determine actual charges in accordance with the following: 
Number of acres × $1,098.00 × annual adjustment = fee. 
(Code 1969, § 12.36.050; Ord. No. 606, § 1(part), 1989) 
Sec. 12.36.060. - Disposition/allocation of funds. 
    The sums derived from the collection of the flood control channel development fee shall be held in trust by the treasurer of the city and shall be distributed according to the fiscal and budgetary provisions of the city and subject to the following conditions and limitations. The proceeds from the development fee, including earnings from investments thereof, shall be used only for the payment of expenses related to the construction of the flood control channel and appurtenances described in the plan. Such expense shall include the payment or repayment of design, construction, and/or administrative expenses related thereto. 
(Code 1969, § 12.36.060; Ord. No. 606, § 1(part), 1989) 
CHAPTER 12.40. - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 
[3]
Footnotes: 

Sec. 12.40.010. - Short title, authority and applicability. 
(a)  This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Development Impact Fee Ordinance." 
(b)  The fees established pursuant to this chapter are development fees levied pursuant to the Mitigation Fee Act (California Government Code § 66000 et seq.). 
(c)  This chapter shall apply to the extent permitted by the statutes and laws of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 937-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 12.40.020. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms as used in this chapter shall have the meaning respectively ascribed thereto: 
    Administrator means the city manager, or his or her designee, who shall administer the provisions of this chapter. 
    Applicant means the owner of real property proposed for development, or the owner's authorized agent. 
    Development means a proposal for the construction, alteration, addition, or change of use of any building or structure in or upon real property in the city that requires any entitlement from or by the city including, without limitation, a building permit, use permit, zoning or rezoning approval, subdivision or re-subdivision map approval, lot line adjustment, architectural permit, general plan amendment, specific plan approval, or any other entitlement or approval. 
    ENR means the construction cost index published in the engineering news record, or if such index is no longer published, its successor. 
    Impact fee or fees means the fee or fees imposed on a development pursuant to this chapter. 
    Impact fee schedule means the schedule of impact fee rates approved by resolution or ordinance of the city council and maintained on file in the office of the administrator. 
    Improvement means (i) the facilities, vehicles and equipment (as well as any land associated with such improvement) identified in the development impact fee study approved by the city council, and (ii) other similar facilities, vehicles and equipment that are approved by the city council that may be substituted for an identified improvement (or be a part of a class of identified improvements) because they will mitigate similar congestion. 
    Improvement subtype means (i) law enforcement facilities, (ii) circulation facilities, (iii) storm drain facilities, (iv) general government facilities, or (v) community center facilities. 
    Program means the improvements described in the development impact fee study or approved by the city council as substitutes for such improvements. 
(Ord. No. 937-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 12.40.030. - Imposition and payment of impact fee. 
(a)  The impact fee is hereby imposed as a condition of the issuance of any permit for any development, unless expressly exempted by this chapter. The rate of the impact fee shall be calculated pursuant to section 12.40.040 of this Code. 
(b)  Except as otherwise required by Government Code § 66007, or unless deferred pursuant to subsection (c) below, the impact fee shall be payable when an application is submitted for a building permit for the project. The amount of the impact fee with respect to the construction authorized by a building permit shall be calculated at the lower of the rate in effect at the time such building permit issues, or the highest rate permissible under state law. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no impact fee shall be charged with respect to any building permit issued prior to August 1, 2009 with respect to development shown on a tentative map approved by the planning commission and complete public improvement plans submitted to the city engineer prior to August 1, 2007. 
(c)  If mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the city payment of the impact fee may be deferred to the date of approval of the final building inspection of the development, provided the owner of the real property for which the fees are required enters into a recordable agreement with the city prior to issuance of the building permit for the development, which shall constitute a lien on the property from the date of recordation and shall be enforceable against successors in interest to the property owner. The agreement shall provide that approval of the final building inspection shall not be granted until the impact fee is paid. The agreement shall also provide that, in any action to collect the impact fee or any portion thereof, the city shall be entitled to all of its costs of enforcement and collection, including reasonable attorney's fees. The city manager may execute such agreements on behalf of the city in a form acceptable to the city attorney. Any deferral granted pursuant to this paragraph shall be consistent with the requirements of Government Code § 66007. Impact fees to cover the cost of public facilities improvements that the city engineer or his/her designee determines are needed prior to the opening of the proposed new building(s) shall be paid at the time an application is submitted for a building permit. 
(d)  Except to the extent a credit is granted pursuant to chapter 18.24 of this Code, a credit against the impact fee may be given for dedications of improvements constructed or provided at private expense and for the value of land dedicated to the city that is necessary or useful to an improvement. Such credit will be granted only if, prior to dedication, the city council determines that (i) the improvement is part of the program and (ii) the grant of the credit, in lieu of the fee, will not cause the city to delay the implementation of elements of the program that are of higher priority, in the judgment of the city council, than the land or improvement to be dedicated. At the time the city council makes these determinations, it must also make a determination of the maximum credit that will be allowed for the dedication, which maximum credit shall not exceed the city council's reasonable estimate of the fair market value of the improvement and/or land. The credit shall be applied when the city accepts the land or improvement. If the city council has made the determinations required by this subdivision, payment of a portion of the impact fee equal to the amount of an expected credit against the impact fee may be deferred to the date of approval of the final building inspection of the development, provided the owner of the real property for which the fee is required enters into a recordable agreement with the city prior to issuance of the building permit for the development, which shall constitute a lien on the property from the date of recordation and shall be enforceable against successors in interest to the property owner. The agreement shall provide that approval of the final building inspection shall not be granted until the impact fee is paid or the credit issued. The agreement shall also provide that, in any action to collect the impact fee or any portion thereof, the city shall be entitled to all of its costs of enforcement and collection, including reasonable attorney's fees. The city manager may execute the agreement on behalf of the city in a form acceptable to the city attorney. Any deferral granted pursuant to this paragraph shall be consistent with the requirements of Government Code § 66007. The amount of any credit granted pursuant to this paragraph shall not exceed the lesser of (i) the actual documented construction costs for the dedicated improvement plus the value of any dedicated land as supported by a professional appraisal produced by an independent consultant selected by the city and paid for by the applicant or (ii) the maximum credit approved by the city council pursuant to this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 937-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 12.40.040. - Calculation of development impact fee. 
(a)  The impact fee imposed upon a development shall be calculated by subtracting any pre-existing impact credits for that development (calculated pursuant to subsection (c) of this section) from the sum of the base amounts (calculated pursuant to subsection (b) of this section) for all uses constituting that development. If the pre-existing impact credits for a project exceed the base amounts for that development, then the fee shall be zero. 
(b)  A base amount shall be calculated for each use included in a development. The base amount shall be calculated by multiplying the planned number (after the completion of the project) of dwelling units (for a residential use), guest rooms (for a commercial lodging use) or developed square feet (for any other use) on the parcels comprising the development by the then-applicable rate for that use as set forth in the impact fee schedule. 
(c)  The existing impact credit for development shall be the sum of the base amounts that would be imposed on a project comprised of the structures that existed on the parcels comprising the development prior to the occurrence of the new development. 
(d)  The rate of the fee shall be established from time to time by resolution or ordinance of the city council in the manner required by Government Code §§ 66004 and 66018 and other applicable law. 
(e)  The council shall review the fee annually to determine if the fee shall increase incrementally consistent with Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter or delay the incremental increase based on economic conditions. If no council action is taken, the fee increase will automatically follow the incremental increase consistent with Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(f)  Beginning July 1, 2008, and on each July 1 thereafter, the rate of the fee shall increase without further action by the city according to the following formula: 
Council-Approved Rate * Most Recent ENR _____ 
ENR at Council- 
Approval  
    Where the "Council-Approved Rate" is the rate shown on the most recently adopted impact fee schedule, "Most Recent ENR" is the most recently published construction cost index when the calculation is made and "ENR at Council-Approval" is the construction cost index published for the month in which the council adopted the impact fee schedule including the "council-approved rate." The administrator shall calculate the increased fee annually and give notice of that calculation in the manner required by law for the publication of ordinance of the city council. 
    However, the rate determined pursuant to this subsection in any year shall not exceed the rate which would exist if the council-approved rate had been increased by three percent on each July 1st following the approval of the council-approved rate by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 937-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 12.40.050. - Use of funds. 
(a)  There are hereby established seven special funds, entitled "Law Enforcement Development Impact Fund," "Circulation Development Impact Fund," "Storm Drain Development Impact Fund," "General Government Facilities Development Impact Fund," "Community Center Development Impact Fund," "Aquatic Facilities Development Impact Fund," and "Parks Development Impact Fund," into which all fee proceeds and any interest thereon shall be deposited. Fee proceeds shall be apportioned amongst the funds as set forth in the impact fee schedule, as adjusted pursuant to subsection (d) of section 12.40.040. The funds shall be maintained as required by Government Code § 66006. Revenues deposited in each fund shall be used exclusively for improvements of the improvement subtype for which the fund has been reserved. 
(b)  No such revenues shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance of facilities. 
(c)  In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for construction of land or improvements for which impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service. 
(d)  At least annually, and as required by Government Code § 66006, the administrator shall review the estimated cost of the public improvements to be funded by the fee, the continued need for those improvements and the reasonable relationship between such need and the impacts of pending or anticipated new development. The administrator shall report his or her findings to the city council at a noticed public hearing and recommend any adjustment to the impact fee or such other action as he or she may deem appropriate. 
(e)  Impact fee revenues may be used to provide refunds pursuant to this chapter. 
(f)  Pursuant to § 66001 of the Government Code, in the fifth fiscal year following the first receipt of impact fees, and every five years thereafter, the administrator shall make the following findings or determinations with respect to the unexpended portion of such fees, whether committed or uncommitted: 
(1)  The purpose to which the fees are to be put; 
(2)  The relationship between the fee and the purpose for which they are imposed; 
(3)  The sources and amounts of funding corresponding to the capital improvements and traffic reduction measures described in the impact fee project list; and 
(4)  The approximate dates on which the funding referenced to in subsection (f)(3) of this section, is expected to be deposited into the impact fee account. 
(Ord. No. 937-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 12.40.060. - Refund of fees paid. 
(a)  If a building permit or other entitlement for a development expires without commencement of construction, then the applicant shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the impact fee paid as a condition for its issuance, except that the city shall retain two percent of the fee to offset a portion of the costs of collection and refund. The applicant shall apply in writing for such a refund within thirty calendar days of the expiration of the permit; provided, that the administrator may extend such period for good cause, not to exceed six months. 
(b)  The city council may additionally authorize refunds as required or permitted by Government Code § 66001(e). 
(Ord. No. 937-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 12.40.070. - Appeals. 
(a)  An applicant may either file an appeal and pay the impact fee imposed pursuant to this chapter under protest, or appeal the impact fee before the building permit or other entitlement for the development to which the fee pertains has been issued. 
(b)  An appeal may be filed from the following determinations of the administrator: 
(1)  The applicability or amount of the impact fees calculated pursuant to section 12.40.040; 
(2)  Calculation of a credit, disapproval of a credit, or disapproval of an exemption pursuant to section 12.40.030 or 12.40.080; 
(3)  Any other determination which the administrator is authorized to make under this chapter. 
(c)  An appeal shall be in writing and shall be accompanied with the appeal fee established by the council prior to the issuance of a building permit or other entitlement for the development to which the appeal pertains. The written appeal shall set forth the grounds for the appeal and contain technical information and specific supporting data to the extent applicable to the determination to be made in the appeal. 
(d)  The filing fee for appeals shall be the same as that for appeals from determinations of the zoning administrator pursuant to chapter 19.72 of this Code. 
(e)  The council shall hear the appeal within 60 days of the date of filing, at which hearing the administrator shall submit to the council: 
(1)  The written appeal and any supporting information submitted by the appellant; 
(2)  The administrator's determination and the record upon which it is based; and 
(3)  The administrator's analysis of the information and materials submitted by the applicant on the appeal of impact fees paid. 
(Ord. No. 937-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 12.40.080. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any development that is exempt from the impact fee by virtue of the constitutions of the United States or California or by virtue of other applicable state or federal law. The amount of the fee calculated pursuant to this section shall not exceed that permitted by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 937-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 12.40.090. - Violations; penalties. 
    Any person, corporation, or other business entity violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable in accordance with section 1.01.110 of this Code. Notwithstanding, the foregoing, the provisions of this chapter may also be enforced by legal or equitable action, or both such actions, all such remedies being cumulative. 
(Ord. No. 937-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 12.40.100. - Interaction with parkland dedication requirements. 
    Where a development would otherwise be subject both to the requirements of chapter 18.24 of this Code and a requirement of payment of impact fee, the development shall be exempt from the portion of the impact fee for the acquisition of land for parks improvements, but not from any other portion of the fee, and shall be subject to the requirements of chapter 18.24 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 937-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 12.40.110. - Fire impact fee. 
(a)  In addition to the fees otherwise imposed by this chapter, a fire impact fee is hereby imposed as a condition of the issuance of any permit for any development, unless expressly exempted by this chapter. 
(b)  The rate of the fire impact fee shall be calculated pursuant to section 12.40.040 of this Code. 
(c)  Except to the extent inconsistent with the provisions of this section, each provision of chapter 12.40 shall apply to the imposition and administration of the fire impact fee. 
(d)  There is hereby established a special fund, entitled "fire impact fee fund" into which all proceeds of the fire impact fee shall be deposited. Funds in the fire impact fee fund shall not be commingled with proceeds of other development impact fees imposed by the city. The city may contract for the expenditure of these funds with another public agency that provides fire suppression services within the boundaries of the city. Funds in the fire impact fee fund shall be used exclusively for the construction and acquisition of fire suppression equipment, facilities and improvements. 
(e)  The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, establish an administrative charge to be collected at the time the fire impact fee is paid to the city. The proceeds of this administrative charge shall be used solely to fund costs associated with (i) calculating the amount of the fire impact fee due from a feepayer; (ii) processing and collecting payments of the fire impact fee; and (iii) administering the fire impact fee fund. 
(Ord. No. 937-2015 , § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC UTILITIES 
CHAPTER 13.04. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior ordinance history- Ord. Nos. 276 and 374. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to construct, establish, and maintain drains and sewers, Government Code § 38900 et seq.; Community Facilities Law of 1911, Health and Safety Code § 4600 et seq. 

Sec. 13.04.010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the maximum beneficial public use of the city's wastewater collection and treatment facilities through adequate regulation and permit requirements governing wastewater discharge; and to provide guidelines for complying with requirements placed upon the city by other regulatory agencies. This chapter shall be known as the "Wastewater Ordinance" and may be cited as such. 
(Code 1969, § 13.04.010; Ord. No. 573, § 1(part), 1987) 
Sec. 13.04.020. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of his chapter, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used shall be as follows: 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Centigrade (Celsius), expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a plumbing system which receives the discharges from water-carried wastes within a building and conveys it to the building lateral, beginning five feet outside the building wall. 
    Building lateral means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Contamination means allowing the quality of the waters to become impure by contact or admixture with wastewaters to a degree which becomes a hazard to the public health through poisoning or spread of disease. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial waste means nondomestic liquid or semisolid waste from industrial, manufacturing or processing operations. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Nuisance means discharge of wastewater in violation of city regulations or orders, which is or could be harmful to or unreasonably affect the wastewater collection, treatment facilities of the city, or groundwater. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, society, company, corporation or agency, including the state and the United States of America. 
    pH is a measure of the concentration of free hydrogen ions in water or wastewater. 
    Pollutant means any type of waste material discharged in the water. 
    Pollution means alteration of the quality of the waters by pollutants to a degree which unreasonably affects such waters for beneficial use or affects facilities which serve such beneficial uses. 
    Premises means any real property, place, or parcel of land including buildings or other structures used or useful for human habitation or gathering or for carrying on a business or occupation. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the city's wastewater system or groundwater. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, or through process changes or other means. 
    Private disposal system means a facility intended to be used for the disposal of sewage on private property, including privy, septic tank, cesspool and leachlines. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded so that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer within a public right-of-way or easement. Laterals connecting building drain to a sewer main are not public sewers although they may be partially located in a public right-of-way or easement. 
    Regional board means the State of California Regional Water Quality Control Board-Lahontan Region, which has control over the entire city area. 
    Secondary treatment means the treatment process of the wastewater effluent received from the primary process and involves more mechanical, chemical, or biological treatment, such as filtration, aeration, and chlorination. 
    Septic tank means a tank in which sewage is allowed to remain until purified by the action of anaerobic bacteria. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, businesses, institutions, commercial and industrial establishments. 
    Sewer or sanitary sewer means a pipe or conduit system for carrying sewage. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial wastes in concentration, or any given constituent in quantity of flow exceeding a period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Wastewater capital improvement fund means the funding established by the city to finance the improvements and replacements of the public sewer system and wastewater reclamation or treatment plant. 
    Wastewater reclamation fund means the funding established by the city to finance the public sewer service and the operation of the wastewater reclamation or treatment plant. 
(Code 1969, §13.04.020; Ord. No. 573, § 1(part), 1987) 
CHAPTER 13.08. - CONNECTION-PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM 

Sec. 13.08.010. - Deposits prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1969, §13.08.010; Ord. No. 276, art. 1, § 1, 1968) 
Sec. 13.08.020. - Discharge into natural outlet. 
    It is unlawful for any person to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of chapter 13.12. 
(Code 1969, § 13.08.020; Ord. No. 276, art. 2, § 2, 1968) 
Sec. 13.08.030. - Privy, cesspool, septic tank construction. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1969, § 13.08.030; Ord. No. 276, art. 2, § 3, 1968) 
Sec. 13.08.040. - Building drain connection. 
    The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer, is required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect the building drain with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of chapters 13.08 through 13.28 within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(Code 1969, § 13.08.040; Ord. No. 276, art. 2, § 4, 1968) 
Sec. 13.08.050. - Private disposal system connection. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 13.08.040, the building sewer lateral shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the building and plumbing code, subject to compliance with section 13.08.070. Where the sewer lateral is for nonresidential and/or employment purposes, a waiver from the public sanitary sewer requirement shall be first approved by the city manager or his designee prior to a private sewage disposal system can be allowed. 
(Code 1969, § 13.08.050; Ord. No. 276, art. 2, § 5, 1968; Ord. No. 809, § 2(part), 2005; Ord. No. 902-2013, § 1(13.08.050), 4-15-2013) 
Sec. 13.08.060. - Private disposal system abandonment. 
    At the time a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with chapters 13.08 through 13.28, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned in accordance with the city building code. 
(Code 1969, § 13.08.060; Ord. No. 276, art. 2, § 6, 1968) 
Sec. 13.08.070. - Private disposal system criteria. 
    No building permit shall be issued for the erection or construction of any building or structure on any parcel of real property from which sewage would be discharged into a private sewage disposal system provided for under section 13.08.050 unless: 
(1)  The applicant for said permit or other responsible persons have made provisions satisfactory to the city engineer for the future connection to public sanitary sewer to serve said parcel when it becomes available; and 
(2)  Said parcel is determined by the city engineer to be adequate and suitable for a private disposal system. In making this determination, the city engineer shall utilize the regional board guidelines. For construction of a nonresidential and/or employment-related use on a parcel qualifying under this subsection, a waiver from the city manager or his designee shall first be applied for and granted before use of a private disposal system will be permitted. 
(Code 1969, § 13.08.070; Ord. No. 382, § 1, 1973; Ord. No. 573, § 2, 1987; Ord. No. 809, § 2(part), 2005; Ord. No. 901-2013, § 1(13.08.070), 4-15-2013) 
CHAPTER 13.12. - DISCHARGES-PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 13.12.100. - Findings. 
(a)  The wastewater facilities of the city discharge treated effluent to percolation ponds adjacent to the Mojave River Bed. 
(b)  Existing laws and regulations establish limits on the nature of all effluent discharged to waterways, to the surface, or underground. 
(c)  The Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB)-Lahontan Region has established limits on the concentration of selected biological and chemical constituents of the effluent discharged by the city. These limits are set forth in orders adopted by the RWQCB. 
(d)  In order to comply with the requirements contained in those orders, the city must regulate the content of wastes discharged into the Barstow Waste Water Treatment Plant (BWWTP). This chapter establishes requirements for discharges into the BWWTP in order to enable the city to comply with the provisions of the its waste discharge requirement (WDR) permit issued by the RWQCB the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and with other criteria required or authorized by state law. 
(e)  The city has undertaken and completed specific financial studies relating to the capital needs, as well as the operation and maintenance needs of the facilities and system. 
(f)  The financial requirements of the city, as shown in the current reports prepared by staff and consultants, are based on current, reliable information and data relating to population projections, wastewater flow and capital facilities needs and are expected to be realized in each year of the report. 
(g)  The revenues derived under the provisions of this chapter will be used for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance and operation of the sewage collection, wastewater treatment and disposal facilities of the city; to repay principal and interest on debt instruments; or to repay federal and state loans issued for the construction and reconstruction of said sewerage facilities, together with costs of administration and provisions for necessary reserves. 
(h)  The need for upgraded and improved treatment of all wastewater collection, treatment and disposal facilities is required to protect the public health and safety, and to preserve the environment without damage. 
(i)  The charges established and levied by this chapter are to allow the city to recover the costs necessary to provide sewer service to individual parcels of real property, and shall not be construed as overriding the authorization for any fees which were previously lawfully approved by the city council. The basis for the respective charge is the request of the owner of a parcel, for the benefit of himself or the occupants of the property, to receive a service based upon actual use, consumption and disposal of water to the BWWTP in lieu of disposal by other means. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.100), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.105. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This chapter provides for the regulation of wastewater discharges in accordance with the following objectives: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the BWWTP which will interfere with the operation of the BWWTP, including interference with its use or disposal of municipal biosolids; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the BWWTP which will pass through the treatment works, inadequately treated, to the receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with such works; 
(3)  To improve opportunities to recycle and reclaim wastewater and biosolids; 
(4)  To enable the city to comply with its WDR permit conditions, biosolids use and disposal requirements, and any other applicable federal or state laws; 
(5)  To provide for the equitable distribution of the costs associated with the operation of the BWWTP; and 
(6)  To protect and preserve the health and safety of the citizens and personnel of the city and adjacent service areas. 
(b)  This chapter shall apply to all users of the BWWTP. This chapter authorizes: 
(1)  The issuance of industrial user permits; 
(2)  Monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; 
(3)  Administrative review procedures; 
(4)  Plan check review services; 
(5)  User reporting requirements; 
(6)  The establishment of fees; and 
(7)  The equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(c)  This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's authority under Government Code § 54739. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.105), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.110. - Administration of policy. 
(a)  Adoption of interpretive rules. The industrial pretreatment coordinator may adopt interpretive rules consistent with the provisions of this chapter for the protection of the BWWTP. Interpretive rules by the industrial pretreatment coordinator pertain to, but shall not be limited to, discharge limitations, pretreatment requirements, standards for wastewater lines and services. 
(b)  General powers of the industrial pretreatment coordinator. Except as otherwise provided herein, the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. In addition to the authority to regulate discharges through enforcement of discharge limitations and prohibitions, the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall have the authority to respond to the following: 
(1)  Endangerment to the health or welfare of the community. The industrial pretreatment coordinator, after informal notice to the affected user, may immediately and effectively halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants into the BWWTP, by any means available, including physical disconnection from the BWWTP, whenever the discharge reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of the community; and 
(2)  Endangerment to the environment or the BWWTP. The industrial pretreatment coordinator, after written order to the user, may halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants into the BWWTP, by any means available, including physical disconnection from the BWWTP, whenever such discharge presents or may present an imminent and substantial endangerment to the environment or threatens to damage or interfere with the operation of the BWWTP. 
The discharges referred to in subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section may be halted or prevented without regard to the compliance of the user with other provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Specific powers of the industrial pretreatment coordinator. If wastewater containing any pollutant in excess of discharge limitations as specified in this chapter is discharged or proposed to be discharged into the BWWTP, the industrial pretreatment coordinator may take any action necessary to: 
(1)  Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater; 
(2)  Require the person discharging to demonstrate that in-plant modifications will reduce or eliminate the pollutant or substance so that the discharge will not violate this chapter; 
(3)  Require treatment, including storage facilities or flow equalization necessary to reduce or eliminate the pollutants or substance so that the discharge will not violate this chapter; 
(4)  Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay any required industrial user permit fees, inspection fees that may be authorized by the city council via resolution, and any additional cost or expense incurred by the city in handling, treating or disposing of excess pollutant loads imposed on its BWWTP, including, but not limited to, any fines, penalties or legal expenses, including attorneys fees, payable by the city associated with alleged or actual violations of the city's WDR permit attributed to the person's discharge; 
(5)  Obtain timely and factual reports from the person responsible for such discharge; and 
(6)  Take such other or further remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable or necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.110), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.115. - Delegation of authority. 
    All power and authority granted to the industrial pretreatment coordinator may be delegated by the industrial pretreatment coordinator to any person capable and qualified to carry out the delegated power and authority. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.115), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.120. - Authorization to discharge. 
    It shall be unlawful for any user to commence, significantly increase, or substantially change the quantity or quality of wastewater discharged to the BWWTP without the express written consent of the industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
(Code 1969, § 13.12.050; Ord. No. 276, art. 4, § 5, 1968; Ord. No. 374, § 3, 1972; Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.120), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.125. - Confidential information. 
    All user information and data on file with the city shall be made available to the public and governmental agencies without restriction, unless the user specifically claims the information to be confidential and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge proprietary information or trade secrets. Any such claim must be asserted when the information is submitted to the city by placing the words "Confidential Business Information" on each page containing such information. If no claim is made at the time of submission, the city may make the information available to the public without further notification to the user. All sample data obtained by either the user or the city shall not be considered confidential information. All production related information used to calculate mass based discharge limitations or required for the development of an industrial user permit shall not be considered confidential information. Confidential information may be made available, upon request, to governmental agencies for enforcement or judicial purposes related to this chapter, the WDR permit or the pretreatment program, and as required by federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.125), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.130. - Signatory requirements. 
    All monitoring reports, permit applications, and other information as required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall contain the following certification statement signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.130), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.135. - Delivery of notice. 
(a)  Any notice, order or requirement issued by the industrial pretreatment coordinator to a user determined to be in violation of the conditions or requirements specified in this chapter, the industrial user permit, or discharge limitations shall be deemed served if it is correctly addressed, postage pre-paid and deposited in the United States mail, to the address on file for the user; or hand delivered to the user or authorized representative or designated contact of the user, at the address on file for the user. 
(b)  Any notice, order or requirement issued by the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall be deemed received on the date personally delivered or on the third day after deposit in the United States mail, as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.135), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.140. - Interpretation. 
    All the provisions of this chapter are to be reasonably interpreted. The intent is to recognize there are varying degrees of hazard to the BWWTP, the BWWTP sludge, personnel, surface waters and subsurface waters, environment and the public, and to apply the principle that the degree of protection shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.140), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.145. - Definitions of terms. 
(a)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, terms within this chapter not defined in subsection (b) of this section shall have the same meaning as commonly used within the industry. 
(b)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise or as previously indicated, the meaning of the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    Approved analytical methods mean the sample analysis techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods, approved by the city, or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the city or other parties as approved by the EPA. 
    Authorized representative means: 
(1)  A responsible corporate officer, if the user is a corporation, of the level of president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  A general partner, managing member or proprietor if the user is a partnership, limited liability company or sole proprietorship respectively. 
(3)  A director, highest appointed official, or employee designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of a federal, state or local government facility. 
(4)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsections (1), (2) and (3) of this definition, provided such authorization is confirmed in writing by the individual described in subsections (1), (2) and (3) of this definition; and the authorization specifies the individual is a plant manager or holds a position of equivalent responsibility or an individual having overall responsibility for environmental matters. 
    Average daily flow means the mathematical daily average flow of industrial wastewater discharged from a user to the BWWTP over a 30-day period. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen, expressed in mg/l, required to biologically oxidize material in a waste or wastewater sample measured under standard laboratory methods of five days at 20 degrees Celsius. 
    BMC means the Barstow Municipal Code. 
    Building official means the employee for the city building department, an authorized representative, or any city officer who is subsequently empowered to assume the duties of the building official. 
    BWWTP means the Barstow Waste Water Treatment Plant and shall include the collection system and all other devices, equipment, pipes, and systems used in the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, sludge, or industrial wastewater, except sewer service lateral line connections. 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any point of a user's pretreatment facility. 
    Categorical industrial user means all industrial users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307 (b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act (33 USC section 1317 et seq.) and amendments thereto, and as listed by the EPA under the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, and amendments thereto. 
    Chapter means chapter 13.12 of the BMC. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the quantity of oxygen, expressed in mg/l, required to chemically oxidize material in a waste sample or wastewater sample, under specific conditions of an oxidizing agent, temperature, and time. COD results are not necessarily related to BOD results. 
    City attorney means the city attorney or an authorized representative, assistant, deputy, or agent appointed by the city council. 
    City engineer means the engineer for the city, an authorized representative, deputy, or agent appointed by the city council. 
    Class I user means an industrial user (IU) classified as a significant industrial user (SIU). 
    Class II user means an industrial user with an average discharge between 10,000 and 24,999 gallons per day of industrial wastewater to the BWWTP. 
    Class III user means an industrial user with an average discharge between 1,000 and 9,999 gallons per day of industrial wastewater to the BWWTP that requires pretreatment to reduce the potential for adversely affecting the operation of the BWWTP or violating any pretreatment standard, prohibition, or requirement of this chapter. 
    Class IV user means an industrial user that has a temporary need, less than 180 days, to discharge wastewater to the BWWTP. 
    Collection system means all pipes, sewers and conveyance systems carrying wastewater to the BWWTP, owned and maintained by the city, excluding sewer service lateral line connections. 
    Combined wastestream formula means the formula, as outlined in the general pretreatment regulations of the Clean Water Act, 40 CFR 403.6(e), for determining wastewater discharge limitations for industrial users whose effluent is a mixture of regulated, unregulated, and dilution wastewater as defined in the formula. 
    Compliance order means a time schedule issued to an industrial user by the city which specifies corrective actions called milestones to be completed by the IU to correct violations of the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. 
    Compliance schedule means a time schedule enforceable under this chapter containing increments of progress, i.e., milestones, in the form of dates. These milestones shall be for the commencement and/or completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment facilities or the implementation of policies, procedures or operational management techniques required for the user to comply with all applicable federal, state or local environmental regulations which may directly or indirectly affect the quality of the user's wastewater effluent. 
    Composite sample means a collection of individual samples obtained at selected time or flow based increments, which are combined into one sample. 
    Confined space, pursuant to California Code of Regulations, title 8, section 5157, subsection b, and amendments thereto, means a space that: 
(1)  Is large enough and so configured that a person can bodily enter and perform assigned work; 
(2)  Has limited or restricted means for entry or exit (for example, tanks vessels, silos, storage bins, hoppers, vaults, and pits are spaces that may have limited means of entry); and 
(3)  Is not designed for continuous occupancy by a person. 
    Consent order means a time schedule agreed upon between the city and an industrial user which specifies corrective actions called milestones to be completed by the industrial user to correct violations of the IU's wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. 
    Constituent means any physical, chemical, or biological component of water or wastewater which can be quantified using approved analytical methods. 
    Conventional pollutants mean BOD, COD, total suspended solids, pH, fecal coliform, oil and grease, total nitrogen and such additional pollutants which may be specified and controlled in the WDR permit issued by the RWQCB. 
    Cooling water means all water used solely for the purpose of cooling a manufacturing process, equipment, or product. 
    Day means calendar day, unless otherwise specified by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
    Dilution means the increase in use of water, wastewater or any other means to dilute a wastestream as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve discharge requirements. 
    Discharger means any person who directly or indirectly causes or contributes to a discharge to the BWWTP. 
    Domestic liquid wastes means all domestic wastes contained in septic tanks, cesspools, seepage pits, holding tanks, private disposal systems, or chemical toilets not connected to the BWWTP. 
    Domestic wastewater means wastewater from private residences and wastewater from other premises resulting from the use of water for personal washing, sanitary purposes or the discharge of human excrement and related matter. 
    Effluent means treated wastewater flowing from a user's pretreatment equipment to the BWWTP. 
    Emergency means facts or circumstances that the city, acting by and through its employees or the city council, reasonably determines create an imminent threat of harm to public health or safety, the environment or the BWWTP. 
    EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Federal categorical pretreatment standard means the national pretreatment standards, established by the EPA, specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged or introduced into the BWWTP by existing or new industrial users in specific industrial categories established as separate regulations under the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR chapter I, Subchapter N, and amendments thereto. 
    Flow monitoring equipment means the equipment and structures required to be installed, maintained, and calibrated at the user's expense to measure, totalize, and record the amount of water used at the facility or the quantity discharged to the BWWTP. 
    Good faith means the user's honest intention to remedy noncompliance together with actions that support the intention without the use of enforcement actions by the city. Examples of these intentions are improved best management practices (BMP) or the installation of pretreatment equipment to reduce or eliminate pollutants. 
    Grab sample means an individual sample collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes. 
    Grease waste means the floating, solid, and semi-solid waste contained within an approved oil/grease interceptor located at a restaurant user. 
    Grease wastehauler means any person engaged in the removal, transport, and disposal of grease waste removed from a permitted restaurant user. 
    Grease wastehauler manifest means the manifest required to document the removal of pretreatment waste from a permitted restaurant user. 
    Hazardous material means any material capable of creating imminent endangerment to health or the environment, including, but not limited to, any substance designated under 40 CFR section 310.11(d) and amendments thereto, or any hazardous chemical substance subject to regulation under the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 USCA section 2601 et seq., and amendments thereto. In general, substances which are toxic, explosive, corrosive, flammable or irritants, or which generate pressure through heat or decomposition, e.g., heavy metals, pesticides, strong acids or bases, distillate fuels, oxidants, etc. 
    Heating water means all water used solely for the heating of a manufacturing process, equipment, or product. 
    Industrial pretreatment coordinator means the industrial pretreatment coordinator of the city, or any authorized representative, deputy, or agent of the industrial pretreatment coordinator appointed by the city council. If there is no person that would otherwise qualify as the industrial pretreatment coordinator, the term "industrial pretreatment coordinator" means the city manager and any appointee of the city manager. 
    Industrial user (IU) means all persons, entities, public or private, industrial, commercial, governmental, educational, or institutional which discharge or cause to be discharged, industrial wastewater into the BWWTP. 
    Industrial user permit means the regulatory permitting procedure established and enforced by the industrial pretreatment coordinator to authorize and control the discharge of industrial wastewater from industrial users into the BWWTP. 
    Industrial wastewater means all water containing wastes of the community, excluding domestic wastewater, and includes all wastewater from any producing, manufacturing, processing, governmental, educational, institutional, commercial, service, agricultural or other operation. The term "industrial wastewater" may also include cooling tower and boiler blowdown water, brine wastewater from the regeneration of water conditioning equipment, and potable water treatment wastewater as determined by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
    Infectious waste means all wastes that normally cause, or significantly contribute to cause, increased morbidity or mortality of human beings. 
    Interceptor means an approved detention chamber designed to remove floatable and settleable material from industrial wastewater prior to discharge to the BWWTP. 
    Interference means any discharge from a user which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the BWWTP, treatment processes or operations, or sludge processes, use or disposal or which causes or threatens to cause a violation of any requirement of the WDR permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act, and any amendments to these Acts or regulations. 
    Liquid wastehauler means any person engaged in the removal, transport, and disposal of domestic liquid wastes from chemical toilets, septic tanks, seepage pits, cesspools, or any other private disposal system for domestic wastewater. 
    Local discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant, determined from either a grab or composite sample that may be discharged to the BWWTP, developed by the city. 
    Lower explosive limit (LEL) means the minimum concentration of combustible gas or vapor in the air that will ignite if an ignition source is present. 
    Mass emission rate means the pounds per day of a particular pollutant or combination of pollutants discharged to the BWWTP, as contained in an industrial user permit. 
    Maximum daily flow means the highest total daily flow of industrial wastewater that a user discharges to the BWWTP in a calendar month. 
    Medical waste means infectious agents, human blood, blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, recognizable body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory waste, dialysis waste, hypodermic needles, syringes, medical instruments/utensils, or any other paper or plastic items of disposable nature used for medically related purposes. The term "medical waste" shall exclude de minimis amounts of wastes, human blood and paper items of a disposable nature associated with domestic wastewater discharges. 
    mg/l means milligrams per liter. 
    Milestone means increments of progress in the form of dates, not to exceed nine months, and are used in compliance schedules. Milestones shall be for the commencement and/or completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment facilities or the implementation of policies, procedures or operational management techniques required for the user to comply with all applicable federal, state or local environmental regulations which may directly or indirectly affect the quality of the user's wastewater effluent. 
    Monthly average means the average of daily measurements over a calendar month as calculated by adding all the daily measurements taken during the calendar month and dividing that sum by the sum of the number of daily measurements taken in the calendar month. 
    National pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, which applies to industrial users, including, but not limited to, federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Noncompliance monitoring program (NMP) means an administrative order issued to an industrial user which requires the user to submit production and flow data and complete monitoring, at a frequency determined by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, for all pollutants determined to be in violation of discharge limits. 
    Noncontact cooling or heating water means any water which is used for temperature control and has no direct contact with any raw material, or intermediate or final product. 
    Nondomestic wastewater means all wastewater except domestic wastewater, domestic liquid waste, and unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, wastewater resulting from industrial, commercial, producing, manufacturing, processing, governmental, educational, institutional, and agricultural operations, brine wastewater from the regeneration of water conditioning equipment, and all non exempt truck hauled liquid wastewater. 
    Oil and grease means any of the following, in part or in combination: 
(1)  Petroleum derived products, e.g., oils, fuels, lubricants, solvents, cutting oils. 
(2)  Vegetable derived products, e.g., oils, shortenings, water soluble cutting oils. 
(3)  Animal derived products, e.g., fats, greases, oils, lard. 
    Pass through means any discharge which exits the BWWTP in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with other discharges from other sources, causes or threatens to cause a violation of any requirement of the WDR permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Permit-required confined space means a confined space that has one or more of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Contains or has the potential to contain a hazardous atmosphere; 
(2)  Contains a material that has the potential for engulfing an entrant; 
(3)  Has an internal configuration such that an entrant could be trapped or asphyxiated by inwardly converging walls or by a floor which slopes downward and tapers to a smaller cross-section; or 
(4)  Contains any other recognized serious safety or health hazard. 
    Permittee means any user which is issued a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
    Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, general or limited partnership, limited liability company, trust, corporation, governmental agency or group, and includes the plural as well as the singular. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions, as analyzed in accordance with Approved Analytical Methods. pH represents both acidity and alkalinity on a scale ranging from 0-14, where 7 represents neutrality, values less than 7 represent acidity and values greater than 7 represent alkalinity. 
    Pollutant means any constituent or characteristic of wastewater, including, but not limited to, conventional pollutants, domestic wastewater, hazardous substances, infectious waste, slug discharges, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, medical waste, heat, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced adverse alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to discharge of the wastewater into the BWWTP. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes, waste minimization, or other legal means designed to remove or reduce pollutants in a wastestream, except dilution. 
    Pretreatment requirement means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits or prohibitions promulgated by EPA, the state or the city, applicable to industrial users, including, but not limited to, federal categorical pretreatment standards; general discharge prohibitions contained in BMC section 13.12.305; and local discharge limits established by the city. 
    Pretreatment waste means all waste, liquid, solid, or semi-solid removed from a waste stream or discharge by physical, chemical, or biological means. 
    Prohibited discharges means all discharges specified in article III of this chapter which are prohibited from being discharged to the BWWTP. 
    Qualified professional means any person who by virtue of experience, education, or training, is qualified to evaluate and assess pollutant discharges and violations of this chapter. 
    RCRA means the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 USC section 6901 et seq., and the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
    Restaurant user means all retail establishments selling prepared foods and drinks for consumption on or off the premises; and lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption. Retail establishments, lunch counters, and drinking places selling prepared food and drink as a subordinate service incidental to their primary operations and institutional facilities (e.g., schools, churches, jails, prisons, and juvenile halls), which serve food on the premises may also be considered restaurant users. 
    Sample location means a location approved by the industrial pretreatment coordinator where a representative sample of nondomestic wastewater is collected from an industrial user. 
    Self-monitoring means wastewater samples collected by a user or the user's contracted laboratory, consultant, engineer, or similar entity. 
    Service area means the physical geographic area where wastewater is generated and discharged to the BWWTP. 
    Service lateral line means the wastewater collection pipe extending from the premises where the wastewater is generated up to and including the connection to the city's collection system. 
    Significant industrial user (SIU) means any user that meets any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Discharges industrial wastewater at an average rate of at least 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) to the BWWTP (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
(2)  Contributes a process wastestream discharge which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the BWWTP; or 
(3)  Is designated by the industrial pretreatment coordinator on the basis that the user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the BWWTP or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
    Significant noncompliance (SNC) means any compliance violation that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, which are defined as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant taken during a consecutive six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, which are defined as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant taken during a consecutive six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the city determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of BWWTP personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health or welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an administrative order, for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days of the due date, any required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to pay, within 30 days, all applicable industrial user application, permit, and enforcement penalty fees; 
(8)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(9)  Any other violations or group of violations which the city believes will adversely affect the operation and implementation of the city's pretreatment program. 
    Single pass noncontact cooling water means water that is used solely for the purpose of cooling, has no direct contact with any raw material, or any intermediate, final or waste product, and is used only once before being discharged. 
    Single pass noncontact heating water means water that is used solely for the purpose of heating, has no direct contact with any raw material, or any intermediate, final or waste product, and is used only once before being discharged. 
    Slug discharge means any nonroutine, episodic discharge of wastewater, material or waste with such a high volume or pollutant concentration which will violate any pretreatment standard or requirement, or cause damage to, interference with, or pass through in the BWWTP, or BWWTP sludge processes, use, or disposal. 
    Slug load control plan means a plan submitted by an industrial user as required by BMC section 13.12.475(2), which contains the elements described in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vi). 
    Spent solutions means any concentrated nondomestic wastewater, such as plating solutions or static rinses, brine wastewater from the regeneration of water conditioning equipment, which contains concentrations of pollutants, the discharge of which may cause interference, pass through, or a violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
    Spill containment means a protection system consisting of berms, dikes, or containers, which are used to prevent the discharge of raw materials, waste materials, chemicals, or finished products to the storm drain or BWWTP. 
    Standard methods mean the most recently updated Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater prepared and published by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, and Water Environment Federation, which specifies accepted procedures used to assess the quality of water and wastewater. 
    Storm drain means a system of open channels, lined and unlined channels, surface channels, impound basins, groundwater recharge basins, stormwater holding ponds, underground pipes, curb and gutter, cross gutters, stormwater pump and lift stations, parking lots, paved areas, streets, and natural water courses used to collect and direct storm precipitation and surface runoff to a receiving body of water or underground aquifer recharge basins. 
    Stormwater means water flowing or discharged as a result of rain, snow, or other precipitation. 
    Total dissolved solids (TDS) mean the total amount of nonvolatile residue by laboratory filtration and dried at 180 degrees Celsius. 
    Total suspended solids (TSS) mean the total amount of residue retained by laboratory filtration and dried at 103 to 105 degrees Celsius. 
    Total toxic organics (TTO) mean the sum of all quantifiable values of the regulated toxic organic compounds which are found in the user's industrial wastewater discharge. 
    Toxic organic management plan (TOMP) means a plan submitted by an industrial user pursuant to BMC section 13.12.475(1), which specifies the solvents and other toxic organics used and stored, the methods of delivery, storage and disposal, and the procedures for preventing or controlling the discharge of the solvents and toxic organics to the BWWTP or ground. 
    Unpolluted water means cooling and heating water, single pass cooling and heating water, air conditioning condensate, ice melt, condensate, groundwater, landscape irrigation, crop irrigation, rain water, and water that meets the effluent standards in effect or water that would not cause a violation of receiving water quality standards. 
    Upset means an exceptional incident which causes temporary and unintentional noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of a user. 
    User means any person, public or private, residential, industrial, commercial, governmental, educational, or institutional which discharges or causes to be discharged wastewater into the BWWTP. 
    Waste means any discarded solid, semi-solid, liquid, or gaseous material. 
    Waste discharge requirements (WDR) permit means the permit issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to section 13263 of the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Act establishing waste discharge requirements for the BWWTP. 
    Waste manifest means the waste hauling receipt which is required to be retained on site by an industrial user for any hazardous, non-hazardous, or pretreatment waste. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water carried domestic waste or nondomestic waste from residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, educational, or institutional facilities, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present which is discharged to the BWWTP. 
    Water supply means the water supply serving the city. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.145), 6-18-2012) 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 13.12.200. - Use of city equipment or facilities. 
(a)  No person or user shall enter, break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any temporary or permanent structure, equipment, or appurtenance which is part of the BWWTP without prior written approval by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
(b)  Any person or user who discharges or causes the discharge of any wastewater or pollutant which causes detrimental effects on the BWWTP, sludge, or any other damages, including the imposition of fines by federal, state, or other regulatory agencies against the city, shall be liable to the city for all damages and costs incurred by the city, including administrative expenses, attorneys' fees, penalties and fines imposed on the city by any federal, state, or other regulatory agencies. The city shall calculate its administrative expenses as 90 percent of the cost of repairs and personnel time expended by the city to remedy such damages and costs. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.200), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.205. - Plan check requirements. 
(a)  All industrial users who request authorization to connect to the BWWTP and all existing industrial users who propose tenant improvements shall be required to submit detailed site plans, including plumbing plans which describe the proposed project, facility expansion, or process modifications, in addition to any other information as required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. The industrial pretreatment coordinator shall review the required information and notify the user of any pretreatment requirements. Compliance with the requirements specified by the industrial pretreatment coordinator is required before the city will release the project to the building department. The project must be released by the industrial pretreatment coordinator before the building department will issue a building permit authorizing construction for the project. A stop work order may be issued for any construction projects which have not been issued the required building permit. 
(b)  All industrial users are required to notify the city during the construction phase of the project in order to conduct on-site inspections of the project. The industrial pretreatment coordinator is required to sign off on the building department job card for underground plumbing and final plumbing of any required pretreatment equipment. All plumbing and pretreatment equipment is required to be exposed during the underground and final plumbing inspections. The industrial user may be required to expose any plumbing or pretreatment equipment which is not visible during the underground and final plumbing inspections. Failure to notify the city and obtain the necessary on-site inspections and job card signatures may delay the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the building department. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.205), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.210. - Inspection requirements. 
(a)  The industrial pretreatment coordinator shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether all requirements of this chapter are being met. Persons on the premises shall allow the industrial pretreatment coordinator ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and records examination. 
(b)  The user shall ensure that there is always a person on site, during normal business hours, knowledgeable of the user's processes and activities to accompany the industrial pretreatment coordinator during the inspection. 
(c)  The user shall provide immediate access when an emergency exists. 
(d)  All pretreatment equipment shall be immediately accessible at all times for the purpose of inspection. At no time shall any material, debris, obstacles or obstructions be placed in such a manner that will prevent immediate access to the pretreatment equipment. 
(e)  No user shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to the industrial pretreatment coordinator when attempting to inspect any facility which discharges wastewater to the BWWTP. 
(f)  Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises, the user shall make all necessary arrangements so that, upon presentation of identification, the industrial pretreatment coordinator will be permitted to enter, without delay. 
(g)  The user shall make available for copying by the industrial pretreatment coordinator all records required to be kept under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.210), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.215. - Inspection warrants. 
    If the industrial pretreatment coordinator has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part, and is able to demonstrate cause that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect or monitor the user's facilities to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the public health, environment, and the safety and welfare of the community, then the industrial pretreatment coordinator may seek issuance of an inspection warrant duly issued pursuant to the procedure set forth in title 13 (commencing with section 1822.50) of part 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure and amendments thereto. However, in the event of an emergency affecting the public health or safety, an inspection or monitoring may be performed without consent or the issuance of a warrant. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.215), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.220. - Monitoring requirements. 
(a)  As required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, any user discharging industrial wastewater to the BWWTP may be required to install monitoring equipment to measure the quality and quantity of wastewater discharged. The monitoring equipment may include, but is not limited to: wastewater sampling equipment, flow meters and recorders, pH meters and recorders, electrical conductivity meters and recorders, and process water meters. 
(b)  The monitoring equipment shall be provided by the user in compliance with this chapter and all applicable building, plumbing, and construction codes. The industrial pretreatment coordinator may require the monitoring equipment have a security closure that can be locked by the city during any monitoring activities. The installation of any required monitoring equipment shall be completed within a reasonable time frame as required in written notification from the industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
(c)  The industrial pretreatment coordinator shall have the right to temporarily install upon the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct wastewater monitoring or metering operations. 
(d)  No user shall interfere with, delay, resist, or refuse entrance to authorized city personnel attempting to install wastewater monitoring equipment on the user's property. Any permanent or temporary obstruction which prevents access to the monitoring equipment shall be immediately removed by the user or property owner at the written or verbal request of the industrial pretreatment coordinator and shall not be replaced. 
(e)  Any required monitoring equipment shall be maintained by the user for continuous monitoring and metering. The monitoring equipment shall be calibrated by the user as often as necessary to ensure accurate measurements according to manufacturer's specifications. All maintenance and calibration work shall be performed at the user's expense. 
(f)  The user shall report any monitoring equipment failure to the industrial pretreatment coordinator within 24 hours after the user is aware of the failure. The notification shall be accomplished by a telephone call, telefax transmission, personal visit, or hand delivered notification to the city. The user shall submit a written report to the industrial pretreatment coordinator documenting the cause of the failure and the corrective actions to be completed within five calendar days after the user discovers the equipment failure. 
(g)  All monitoring shall be completed at the time, place, and frequency as specified by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
(h)  Samples for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil/grease, sulfide, and volatile organics shall be analyzed from grab samples. The industrial pretreatment coordinator may elect to collect either a 24-hour composite sample comprised of discrete time or flow proportioned samples or a grab sample, as appropriate, for all other pollutants. 
(i)  Any wastewater samples collected from a sampling location approved by the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall be considered representative of the wastewater discharged from the user to the BWWTP. 
(j)  All users who request permission to conduct their own wastewater sampling shall submit a written wastewater monitoring plan describing the sample collection methods, equipment used, equipment cleaning practices, employee training, sample preservation methods, and chain of custody procedures. The monitoring plan shall be approved by the industrial pretreatment coordinator prior to the implementation of the plan. Any samples collected by a user without an approved plan shall be considered invalid. 
(k)  All users that are required to self-monitor shall have all samples collected according to 40 CFR 403.12(b)(5) specifications and analyzed by a laboratory certified by the state, department of health services to complete the specific pollutant analyses. 
(l)  All users that are required to self-monitor shall submit all reporting forms, required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, that include the following information and documents: 
(1)  The date, exact place, time, and methods of sampling or measurements, and sample preservation techniques or procedures; 
(2)  The name of the person who performed the sampling or measurements; 
(3)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(4)  Beginning and ending flow meter readings which correspond to the time period of the 24-hour composite sample; 
(5)  The name of the person who performed the analyses; 
(6)  The analytical techniques or methods used; 
(7)  The results of such analyses; and 
(8)  The reporting limits for each pollutant 
(m)  All users that are required to self-monitor shall submit a copy of the sample analysis and all required reporting forms within the timeframe established by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. All sample analysis reports which include discharge violations shall be reported to the industrial pretreatment coordinator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The results of the required resample and correspondence which includes a possible explanation for the violations shall be submitted to the industrial pretreatment coordinator within 30 days after the user is aware of the initial violation. Failure to report pollutant violations as stated shall constitute a violation of this chapter and may subject the user to enforcement actions. 
(Code 1969, § 13.12.080 and 13.12.090; Ord. No. 276, art. 4, §§ 8 and 9, 1968; Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.220), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.225. - Noncompliance monitoring requirements. 
(a)  Noncompliance with any concentration or mass based discharge limit specified in this chapter or the user's permit may be determined by an analysis of a grab or composite sample collected from a designated sample location and shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  As required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, a wastewater resample shall be collected and analyzed for all pollutants in noncompliance with discharge limits. The resample is separate and independent of any wastewater monitoring performed by the city. All resamples shall be collected according to 40 CFR 403.12(b)(5) specifications and analyzed by a laboratory certified by the state department of health services to complete the specific pollutant analyses. The analysis of all wastewater resamples collected by a user shall be submitted with all required reporting forms to the industrial pretreatment coordinator no later than 30 days after the city has informed the user of the initial violation or the user becomes aware of the violation. Failure to submit the laboratory results within the 30-day requirement shall constitute a violation of this chapter and may subject the user to enforcement actions. 
(c)  As required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, a noncompliance monitoring program (NMP) shall be completed by a user for any wastewater resamples which are determined to be in noncompliance with discharge limits. The NMP requires the user to collect a representative wastewater sample from the designated sample location at a frequency determined by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. The samples are to be analyzed for all pollutants which were determined to be in violation of discharge limits. Continued noncompliance may result in escalated enforcement action and additional monitoring requirements as specified by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.225), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.230. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  All industrial users shall submit self-monitoring reports, as required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, which identify the characteristics of the industrial wastewater discharged to the BWWTP. The self-monitoring reports shall be used to determine compliance with the conditions and discharge requirements specified in this chapter, the industrial user permit, and federal and state regulations. Reports which may be required include: 
(1)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(2)  Compliance schedule progress reports. 
(3)  90-day compliance reports. 
(4)  Periodic reports on continued compliance. 
(5)  Other reports as required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
(b)  The monitoring frequency and pollutants required to be analyzed shall be specified by the industrial pretreatment coordinator in the industrial user permit issued to the user. All costs associated with the collection and analysis of the required monitoring and the submittal of all required reports shall be the responsibility of the industrial user. 
(c)  Failure to complete any required monitoring or failure to submit any required reports shall be a violation of this chapter and may subject the user to enforcement actions. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.230), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.235. - Flow measurement conditions. 
(a)  Any Class I user, an industrial user who is designated as an industrial rate facility for sewer billing purposes, or any other industrial user as required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, shall install a continuous monitoring flow or water meter approved by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, which is capable of measuring the volume of industrial wastewater discharged from the industrial user to the BWWTP. The readings collected from the flow or water meter shall be used to calculate the average daily flow and maximum daily flow. 
(b)  The user shall record daily flow water meter readings, as specified by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, on an approved log sheet. As required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, monthly flow or water meter records shall be submitted to the city by the fifth calendar day of each month for the preceding month. The flow or water meter shall conform to standards issued by the industrial pretreatment coordinator and shall be equipped with a non-resetting flow totalizer. All flow and water meters shall be calibrated at least annually to ensure the accuracy of the actual flow. All industrial users shall post the type, size, totalizer units, and flow multipliers for any flow or water meters used to measure the volume of wastewater discharged from the user. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.235), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.240. - Record keeping. 
    All industrial users shall keep records of all waste hauling, pretreatment equipment maintenance reports, monitoring equipment recording charts and calibration reports, effluent flow, sample analysis data, and any other information required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, on the site of the wastewater generation. All records are subject to inspection by the industrial pretreatment coordinator and shall be copied as needed. All records must be kept on the site of wastewater generation for a minimum period of three years. The record retention period may be extended beyond three years in the event enforcement proceedings have been initiated against the user or an extensive history of the industrial user is required. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.240), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.245. - Written responses. 
    All users required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator to provide a written response to any correspondence, order, or notice shall do so by the date specified. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.245), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.250. - Compliance extension. 
    Any time limit or due date required in any report, written notice or any provision of this chapter may be extended only upon a showing of good cause by the user and a written extension by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.250), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.255. - Falsifying information. 
    Any user who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, or certification in any record, correspondence, or other document submitted or required to be maintained by the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall be in violation of this chapter and may subject the user to enforcement actions. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.255), 6-18-2012) 
ARTICLE III. - DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 13.12.300. - Point of discharge. 
    No person or user shall discharge any wastewater directly into a manhole or other opening in the collection system other than through an approved building sewer connection, unless written permission for the discharge has been granted by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. This prohibition shall not apply to authorized city or contract city personnel involved with the maintenance, cleaning, repair, or inspection of the collection system. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.300), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.305. - Prohibited waste discharges. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no person or user shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the BWWTP, or any opening, sump, tank, clarifier, piping or waste treatment system which drains or flows into the BWWTP, any of the following: 
(1)  Any earth, sand, rocks, ashes, cinders, spent lime, stone, stone cutting dust, gravel, plaster, concrete, glass, metal filings, or metal or plastic objects, garbage, grease, viscera, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides, or fleshings, whole blood, feathers, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing fuel or lubrication oil and similar substances, or solid, semi-solid or viscous material in quantities or volume which will obstruct the flow of sewage in the collection system or any object which will cause clogging of a sewer or sewage lift pump, or interfere with the normal operation of the BWWTP. 
(2)  Any compound which will produce noxious odors in the BWWTP. 
(3)  Any recognizable portions of human or animal anatomy. 
(4)  Any solids, liquids, gases, devices, or explosives which by their very nature or quantity are or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances or sewage to cause fire or explosion hazards, to exceed ten percent of the LEL at the point of discharge or in the collection system, or in any other way create imminent danger to the city or city personnel, the BWWTP, the environment or public health. 
(5)  Any wastewater or material with a closed cup flash point of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21 and amendments thereto. 
(6)  Any overflow from a septic tank, facility wastewater holding tank, cesspool or seepage pit, or any liquid or sludge pumped from a septic tank, facility wastewater holding tank, cesspool or seepage pit. 
(7)  Any discharge from any wastewater holding tank of a recreational vehicle, trailer, bus and other vehicle, except as may be permitted by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
(8)  Any stormwater, groundwater, well water, street drainage, subsurface drainage, roof drainage, yard drainage or runoff from any field, driveway or street. The industrial pretreatment coordinator may temporarily approve the discharge of such waters, to the BWWTP, when no reasonable alternative method of discharge is available, subject to the payment of all applicable user charges and fees by the discharger. Water from swimming pools, wading pools, spas, whirlpools, and therapeutic pools may be discharged to the BWWTP between the hours of 8:00 pm and 6:00 am, unless specifically prohibited by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
(9)  Any substance or heat in amounts that will inhibit biological activity in the BWWTP resulting in interference or which will cause the temperature of the sewage in the BWWTP to be higher than 140 degrees Fahrenheit. In no case shall any substance or heat be discharged to the sewer that will raise the BWWTP influent higher than 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius). 
(10)  Any radioactive waste in excess of federal, state or county regulations. 
(11)  Any pollutants, material or quantity of material which causes or contributes to: 
a.  Damage to any part of the BWWTP; 
b.  A need for nonroutine maintenance or increased maintenance of the BWWTP; 
c.  An increase in the operational costs of the BWWTP; 
d.  A nuisance or menace to public health; 
e.  Interference or pass through in the BWWTP, its treatment processes, operations, sludge processes, use or disposal. This applies to each user introducing pollutants into the BWWTP whether or not the user is subject to other national pretreatment standards or any federal, state, or local pretreatment requirements; or 
f.  A violation of the city's WDR permit. 
(12)  Any quantities of herbicides, algaecides, or pesticides. 
(13)  Any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in excess of local discharge limits or national pretreatment standards. 
(14)  Any material or quantity of materials which will cause abnormal sulfide generation. 
(15)  Any wastewater having a corrosive property capable of causing damage to the BWWTP, equipment, or structures, or harm to the city or city personnel. However, in no case shall wastewater be discharged to the BWWTP with a pH below 5.0, or greater than 11.0, or which will change the influent pH of the BWWTP to below 6.5 or above 8.0. 
(16)  Any substance that will cause discoloration of the BWWTP effluent. 
(17)  Any unpolluted water, including cooling water, heating water, stormwater, subsurface water, single pass cooling water, and single pass heating water, except as permitted by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. The industrial pretreatment coordinator may approve, on a temporary basis, the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of discharge is available and the user pays all applicable user charges and fees. 
(18)  Any substance which may cause the BWWTP effluent or any other product such as residues, sludge, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation or reuse or which will interfere with any of the reclamation processes. This includes any material which will cause the sludge at the BWWTP to violate applicable sludge use or disposal regulations developed under the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 USCA, section 1251 et seq., or any regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USCA, section 6901 et seq.; Clean Air Act, 42 USCA, section 7401 et seq.; Toxic Substance Control Act, 15 USCA, section 2601 et seq., or any other applicable federal, state, or local regulations, and any amendments thereto. 
(19)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, COD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that will cause interference with the BWWTP. 
(20)  Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the BWWTP in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(21)  Any hazardous substance which violates the objectives of the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR 403), this chapter, or any statute, rule, regulation or chapter of any public agency having jurisdiction over said discharge, and any amendments thereto. 
(22)  Any discharge from any groundwater remediation projects, except as may be permitted by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
(23)  Any slug loads from raw material, spent solutions, or sludges generated from processing tanks or vessels, unless no reasonable alternative is available to prevent severe loss of life or to protect the environment. These shall include, but are not limited to, wash tanks, chemical conversion tanks, acid and alkali tanks, lubricating tanks, condensate from dry cleaning processes, fruit and vegetable wash tanks, brine wastewater from soft water regeneration processes above permitted limits, and any other tank or vessel containing a material which would exceed permitted discharge limits. 
(24)  Any radiator fluid or coolant, cutting oil, water soluble cutting oil, or water-based solvent. 
(25)  Any photo processing waste from developing or fixing solutions or rinse waters that violate the discharge limits specified in this chapter. 
(26)  Any toxic organics in amounts which are determined to be toxic to the maintenance or operation of the BWWTP. The city may require the submittal of a toxic organic management plan (TOMP) from any user determined to discharge toxic organics above detection limits. 
(27)  Any domestic liquid wastes. Such wastes shall only be disposed of at a legal disposal site. 
(Code 1969, § 13.12.010 and 13.12.040; Ord. No. 276, art. 4, §§ 1, 4, 1968; ; Ord. No. 573, § 3, 1987; Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.305), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.310. - Interceptor prohibitions. 
    The use of any biological or chemical products or other materials designed to metabolize, emulsify, suspend, or dissolve oil and grease within any sand/oil or oil/grease interceptor is prohibited. 
(Code 1969, § 13.12.030; Ord. No. 276, art. 4, § 3, 1968; Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.310), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.315. - Prohibited discharge of pretreatment waste. 
    No person shall discharge any waste removed from any pretreatment equipment, systems, or devices into any sewer or storm drain opening or any drains or other openings leading to any sewer or storm drain or to the ground without authorization and permits from the regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the discharge of such waste. All waste removed from pretreatment equipment shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable federal, state, county, and local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.315), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.320. - Medical waste disposal. 
(a)  No user shall discharge medical waste to the BWWTP without first complying with all requirements of the California Medical Waste Management Act (California Health and Safety Code §§ 117600 through 118360) and obtaining written permission from the industrial pretreatment coordinator. The request shall be submitted to the industrial pretreatment coordinator and shall include: 
(1)  The source and volume of the medical waste; 
(2)  The procedures and equipment used for disinfection of the medical waste; and 
(3)  Employee training procedures for the legal disposal of the medical waste. 
(b)  If the industrial pretreatment coordinator believes that the waste would not be adequately disinfected, the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall issue a written denial to the user and state the reasons for the denial. This denial shall be issued within 30 days from receipt of the written request. 
(c)  If the industrial pretreatment coordinator believes that adequate disinfection of the waste can be achieved prior to discharge of the waste to the collection system, then conditional approval may be granted for the disposal of the waste. A letter of approval shall be sent to the user within 30 days of receipt of the written request. 
(d)  If the user is granted permission for disposal of the medical waste, the user: 
(1)  Shall adequately disinfect the medical waste prior to discharge to the BWWTP as outlined in the approval letter; 
(2)  Shall not dispose of solid medical waste to the BWWTP, including hypodermic needles, syringes, instruments, utensils or other paper and plastic items of a disposable nature, or recognizable portions of human or animal anatomy; and 
(3)  Shall be subject to periodic inspections to verify that all disinfection methods, procedures, and practices are being performed. 
(e)  As authorized by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, wastewater generated from medically required life saving operations, including, but not limited to, dialysis facilities, may be approved for disposal to the BWWTP. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.320), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.325. - Dilution prohibited as a substitute for treatment. 
    No industrial user shall increase the use of water, or in any other manner attempt to dilute a wastewater discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with this chapter and the user's permit, or to establish an artificially high flow rate for permitted mass emission rates or permitted flow amounts. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.325), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.330. - Water softening prohibitions. 
(a)  No industrial user shall install, replace, enlarge, or use any apparatus for softening all or any part of the water supply to any premises when such apparatus is an ion-exchange softener or demineralizer of the type that is regenerated at the site of use with the regeneration wastes being discharged to the ground, storm drain or the BWWTP, unless the apparatus is in compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  The brine solutions generated during the backwash cycles of the water softener shall be segregated from the fresh water rinses for disposal to a legal brine disposal site; 
(2)  The backwash equipment shall be equipped with an electrical conductivity controlled discharge valve that controls the wastewater discharged to the BWWTP. The electrical conductivity valve shall be calibrated at a minimum annually or as often as necessary to control and prevent any wastewater from being discharged to the BWWTP that exceeds the maximum electrical conductivity, total dissolved solids, or associated sodium and chloride concentrations established in the local discharge limitations specified in this chapter; and 
(3)  The industrial user shall maintain the electrical conductivity controlled discharge valve in proper operating condition at all times. The industrial user shall notify the industrial pretreatment coordinator within 24 hours in the event of a valve failure and immediately cease the discharge of all wastewater to the BWWTP associated with the soft water regenerating processes. A written report documenting the cause of the failure and the corrective actions taken shall be submitted to the industrial pretreatment coordinator within five calendar days after discovery of the electrical conductivity valve failure. 
(b)  Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code §§ 116775-116795 and amendments thereto, no residential water softening or conditioning appliance shall be installed except in either of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The regeneration of the appliance is performed at a nonresidential facility separate from the location of the residence where such appliance is used; or 
(2)  The regeneration of the appliance discharges to the waste disposal system of the residence where such appliance is used and the following conditions are met: 
a.  The appliance activates regeneration by demand control. 
b.  An appliance installed on or after January 1, 2000, shall be certified by a third party rating organization using industry standards to have a salt efficiency rating of no less than 3,350 grains of hardness removed per pound of salt used in generation. An appliance installed on or after January 1, 2002, shall be certified by a third party rating organization using industry standards to have a salt efficiency rating of no less than 4,000 grains of hardness removed per pound of salt used in generation. 
c.  The installation of the appliance is accompanied by the simultaneous installation of the following softened or conditioned water conservation devices on all fixtures using softened or conditioned water, unless such devices are already in place or are prohibited by local and state plumbing and building standards or unless such devices will adversely restrict the normal operation of such fixtures: 
1.  Faucet flow restrictors. 
2.  Shower head restrictors. 
3.  Toilet reservoir dams. 
4.  A piping system installed so that untreated (unsoftened or unconditioned) supply water is carried to hose bibs and sill cocks which serve water to the outside of the house, except that bypass valves may be installed on homes with slab foundations constructed prior to the date of installation; or condominiums constructed prior to the date of installation; or otherwise where a piping system is physically inhibited. 
(c)  The certification required under subsection (b) of this section shall be provided by the new user of the appliance and shall be completed by a contractor having a valid Class C-55 water conditioning contractor's license or Class C-36 plumbing contractor's license and filed with the city building division. The certification form shall contain all of the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of homeowner; 
(2)  Manufacturer of the water softening or conditioning appliance, model number of the appliance, pounds of salt used per regeneration, and salt efficiency rating at the time of certification; 
(3)  Manufacturer of the water-saving devices installed, model number, and number installed; and 
(4)  Name, address, and the specialty contractor's license number of the C-55 and C-36 licensee making the certification. 
(d)  Any person installing or operating a water conditioning apparatus of any kind shall make such apparatus accessible to the industrial pretreatment coordinator for inspection at reasonable times. 
(Code 1969, § 13.14.010, 13.14.030; Ord. No. 329, § 1(part), 1971; Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.330), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.335. - Limitation on wastewater strength. 
    No user shall discharge industrial wastewater to the BWWTP unless the wastewater conforms to the limitations and requirements of this chapter. Discharge limitations shall be revised and adopted by the city council to ensure compliance of the BWWTP effluent and biosolids reuse in compliance with the city's WDR permit. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.335), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.340. - Local discharge limitations. 
    As required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, all users shall comply with the local discharge limits as set forth in this section. 
INDUSTRIAL USER LOCAL DISCHARGE LIMITATION TABLE 
(The "Daily Maximum Constituent Discharge Limit") 
Constituent Daily Maximum Constituent Discharge Limit in Milligrams/Liter Arsenic 0.249 Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD 5 ) 500.0 Boron 1.0 Cadmium 0.2 Chemical oxygen demand (COD) 750.0 Chloride 1 WS + 200 Copper 2.0 Cyanide 1.0 Fats, oils and grease (non-polar) 40 Fluoride 3.8 Chromium (Total) 0.05 Lead 1.8 Methylene blue active substances (MBAS) 40 Mercury 0.05 Molybdenum 0.1 Nickel 2.2 Nitrate as NO 3 WS + 10 Nitrogen, ammonia 50.0 PCB 0.0 Pesticides 0.0 pH 5.5-9.5 Phenol 0.05 Selenium 0.023 Silver 2.5 Sodium 1 WS + 110 Sulfate 1 WS + 140 Temperature 140°F at discharge point Total dissolved solids (TDS) 1 WS + 650.0 Total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH) 0.50 Total suspended solids (TSS) 300.0 Total toxic organics (TTO) 0.50 Zinc 1.8  
       1 WS = Water service plus assigned limit (per constituent equals local discharge limit). 
(Code 1969, § 13.12.120; Ord. No. 552, § 1, 1986; Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.340), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.345. - Water examination procedures. 
    Except as may otherwise be stated in this chapter, the industrial pretreatment coordinator will comply with and utilize the wastewater examination procedures set forth in the current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.345), 6-18-2012) 
ARTICLE IV. - PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 13.12.400. - Separation of wastewater. 
    Any user who discharges industrial wastewater to the BWWTP shall keep domestic wastewater separate from all industrial wastewater until the industrial wastewater has passed through all required pretreatment and monitoring equipment or devices. For existing users subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards that cannot separate the domestic wastes from the industrial wastes prior to the permitted sample location, the combined wastestream formula shall be applied to determine applicable discharge limitations. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.400), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.405. - Pretreatment of industrial wastewater. 
    All industrial users shall: 
(1)  Provide wastewater pretreatment, as required, to comply with this chapter; 
(2)  Achieve compliance with all applicable federal categorical pretreatment standards, as contained in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, and amendments thereto, and local limits, whichever are more stringent, within the time limitations specified by the industrial pretreatment coordinator; 
(3)  Install, operate, and maintain all equipment, systems, and devices required to comply with this chapter at the user's expense; 
(4)  Provide detailed plans to the industrial pretreatment coordinator for review and approval indicating the pretreatment equipment, systems, devices and operating procedures prior to beginning any construction or installation of any equipment. The review of such plans and operating procedures by the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall not relieve the user from the responsibility for pretreating wastewater to produce an effluent acceptable to the industrial pretreatment coordinator under the provisions of this chapter; 
(5)  No user shall install pretreatment equipment systems or devices in a confined space or a permit required confined space; 
(6)  Whenever deemed necessary, the industrial pretreatment coordinator may require users to restrict their wastewater discharge, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate domestic waste streams from industrial waste streams, and other such conditions as may be necessary to protect the BWWTP and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter; and 
(7)  Notify the industrial pretreatment coordinator of any pretreatment equipment failure within 24 hours after the user is aware of the failure. The notification shall be accomplished by a telephone call, telefax transmission, personal visit or hand delivered notification to the city. A written report documenting the cause of the failure and the corrective actions completed shall be submitted to the industrial pretreatment coordinator within five calendar days after discovery of the pretreatment equipment failure. 
(Code 1969, § 13.12.070; Ord. No. 276, art. 4, § 7, 1968; Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.405), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.410. - Pretreatment equipment bypass. 
(a)  No user shall bypass any pretreatment equipment or device unless the bypass: 
(1)  Is necessary to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage, is not necessitated by some fault of the user, and is the only feasible alternative; or 
(2)  Is necessary to perform essential maintenance ensuring adequate operation of the pretreatment equipment or device and does not cause a violation of applicable discharge limits. 
(b)  All users shall comply with the following bypass notification requirements: 
(1)  Anticipated bypass. The user shall submit a written notice to the industrial pretreatment coordinator at least ten days before the date of the scheduled bypass. 
(2)  Unanticipated bypass. The user shall notify the industrial pretreatment coordinator within 24 hours upon learning that any pretreatment equipment or device has been bypassed. The user shall submit a written report to the industrial pretreatment coordinator within five working days after the bypass. All bypass reports shall include: 
a.  A description of the bypass, including the volume and duration; 
b.  If the bypass was corrected; and 
c.  Actions completed or proposed to prevent a recurrence of the bypass. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.410), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.415. - Standard interceptor designs. 
    The industrial pretreatment coordinator shall maintain a file, available to the public, of suitable designs of gravity separation interceptors. This file shall be for informational purposes only and shall not provide or imply any endorsements of any kind. Installation of an interceptor of a design shown in this file, or of any design meeting the size requirements set forth in this chapter, shall not subject the city to any liability for the adequacy of the interceptor under actual conditions of use. The user and property owner shall not be relieved of the responsibility of preventing the discharge of industrial wastewater to the BWWTP which exceeds permitted discharge limits. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.415), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.420. - Interceptor requirements for existing restaurant users. 
    All existing restaurant users shall install a grease interceptor that complies with the requirements of this chapter within 60 days of notification by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. The industrial pretreatment coordinator may require an existing restaurant user to install a grease interceptor under the following conditions: 
(1)  The user has been determined to cause or contribute to an increase in the frequency of sewer line maintenance cleaning or repairs. 
(2)  The user has been determined to cause or contribute to sewer line blockages or sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs). 
(3)  The user has sold or transferred operation of the facility to a new user or operator. 
(4)  The user has completed any changes to the following: 
a.  A significant interior plumbing modification. 
b.  A significant increase in seating capacity. 
c.  A significant increase in operating hours. 
d.  A significant change in the type of food prepared at the facility. 
e.  A significant change in the maximum meals served per peak hour. 
f.  A significant change in the type of equipment used. 
g.  Any other changes which result in a significant change to the quantity or quality of the wastewater discharged to the BWWTP. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.420), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.425. - Interceptor requirements. 
    All interceptors and grease traps required to be installed must be approved by the building official prior to installation. Any user required by this chapter to install an interceptor shall install, operate, and maintain an adequately sized interceptor that complies with the following conditions: 
(1)  The interceptor shall be watertight, structurally sound, durable and have a minimum of two chambers with a separate ring and cover for each chamber, unless otherwise approved by the building official, to ensure adequate cleaning capabilities. All rings shall be affixed to the interceptor to ensure a gastight and watertight seal. 
(2)  All interceptor chambers shall be immediately accessible at all times for the purpose of inspection, sampling, cleaning, and maintenance. At no time shall any material, debris, obstacles or other obstructions be placed in such a manner that will prevent immediate access to the interceptor. 
(3)  Any interceptor legally and properly installed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be acceptable as an alternative to the current interceptor requirements, provided the interceptor is effective in removing floatable and settleable material and is accessible for inspection, sampling, cleaning, and maintenance. 
(4)  All drains, openings and service lateral lines connected to an approved interceptor shall be kept free from any obstructions or restrictions to wastewater discharge. All drains and openings connected to an approved interceptor shall be equipped with screens or devices which will prevent all material and particles with a cubic dimension greater than three-eighths of an inch from being discharged to the BWWTP. 
(5)  All interceptors shall be equipped with an influent tee extending no more than 12 inches below the operating fluid level of the interceptor. The interceptor shall also have tees extending to within 12 inches of the bottom at the exit side of each interceptor chamber, including the final chamber. The building official shall review and either approve or deny any alternate manufacturers engineered interceptor designs contrary to standard requirements. 
(6)  All interceptors shall be equipped with a sample box as required by the building official. 
(7)  No user shall install or use any elbows or tees in any interceptor sample box. 
(8)  No user shall install any interceptor or sample box in a confined space or a permit-required confined space. 
(9)  If the building official finds, either by knowledge or by observation, that an interceptor is incapable of adequately retaining floatable and settleable material in the wastewater flow, is structurally inadequate, or is undersized for the facility, the building official shall reject such interceptor and declare that the interceptor does not meet the requirements of this section. The user shall be required to promptly install, at the user's expense, an interceptor that is acceptable to the building official. 
(10)  No user shall abandon, seal, fill, or in any other way bypass an existing interceptor or grease trap unless prior approval has been requested and granted by the building official and the industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.425), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.430. - Sand/oil interceptors. 
(a)  Any user that owns, operates, or maintains a new facility for the servicing, repair, cleaning, washing, or any other type of maintenance activities performed on roadway machinery, industrial transportation equipment, motor vehicles, public or private transportation vehicles, shall, prior to discharging wastewater to the BWWTP, install a sand/oil interceptor in compliance with requirements specified in the most recent version of chapter 10 of the California Plumbing Code as may have been amended by the city, or any successor provisions. Such users shall complete and submit a city business questionnaire and a Class III industrial user permit application to the building official for review. Any facility for the servicing, repair, cleaning, washing, or any other type of maintenance activities performed on roadway machinery, industrial transportation equipment, motor vehicles, public or private transportation vehicles shall be required to comply with this section as a condition of any expansion or remodeling of the facility that allows the user to increase the level of service, repair, cleaning, washing or maintenance activities at the facility. 
(b)  The building official shall calculate the size of the sand/oil interceptor required to be installed in accordance with the sizing criteria specified in the most recent version of the California Plumbing Code (CPC), Appendix H, as amended. The interceptor shall have a minimum operational fluid capacity of 100 gallons and be designed to retain material which will float or settle and comply with BMC section 13.12.425. Domestic wastewater, including, but not limited to, wastewater from restrooms, showers, drinking fountains, and condensate (i.e., ice melt, air conditioning condensate) shall not be allowed to pass through the interceptor. 
(c)  Any user required to install a sand/oil interceptor shall direct all wastewater from all drains, sinks, and wash racks through the approved sand/oil interceptor. 
(d)  Any user required to install a sand/oil interceptor shall maintain such interceptor in accordance with BMC section 13.12.445. 
(Code 1969, § 13.12.060; Ord. No. 276, art. 4, § 6, 1968; Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.430), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.435. - Restaurant user requirements. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided under section 13.12.440 (Conditional waiver), no restaurant user shall discharge wastewater to the BWWTP without first complying with all oil/grease interceptor requirements in the most recent version of chapter 10 of the California Plumbing Code, or any successor code, and as may have been amended by the city. 
(b)  Interceptor sizing requirements shall be determined in accordance with the sizing criteria specified in the most recent version of the California Plumbing Code (CPC); provided, however, in order to provide adequate retention time for the separation of oil/grease, no interceptor shall have a capacity less than 750 gallons. The building official reserves the right to determine interceptor size and type based on the type of restaurant, the condition of the collection system serving the restaurant, and possible adverse affects caused by the restaurants discharge. The building official also reserves the right to require a larger interceptor when necessary and to set a maximum interceptor size when appropriate to prevent the accumulation of sewer gas in underutilized interceptors. 
(c)  Any restaurant user required to install an oil/grease interceptor shall direct all wastewater from all restaurant drains, sinks, wash racks, dishwashers, and garbage grinders through an approved grease interceptor which complies with BMC section 13.12.425. No domestic wastewater, including, but not limited to, wastewater from restrooms, showers, drinking fountains, and condensate (i.e., ice melt, air conditioning condensate) shall be allowed to pass through the grease interceptor. 
(d)  Any restaurant user required to install a grease interceptor shall maintain such interceptor in accordance with BMC section 13.12.445. 
(e)  All restaurant users shall segregate all waste oil from deep fryers, cookers, etc., from all other waste streams. The segregated waste oil shall not be discharged to the BWWTP. The waste oil shall be stored on site and hauled to an approved disposal site. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.435), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.440. - Conditional waivers. 
    The building official may conditionally waive the requirement to install an interceptor for any restaurant user who can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the building official that the use does not generate any fat, oil or grease, or otherwise have any reasonable potential to cause an adverse effect on the operation of the BWWTP. The building official may revoke such conditional waiver for the following reasons: 
(1)  Changes in menu; 
(2)  Falsification of information submitted in the wastewater discharge survey form; 
(3)  Changes in operating hours; 
(4)  Changes in maximum seating capacity; 
(5)  Changes in maximum meals served per peak hour; 
(6)  Changes in equipment used; 
(7)  Changes in the quantity or quality of the wastewater discharged; or 
(8)  Increased sewer line maintenance or sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs) which is attributed to the restaurant user's wastewater discharge. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.440), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.445. - Interceptor maintenance. 
(a)  All interceptors shall be properly maintained at all times. The interceptor shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the interceptor and odors do not accumulate which would cause a public nuisance. An interceptor is considered to be in violation of this chapter under the following conditions: 
(1)  Odors generated from the interceptor cause a public nuisance. 
(2)  The interceptor is not in good working condition and appears to be surcharging. 
(3)  The operational fluid capacity of the interceptor has been reduced by more than 25 percent by the accumulation of floating material, sediment, solids, oil or grease. 
(4)  The industrial wastewater discharged from the user is determined to contain more than 250 mg/l of oil and grease. 
(b)  When an interceptor is cleaned, the interceptor must be pumped out completely and the removed sediment, liquid and floating material shall be disposed by a licensed grease hauler at an approved disposal site in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and/or local laws. 
(c)  The user shall maintain a manifest for the removed interceptor waste. The manifest shall include, at a minimum: the name and address of the facility where the waste is removed, the name and address of the grease hauler, the name and address of the disposal site for the interceptor waste, the volume removed, and the date and time of removal. Failure to maintain and provide the required information shall be a violation of this chapter and may require the user to document the required information on a city-issued grease hauler manifest form. 
(d)  The removed pretreatment waste shall not be reintroduced into the interceptor or discharged into another interceptor at another location. 
(e)  If the interceptor is not maintained adequately and increased pumping is determined to be insufficient to maintain the effective operation of the interceptor, the user shall install an interceptor of sufficient size that pretreats the wastewater to acceptable standards. 
(f)  The owner, lessee, sublessee, proprietor, operator and superintendent of any facility required to install an interceptor are individually and severally liable and responsible for any failure to properly maintain such interceptor. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.445), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.450. - Silver recovery pretreatment systems. 
(a)  All industrial users who discharge wastewater to the BWWTP which is generated from the development of photographic film, film negatives, x-rays, or plate negatives shall install silver recovery pretreatment equipment approved by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
(b)  The silver recovery equipment shall sufficiently remove silver from the fixer solution and any silver laden rinse water to meet the required local discharge limits specified herein. 
(c)  The photo developing solution shall be separated, reclaimed, and hauled by a licensed liquid wastehauler to an approved disposal site and shall not be discharged to the silver recovery equipment. 
(d)  The user shall install an approved sample collection device at the discharge end of the silver recovery equipment to facilitate the collection of representative wastewater samples. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.450), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.455. - Industrial user modifications. 
    All permitted users shall report, in writing to the industrial pretreatment coordinator for review and approval, any proposed changes to the user's operations which may alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days prior to initiation of the proposed changes. The report shall be signed by the authorized representative of the permitted industrial user. For the purposes of this section, the term "changes" includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  A sustained 20 percent increase or decrease in the industrial wastewater flow discharged or in production capacity; 
(2)  Additions, deletions or changes to processes or equipment; or 
(3)  Experimentation with new processes and/or equipment that will affect the quantity or quality of the wastewater discharged. 
(Code 1969, § 13.12.100; Ord. No. 276, art. 4, § 10, 1968; Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.455), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.460. - Unauthorized equipment modifications. 
    No user shall knowingly falsify, tamper with, or render inaccurate any monitoring device or any pretreatment equipment or device. Such falsification, tampering, or inaccuracy shall be considered a violation of this chapter and shall subject the user to enforcement actions. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.460), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.465. - Notice of potential problems to industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
    All users shall notify the industrial pretreatment coordinator within 24 hours of all wastewater discharges that could cause a problem at the BWWTP, including any slug loadings of any material. Wastewater discharges that may cause a problem at the BWWTP include, but are not limited to, acids, alkalis, oils, greases, high strength organic waste, salts, hazardous substances and waste, colored wastes, and batch discharges. All users shall provide the industrial pretreatment coordinator, within five business days from the incident, a written report detailing the cause of the discharge and the corrective actions completed to prevent a recurrence. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.465), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.470. - Spill containment systems. 
    If required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, users shall install spill containment systems which conform to the requirements of this section. The spill containment systems shall be sufficient to prevent the discharge of any bulk chemicals, raw materials, finished product, etc., to the BWWTP. Spill containment requirements include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Spill containment systems for tanks, carboys, and vats shall consist of a system of dikes, walls, barriers, berms, or other devices approved by the industrial pretreatment coordinator which are designed to contain a minimum of 110 percent of the liquid contents of the largest container stored in the containment device. 
(2)  Spill containment systems for drums and barrels may consists of individual spill containment skids, pallets, or other devices approved by the industrial pretreatment coordinator which are designed to contain a minimum of 110 percent of the entire contents of all containers stored in the containment device. 
(3)  Spill containment systems shall be constructed of materials that are impermeable and nonreactive to the liquids being contained. 
(4)  Outdoor spill containment systems shall be constructed with adequate covering to prevent the accumulation of water from inclement weather or irrigation within the spill containment device. 
(5)  Spill containment systems shall not allow incompatible substances to mix and cause a hazardous situation in the event of a failure of one or more containers. 
(6)  At no time shall a user use a spill containment system for the storage of waste other than from a spill generated from a contained liquid. 
(7)  Liquid contained within the spill containment system shall be removed as soon as possible or as instructed by the industrial pretreatment coordinator to restore the capacity of the spill containment system to the original volume. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.470), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.475. - Facility waste management plan. 
    Permitted uses shall develop and maintain a facility waste management plan (FWMP). As determined by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, such FWMP may include the following documents, as appropriate: 
(1)  A toxic organic management plan (TOMP) is required of all categorical industrial users which are permitted to submit a TOMP in lieu of required pollutant monitoring. 
(2)  A slug load control plan (SLCP) is required of all industrial users which have batch discharge provisions, stored chemicals or materials, or the potential for a slug discharge which, if discharged to the BWWTP, would violate any of the prohibited discharge requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  A pretreatment systems operations manual is required of all industrial users that operate and maintain pretreatment equipment. 
(4)  A hazardous materials/waste management plan is required of all industrial users that use or possess a hazardous substance or generate a hazardous substance. The city's fire department-required business emergency plan may be substituted for this management plan. 
(5)  Waste management/pollution prevention plan. 
a.  A waste minimization/pollution prevention plan (WM/PPP) is required of any industrial user: 
1.  For whom the industrial pretreatment coordinator has determined such WM/PPP is necessary to achieve a water quality objective; 
2.  Determined by the state water quality control board (state or regional board) to be a chronic violator, and the state board, RWQCB or city determines that pollution prevention (as defined in Water Code section 13263.3(b)) could assist in achieving compliance; or 
3.  That the industrial pretreatment coordinator determines significantly contributes or has the potential to significantly contribute to the creation of a toxic hot spot as defined in Water Code section 13391.5. 
b.  Any required WM/PPP shall include the following information: 
1.  A wastewater analysis of pollutants that the user discharges to the BWWTP, a description of the sources of the pollutants, and a comprehensive review of the processes used by the users that result in the generation and discharge of the pollutants. 
2.  An analysis of the potential for pollution prevention to reduce the generation of the pollutants, including the application of innovative and alternative technologies and any adverse environmental impacts resulting from the use of those methods. 
3.  A detailed description of the tasks and time schedules required to investigate and implement various elements of pollution prevention techniques. 
4.  A statement of the user's pollution prevention goals and strategies, including priorities for short-term and long-term action. 
5.  A description of the user's existing pollution prevention methods. 
6.  A statement that the user's existing and planned pollution prevention strategies do not constitute cross media pollution transfers unless clear environmental benefits of such an approach are identified to the satisfaction of the city. 
7.  Proof of compliance with the Hazardous Waste Source Reduction and Management Review Act of 1989 (article 11.9 of chapter 6.5 of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code, commencing with section 25244.12), if applicable. 
8.  An analysis of the pollution prevention measures, relative costs, and benefits of the proposed pollution prevention activities selected by the user. 
9.  A specification of, and rationale for, the technically feasible and economically practicable pollution prevention measures selected by the discharger for implementation. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.475), 6-18-2012) 
ARTICLE V. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS 

Sec. 13.12.500. - General permit requirements. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any Class I, II, III, or IV user to connect or discharge to the BWWTP without a valid industrial user permit. 
(b)  Plans and building permits shall not be approved by the industrial pretreatment coordinator for any sewer connection to the BWWTP unless the user has first obtained the appropriate industrial user permit or the user has received written permission from the industrial pretreatment coordinator to connect to the BWWTP after agreeing in writing not to discharge industrial wastewater until an industrial user permit has been obtained. 
(c)  The industrial pretreatment coordinator shall have the authority to deny or establish discharge limitations for all users who propose new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants to the BWWTP where the contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards, requirements or would cause the city to violate its WDR permit. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.500), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.505. - Industrial user permit application requirements. 
(a)  All users required to obtain an industrial user permit shall complete and file with the industrial pretreatment coordinator a permit application form provided by the industrial pretreatment coordinator and shall pay all applicable fees invoiced by the city. The permit application may require the applicant to supply any or all of the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and location of the facility (if different from the mailing address); 
(2)  Name, title and phone number of authorized representatives and contacts; 
(3)  NAICS number of the operations carried out by the industrial user, according to the Federal North American Industry Classification System, Office of Management and Budget, 1997, as amended; 
(4)  EPA hazardous waste generator's number, if applicable; 
(5)  A description of operations, including the nature, average rate of production, and a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the BWWTP; 
(6)  Flow measurement information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow in gallons per day discharged to the BWWTP from process waste streams and all other waste streams, as necessary, to determine the permitted flow of the user and to allow use of the combined waste stream formula; 
(7)  Time and duration that wastewater is discharged; 
(8)  Wastewater samples collected according to 40 CFR 403.12(b)(5) and 40 CFR 136 specifications and analyzed by a laboratory certified by the state department of health services to complete the specific pollutant analyses; 
(9)  Measurement of pollutants identified in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standard applicable to each regulated process, with the results of sample analyses identifying the nature and concentration (or mass where required) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily constituent maximum and average constituent concentration (or mass) shall be reported. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto 
(10)  A list of all environmental control permits held; 
(11)  Site plans, floor plans, process and pretreatment flow charts, mechanical and plumbing plans with details to show all sewers, sewer connections, monitoring equipment, pretreatment equipment, systems and devices, production areas and all areas of wastewater generation; 
(12)  Certification statement, as set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii) and amendments thereto, executed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and prepared by a qualified professional, indicating whether or not pretreatment standards (categorical and local) are being met on a consistent basis. If not, the industrial user shall state if additional pretreatment equipment is necessary to achieve compliance with pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(13)  A statement in a form agreeable to the city attorney that the applicant will reimburse the city for any fines the applicant is assessed as a result of violation of the permit and hold harmless and indemnify the city from any third party claims relating to the permit; and 
(14)  Any other information as may be necessary for the industrial pretreatment coordinator to evaluate the permit application. The accuracy of all data submitted, including monitoring data, shall be certified by an authorized representative of the industrial user as set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii). 
(b)  After receiving the completed application and all required support information, the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall evaluate the application and information furnished by the applicant and either issue an industrial user permit subject to the terms and conditions provided in this chapter, suspend the issuance of the permit or disapprove the application pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. The industrial pretreatment coordinator shall issue the permit, if the industrial pretreatment coordinator believes that sufficient and accurate information has been provided by the applicant in the permit application and the industrial pretreatment coordinator finds that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The proposed discharge of the applicant is in compliance with the prohibitions and limitations of this chapter; 
(2)  The proposed operation and discharge of the applicant would not interfere with the normal and efficient operation of the BWWTP; 
(3)  The proposed operation and discharge of the applicant shall not result in a violation by the city of the terms and conditions of its WDR permit or cause a pass through of any toxic materials to the BWWTP; and 
(4)  The applicant has paid all applicable industrial user permit fees. 
(c)  The industrial pretreatment coordinator may suspend the permit application process if the user's business will not be operational at the conclusion of the application review process. The industrial pretreatment coordinator will supply the user with an interim approval letter in order to receive a permit to commence construction from the building department. The user is required to notify the industrial pretreatment coordinator at least 14 days prior to the commencement of business operations. The industrial user permit will be issued upon proper notification by the user. 
(d)  If the industrial pretreatment coordinator determines that the proposed discharge will not be acceptable, the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall deny the application and shall notify the applicant in writing specifying the reasons for denial and the applicable appeals process. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.505), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.510. - Industrial user permit requirements. 
(a)  Industrial user permits shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, charges and fees established by resolutions approved by the city council. 
(b)  Permits may contain or require any or all of the following: 
(1)  Limitations on the maximum daily and average monthly wastewater pollutants and mass emission rates for pollutants; 
(2)  Limitations on the average daily flow and maximum daily flow rates; 
(3)  Requirements for the submittal of daily, monthly, annual and long-term production rates; 
(4)  Requirements for reporting changes and/or modifications to equipment and/or processes that affect the quantity or quality of the wastewater discharged; 
(5)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of monitoring and sampling equipment and devices; 
(6)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate spill containment devices; 
(7)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include: sampling locations; frequency of sampling; pollutant violation notification and resampling requirements; number, types and standards for tests; reporting schedules; TTO monitoring; and self-monitoring standard operating procedures (SOPs); 
(8)  Requirements for reporting flow exceedances and pollutant violations; 
(9)  Requirements for submission of technical or discharge reports, baseline monitoring reports (BMR), compliance reports, and reports on continued compliance; 
(10)  Requirements for collection and analysis of representative wastewater samples from the approved sample location during the first month of the first and third quarters. Unless otherwise specified in the permit, the sample analysis compliance reports shall be submitted to the city by the end of the second month of the first and third quarter. Unless otherwise specified in the permit, these reports shall include effluent sample analyses results with the name and concentration or mass of the pollutants in the industrial user permit; average and maximum daily wastewater flows for all processes and total flow for the reporting period; average and maximum daily production rates; and total production rate for the reporting period; 
(11)  Requirement that all required reports be signed by an authorized representative of the user; 
(12)  Requirement that all required reports be accompanied by certification statement, by an authorized representative stating whether the pretreatment standards are or are not being met as set forth in 40 CFR section 403.12(b)(6) and amendments thereto; 
(13)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining all records relating to the wastewater monitoring, sample analyses, production, waste disposal, recycling, and waste minimization as specified by the industrial pretreatment coordinator; 
(14)  Requirements for notification of slug or accidental discharges and significant changes in volume or characteristics of the pollutants discharged; 
(15)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements of this chapter and amendments thereto; and 
(16)  Other conditions or requirements as deemed appropriate by the industrial pretreatment coordinator to ensure compliance with this chapter and amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.660), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.515. - Permit duration. 
    Industrial user permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed three years. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.515), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.520. - Duty to comply. 
    All users that have been issued an industrial user permit have a duty to comply with all permit conditions and limitations. Any user failing to comply with the requirements of the permit shall be subject to administrative, civil or criminal enforcement actions in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.520), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.525. - Permit renewal. 
    All industrial users shall submit a completed permit application, required monitoring information or production reports, and any other information required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator for permit renewal a minimum of 90 calendar days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. All users shall pay all applicable permit fees after invoicing by the city. If the industrial pretreatment coordinator fails to notify user of the decision to issue or not issue a renewed permit prior to the expiration date of the current permit, the user's timely submission of a completed application and all other required information and reports shall automatically extend the existing permit for up to 30 working days until the actual permit can be issued or denied. Any discharge of industrial wastewater to the BWWTP with an expired permit shall be a violation of this chapter and may subject the user to enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.525), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.530. - Permit modifications. 
(a)  The terms and conditions of the industrial user permit shall be subject to modification during the term of the permit for reasons specified by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, including the following: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or modifications to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the BWWTP that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge; 
(4)  The permitted wastewater discharge poses a threat to the BWWTP or city personnel, residents, or receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any term or condition of the user's permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the user's permit application or in any required reporting; or 
(7)  To correct typographical or other errors in the user's permit. 
(b)  When possible, the city shall notify the user of any proposed permit changes at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the changes. Any modifications in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.530), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.535. - Permit transfer. 
    Each industrial user permit is issued to a specific user for a specific operation for a specified time. Any assignment, transfer or sale of an industrial user permit to a new owner, new user, different premises, or different use is prohibited and is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.535), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.540. - Permit revocation. 
    The industrial pretreatment coordinator may revoke any industrial user permit if the user is in violation of any provision of this chapter or user permit. These violations include but are not limited to: falsification of any required information; denial of the city right to entry; failure to re-apply for a permit or request a required permit modification; failure to pay required permit fees or charges; or any discharges in violation of this chapter. The industrial pretreatment coordinator may revoke the industrial user permit upon a minimum notice of 15 calendar days when the industrial pretreatment coordinator finds the user violated any provision of this chapter or user permit. The permit revocation will result in the immediate suspension of all discharge rights and privileges as specified in BMC section 13.12.640. All costs for permit revocation and reissuance shall be paid by the user. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.540), 6-18-2012) 
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT NOTICES 

Sec. 13.12.600. - Enforcement response plan. 
    The city shall use an enforcement response plan adopted by the city council to guide the city in imposing progressive enforcement actions against users in noncompliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.600), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.605. - Administrative violations. 
    There is hereby established a class of violations to be known as administrative violations that are further subdivided into minor and major administrative violations as follows: 
(1)  Minor administrative violations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Submission of incomplete reports or questionnaires; 
b.  Failure to submit required reports or correspondence by the scheduled due date; 
c.  Failure to submit a compliance report by the due date specified without prior notification to the city; 
d.  Failure to conduct required monitoring; 
e.  Failure to notify the industrial pretreatment coordinator of a violation of a permit condition within 24 hours after discovery of the violation; or 
f.  Failure to pay any required fees, penalties and charges within 30 calendar days from the due date. 
(2)  Major administrative violations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Failure to notify the industrial pretreatment coordinator of a slug discharge immediately after discovery of said discharge; 
b.  Failure to submit required reports or correspondence within 30 days after the original due date; 
c.  Failure to submit a compliance report within 30 days after the original due date; 
d.  Falsification of documents or attempting to mislead city officials; 
e.  Failure to cooperate with city officials exercising their authority under this chapter, including monitoring and inspection activities; 
f.  A pattern of minor administrative violations; 
g.  Failure to provide the city with access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; 
h.  Failure to produce records as required; 
i.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
j.  Failure to submit required reports or submitting such reports more than 30 calendar days late; 
k.  Failure to pay charges pursuant to BMC section 13.12.700, permit application fees, permit renewal fees, administrative fines and penalties pursuant to BMC chapter 6.30, and civil penalties or attorney fees within 60 calendar days after the due date; or 
l.  Failure to pay all other required fees, penalties, and charges within 60 calendar days after the due date. 
(3)  Upon notice of appropriate mitigating circumstances and consistent with applicable federal and state laws, the industrial pretreatment coordinator has sole discretion to treat a major administrative violation as a minor administrative violation, or a pattern of minor administrative violations with aggravating circumstances as an individual major administrative violation. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.605), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.610. - Discharge violations. 
(a)  There is hereby established a class of violations to be known as discharge violations that are further subdivided into minor and major discharge violations as follows: 
(1)  Minor discharge violations are those that the industrial pretreatment coordinator has determined, either alone or in combination with other discharge violations, pose no significant threat to the operation of the BWWTP, the environment, or the health and safety of the general public or the city and city employees. 
(2)  Major discharge violations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Violations which result in significant noncompliance; 
b.  Discharge violations which, either alone or in combination with other discharge violations, pose a significant threat to the operation of the BWWTP, the environment, or the health and safety of the general public or city employees, or cause or contribute to additional treatment costs incurred by the city or a violation of the WDR permit, or cause or contribute to pass through, interference, or other known damages; 
c.  Discharging industrial wastewater to the BWWTP without a current industrial user permit; 
d.  A pattern of minor discharge violations; 
e.  Failure to correct a minor discharge violation within a specific time period as specified by the industrial pretreatment coordinator; or 
f.  Tampering with or purposely rendering inaccurate any monitoring device, method or record required to be maintained by the city or the user. 
(b)  Upon notice of appropriate mitigating circumstances, the industrial pretreatment coordinator has sole discretion to treat a major discharge violation as a minor discharge violation. The industrial pretreatment coordinator also has sole discretion to treat a pattern of minor discharge violations with aggravating circumstances as an individual major discharge violation. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.610), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.620. - Unclassified violations. 
    For any violation by any user that is not classified herein, or for the violation of any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall have the discretion to treat such violation as a minor or major violation and to exercise enforcement authority accordingly. In exercising this enforcement authority, the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall consider the magnitude of the violation, its duration, and its effect on receiving waters, the BWWTP, the BWWTP sludge, the health and safety of the city and city employees, contractors, users, and the general public. The industrial pretreatment coordinator shall also evaluate the user's compliance history, good faith, and any other factors the industrial pretreatment coordinator deems relevant. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.620), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.625. - Public nuisance. 
    The provisions of BMC section 1.01.150, including subsection (c) declaring violations of this code to be a public nuisance, applies to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.625), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.630. - Administrative orders. 
    The city manager may require compliance with this chapter and any permit or order issued hereunder by issuing administrative orders that are enforceable in a court of law, or by directly seeking court action. The industrial pretreatment coordinator may use administrative orders, either individually, sequentially, concurrently, or in any order for one or more violations as appropriate for the circumstances. Administrative orders include: 
(1)  Notice of noncompliance (NNC). A notice of noncompliance shall be issued to a user for any initial pollutant violations of any minor violations of the requirements of an industrial user's permit or this chapter. A copy of the NNC shall be submitted to the user at the conclusion of the inspection or mailed to the user with a written receipt of delivery. The NNC shall require the user to correct the violation by a specified date or submit a written explanation of the violations and a plan to achieve immediate compliance. An extension of the compliance deadline specified in the NNC may be granted at the discretion of the industrial pretreatment coordinator upon a showing of good faith by the user. 
(2)  Verbal notice (VN). A verbal notice shall be used to notify a user that required correspondence, monitoring data, or any other type of required report has not been received by the required compliance date. The VN shall be completed through a phone call, telefax, or personal visit and shall be completed within five days after the original compliance date. All VNs issued to a user shall be documented in writing in the user's file. 
(3)  Warning notice (WN). A warning notice shall be issued to a user when compliance has not been achieved by the original due date specified in the NNC issued to the user. The WN states the provisions violated and the facts alleged to constitute the violation. The WN will also inform the user that additional enforcement action, including the issuance of a notice of violation and monetary penalties, will be taken if compliance is not achieved by the date specified. A WN shall be documented in a written inspection report at the time of the follow up inspection or mailed to the user with a written receipt of delivery. 
(4)  Noncompliance monitoring program (NMP). A noncompliance monitoring program (NMP) shall be issued to a user when analysis results from consecutive samples indicate violations for the same pollutant. The NMP requires the user to collect a representative wastewater sample from the designated sample location at a frequency determined by the industrial pretreatment coordinator and to analyze the samples for all pollutants which were determined to be in violation of discharge limits. The user shall be responsible for all costs associated with the NMP. Production information, including daily flow meter records, shall be submitted for each sample, as required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. The NMP shall be hand delivered or delivered certified mail with a written receipt of delivery. Continued noncompliance may result in escalated enforcement action and additional monitoring requirements as specified by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. 
(5)  Notice of violation (NOV). A notice of violation shall be issued to a user for any repeat pollutant violations, any violations which result in significant noncompliance, or any major violations of the user's permit or this chapter. A notice of violation shall also be issued to a user who has not complied with the requirements contained in a notice of noncompliance, warning notice, or stop work order. The NOV shall state the provisions violated and the facts alleged to constitute the violation, and may include proposed compliance measures or require additional monitoring. The NOV will also inform the user that additional enforcement action up to and including suspension or termination of sewer service will be taken if compliance is not achieved. The NOV shall require the user to correct the violation or submit a written explanation of the violations and a plan to achieve immediate compliance. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the NOV. The NOV shall be hand delivered or delivered certified mail with a written receipt of delivery. 
(6)  Stop work order (SWO). A stop work order shall be issued to a user to stop any new construction, tenant improvements, alterations, or additions, when the user has not received all necessary city permits, has initiated work without written approval of the industrial pretreatment coordinator, or violations of this chapter related to the building activity have been discovered at the site. The SWO requires the user to cease all building activity until the user has achieved compliance with the conditions specified in the SWO and received authorization from the industrial pretreatment coordinator to resume building activity. The SWO shall be documented in a written inspection report completed during the on-site inspection. A copy of the SWO is either submitted to the user at the conclusion of the inspection or mailed to the user with a written receipt of delivery. 
(7)  Violation meeting order (VMO). A violation meeting order shall be issued to a user who has failed to achieve compliance after the issuance of an NOV, or at the conclusion of an NMP that has resulted in significant noncompliance. A VMO is an informal meeting between the user and the industrial pretreatment section and is intended for the user to propose possible corrective actions and request time extensions to comply with the NOV. The VMO is also used by the user to demonstrate good faith efforts towards achieving compliance. The VMO may also be used by the city to draft a consent order or compliance order, or for the user to draft a compliance schedule, or file an appeal. The VMO shall be hand delivered or delivered certified mail with a written receipt of delivery. 
(8)  Cease and desist order (CDO). A cease and desist order shall be issued to a user who is in violation of an NOV, or the requirements of this chapter, an industrial user permit, or any order issued under this chapter, which is determined to pose an immediate threat to the BWWTP, city personnel, the environment or the public. A CDO may also be issued to a user who is discharging industrial wastewater to the BWWTP without a valid industrial user permit. The CDO may result in the immediate revocation of the user's permit and shall require the user to take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as determined by the industrial pretreatment coordinator to achieve immediate compliance and eliminate the threat, including halting operations and terminating the discharge to the BWWTP. The CDO shall state the provisions violated and the facts constituting the violation. The CDO shall be hand delivered or delivered certified mail with a written receipt of delivery. 
(9)  Consent order. A consent order shall be issued to a user after an NOV has failed to achieve compliance with the requirements specified in this chapter, an industrial user permit, or any order issued under this chapter. The consent order is routinely developed as a result of information collected during the VMO between the city and a user who has exhibited a willingness to comply. The consent order is a written agreement developed jointly between the city and the user with individual milestones, specific actions to be taken by the user, or other remedies necessary to achieve compliance. The consent order shall specify the provisions violated and the facts constituting the violations, and shall require adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other pretreatment technology be installed and properly operated by the user to achieve and maintain compliance. No individual milestone, including milestone extensions, is permitted to exceed nine months in length. The consent order shall be hand delivered or delivered certified mail with a written receipt of delivery. The user is required to submit written progress reports to the city every 30 days, as scheduled by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, to accurately document the current status of the project and to maintain the required schedule. 
(10)  Compliance order. A compliance order shall be issued to a user after an NOV has failed to achieve compliance with the requirements specified in this chapter, an industrial user permit, or any order issued under this chapter. The compliance order is routinely developed as a result of information collected during the VMO between the city and a user who has exhibited a lack of cooperation and is unwilling to comply. The compliance order is used to compel uncooperative users to achieve compliance and shall be developed by the city with no input from the user. The compliance order is a compliance schedule with individual milestones developed by the city which requires the user to complete specific actions, or other remedies to achieve compliance with the violations. The compliance order shall specify the provisions violated and the facts constituting the violations, and shall require adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other pretreatment technology be installed and properly operated by the user to achieve and maintain compliance. No individual milestone, including milestone extensions, is permitted to exceed nine months in length. The compliance order shall be hand delivered or delivered certified mail with a written receipt of delivery. The user is required to submit written progress reports to the city every 30 days, as scheduled by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, to accurately document the current status of the project and to maintain the required schedule. 
(11)  Show cause order. A show cause order shall be issued to a user who is in violation of this chapter, a user permit, or any order issued under this chapter, and has failed to achieve compliance with previous enforcement actions. The show cause order shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing; the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, including any alleged violations and the facts constituting the violation. The show cause order allows the user an opportunity to show why a civil and/or criminal action should not be brought against the user for failure to comply with previous enforcement actions. The show cause order notice shall be served upon the user personally or by certified mail at least 15 calendar days prior to the hearing, unless the user requests an earlier date for the hearing. The industrial pretreatment coordinator shall permit the alleged violating user to respond to the notice and order, to present evidence and argument on all relevant issues, and to conduct cross-examination of any witnesses necessary for the full disclosure of the facts. The industrial pretreatment coordinator may request the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter, and may seek the issuance of a subpoena from the hearing officer for the presence of prospective witnesses. The testimony taken shall be under oath and recorded, with a transcript prepared and provided to any person upon payment of the usual charges for such transcript. Attendees at the show cause hearing may include, but not be limited to, any of the following: a representative from the city attorney's office, the city manager, and the industrial pretreatment coordinator. Prior to the issuance of a show cause order, representatives from the city shall review the case to determine possible compliance measures. Upon review of the findings of fact, the city manager or his designee shall make a final decision which shall be served upon the user. The city may immediately impose an enforcement action after the hearing whether or not a duly notified user appears as required. 
(12)  Probation order. A probation order may be issued to any user for any repeat violations of this chapter. The probation order shall require the user to conduct repeated monitoring, as determined by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, submit recurring documentation as required by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, or complete any other actions the industrial pretreatment coordinator deems necessary to affirm the continued compliance of the user. The probation order shall be hand delivered or delivered certified mail with a written receipt of delivery. 
(13)  Permit revocation order (PRO). A permit revocation order may be issued to any user who has not complied with the requirements contained in any enforcement action. The permit revocation requires the user to immediately cease the discharge of all wastewater determined by the industrial pretreatment coordinator to be in noncompliance. The permit revocation requires the user to demonstrate continued compliance prior to the reissuance of a permit authorizing the continued discharge of the specified wastewater to the sewer system. The permit revocation order shall be hand delivered or delivered certified mail with a written receipt of delivery. The user shall be responsible for all costs associated with the re-issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.630), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.635. - Sewer suspension order. 
    A sewer suspension order may be issued to any user who has either willfully or negligently violated the requirements contained in a permit revocation order, failed to comply with the requirements of a consent order or compliance order, or whose actual or impending discharge to the BWWTP presents or may present an imminent endangerment to the health and welfare of persons or to the environment, may pass through or cause interference with the operations of any part of the BWWTP, is in violation of this chapter or the user's permit, or may cause the city to violate its WDR permit or any other federal or state law or regulation. The suspension order shall be hand delivered or delivered certified mail with a written receipt of delivery. Any user issued a suspension order shall immediately cease the discharge of all wastewater to the BWWTP, as specified by the industrial pretreatment coordinator. The suspension order will result in the immediate revocation of the user's permit. Noncompliance with the conditions of the suspension order may result in the immediate termination of sewer service as specified in BMC section 13.12.640. As soon as reasonably practicable, but in no event more than five business days following the issuance of the suspension order, the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall schedule a hearing to provide the user with an opportunity to present information which states the reasons the suspension order should not be executed. The scheduled hearing shall not delay or prevent the effects of the suspension order. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the city council. Within five business days following the hearing, the city manager shall issue a written decision to the user regarding the status of the suspension order. The industrial pretreatment coordinator may allow the user to resume sewer service if the user demonstrates continued compliance with all discharge requirements and requirements of this chapter. The user shall be responsible for all costs associated with the issuance of the suspension order. The user shall be responsible for all costs associated with the suspension order and reissuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.635), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.640. - Sewer termination order. 
    A sewer termination order may be issued to any user who has either willfully or negligently violated the requirements contained in a sewer suspension order, failed to comply with the requirements of a consent order or compliance order, or whose actual or impending discharge to the BWWTP presents or may present an imminent endangerment to the health and welfare of persons or to the environment, may pass through or cause interference with the operations of any part of the BWWTP, is in violation of this chapter or the user's permit, or may cause the city to violate its WDR permit or any other federal or state law or regulation. The termination order shall be hand delivered or delivered certified mail with a written receipt of delivery. The termination order will result in the immediate revocation of the user's permit and the immediate severance of the user's sewer connection and/or the termination of water service. As soon as reasonably practicable, but in no event more than five business days following the issuance of the termination order, the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall schedule a hearing to provide the user with an opportunity to present information which states the reasons the termination order should not be executed. The scheduled hearing shall not delay or prevent the effects of the termination order. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the city council. Within five business days following the hearing, the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall issue a written decision to the user regarding the status of the termination order. The city manager may allow the user to reconnect to the sewer and/or resume water service if the user demonstrates continued compliance with all discharge and ordinance requirements. The user shall be responsible for all costs associated with the termination order, including the termination and reconnection of sewer and/or water service, and re-issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.640), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.645. - Civil penalties. 
    Any user who is in violation of the user's permit or any provision of this chapter or who has failed to comply with the requirements or conditions specified in a previous enforcement action under this chapter shall be responsible for all costs associated with the violations; including: reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including, but not limited to, sampling, monitoring, laboratory costs, and inspection expenses. 
(1)  Authority. All users of the BWWTP are subject to enforcement actions administratively or judicially by the city, United States Environmental Protection Agency, state regional water quality control board, or the county district attorney. The actions may be taken pursuant to the authority and provisions of several laws, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly known as the Clean Water Act (33 USCA 1251 et seq.); 
b.  California Porter Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code section 13000 et seq.); 
c.  California Hazardous Waste Control Law (California Health and Safety Code §§ 25100 through 25250); 
d.  Resource Conversation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 USCA 6901 et seq.); and 
e.  California Government Code §§ 54739 through 54740. 
(2)  Recovery of fines or penalties. If the city is required to pay fines or penalties pursuant to the legal authority and actions of other regulatory or enforcement agencies based on a violation of law or regulation or its permits, and the violation can be attributed to the discharge of the user in violation of any provision of this chapter, the user's permit, or an administrative order issued pursuant to this chapter the city shall be entitled to recover all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, the full amount of said fines or penalties from the user. 
(3)  Civil penalties. Notwithstanding any limitations in section 1.01.150, pursuant to the Authority of California Government Code §§ 54739 through 54740, any person who violates any provision of this chapter, the user's permit, including, but not limited to, any prohibition or effluent limit, or any suspension or revocation order shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed $25,000.00 per violation for each day in which such violation occurs. The city attorney, at the request of the industrial pretreatment coordinator, may petition a court of competent jurisdiction to impose, assess and recover all costs pursuant to federal and/or state legislative authorization. 
(4)  Administrative civil penalties. 
a.  Notwithstanding any provision in the municipal code to the contrary, pursuant to the authority of California Government Code §§ 54740.5 and 54740.6, the city may issue an administrative complaint to any person who violates: 
1.  Any provision of this chapter; 
2.  Any permit condition, prohibition, or effluent limit; or 
3.  Any suspension or revocation order. 
b.  The administrative complaint shall be served by personal delivery or certified mail and shall inform the user that a hearing will be conducted, and shall specify a hearing date within 60 days following service. The administrative complaint will allege the act or failure to act that constitutes the violation of this chapter, the provisions of law authorizing civil liability to be imposed, and the proposed civil penalty. The matter shall be heard by the industrial pretreatment coordinator or a designated representative. The user to whom the administrative complaint has been issued may waive the right to a hearing, in which case the hearing will not be conducted. 
c.  At the hearing, the user shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the administrative complaint by presenting written or oral evidence. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures established by the industrial pretreatment coordinator and approved by the city council. After the conclusion of the hearing, the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall complete a written report which includes a brief statement of facts, a review of the issues involved, and the amount of the. 
d.  If after the hearing, or appeal, if any, it is found that the person has violated reporting or discharge requirements, the hearing officer or board may assess a civil penalty against that person. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the hearing officer or board may take into consideration all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the economic benefit derived through any noncompliance, the nature and persistence of the violation, the length of time over which the violation occurs and corrective action, if any, attempted or taken by the discharger. 
e.  Upon receipt of the written report, the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall make a determination regarding the issuance of a civil penalty against the user. The industrial pretreatment coordinator shall issue an administrative order regarding the civil penalty to the user within 30 calendar days after the hearing date. 
f.  Civil penalties may be assessed as follows: 
1.  In an amount which shall not exceed $2,000.00 for each day for failing or refusing to furnish technical or monitoring reports. 
2.  In an amount which shall not exceed $3,000.00 for each day for failing or refusing to timely comply with any compliance schedules established by the city. 
3.  In an amount which shall not exceed $5,000.00 for each day of discharge in violation of any waste discharge limit, permit condition, or requirement issued, reissued, or adopted by the city. 
4.  In any amount which does not exceed $10.00 per gallon for discharges in violation of any suspension, revocation, cease and desist order or other orders, or prohibition issued, reissued, or adopted by the city. 
g.  An order assessing administrative civil penalties issued by the city shall be effective and final upon issuance thereof unless the user files a notice of appeal with the city council pursuant to BMC section 13.12.665 no later than the 30th day following delivery of the notice of the industrial pretreatment coordinator decision. An order assessing administrative penalties issued by the city council shall be final. 
h.  Copies of the administrative order shall be either hand delivered or by certified mail to the user served with the administrative complaint. 
i.  Payment of the administrative civil penalties shall be made within 30 days of the date the administrative order becomes final. A lien shall be placed against the user's real property for any outstanding penalties which remain delinquent 60 days. The lien shall not be in effect until recorded with the county recorder. The city may record the lien for any unpaid administrative civil penalties on the 91st day following the date the administrative order becomes final. 
j.  No administrative civil penalties shall be recoverable under BMC section 13.12.645(d) for any violation which the city has recovered civil penalties through a judicial proceeding filed pursuant to Government Code § 54740. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.660), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.650. - Criminal penalties. 
    A criminal penalty may be issued to any user in violation of the user's permit, this chapter, or an enforcement order issued by the city manager or has failed to comply with the requirements or conditions specified in previous enforcement orders. A criminal penalty may also be issued to any user that willfully or knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or the user's permit, or which falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter. The penalties shall be consistent with any relevant state laws. The user shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both, per violation per day. A user shall be guilty of a separate violation for each day a violation of any provision of this chapter or user's permit is committed or continued by such user. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.650), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.655. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The enforcement remedies set forth in this chapter are not exclusive. In addition to the remedies listed in section 1.01.150, the city may take any, all, or any combination of the enforcement responses against a user who is in noncompliance with conditions and requirements specified in this chapter, the user's permit, or discharge limits. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.655), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.660. - Damage to BWWTP operation. 
(a)  Any user who discharges any wastewater which causes or contributes to any obstruction, interference, damage, or any other impairment to the operation of the BWWTP shall be liable for all costs required to resume normal operations of the BWWTP. 
(b)  Any user who discharges any wastewater which causes or contributes to the city's violation of any limitation, condition or requirement in its WDR permit or any other discharge requirement established by any regulatory agency shall be liable for any fines, penalties, fees or assessments imposed on the city by other regulatory agencies or the courts as a result of such violation. 
(Code 1969, § 13.12.110; Ord. No. 276, art. 5, § 1, 1968; Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.660), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.665. - Written appeals. 
(a)  Any person dissatisfied with any decision, order, or enforcement action made by the industrial pretreatment coordinator or designee interpreting or implementing the provisions of this chapter or user's permit may file with the city manager a written appeal requesting reconsideration of such decision, order or enforcement action within ten calendar days from the issuance of the notice of such decision, order or enforcement action. The user shall state in detail the facts supporting the request for reconsideration. The city manager shall render a ruling on the request for reconsideration in writing within ten business days from receipt of the appeal, and provide a copy of the determination to the user and the appealing party. Submission of such a request in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of decision, order, or enforcement action, nor stays the requirements of achieving or maintaining compliance. 
(b)  If any party finds the ruling on the request for reconsideration made by the city manager to be unsatisfactory, the user may file a written appeal with the city council, after lodging the required appeal fee with the city in the amount established by the applicable resolution of the city council. In any appeal, the user shall state with specificity the specific reasons the user finds the city manager's ruling to be unsatisfactory. Any appeal must be filed within ten business days after receipt of notice of the city manager's ruling, except that an appeal under BMC section 13.12.645 may be filed within 30 calendar days following delivery of the notice. The written appeal shall result in a hearing, after notice to the affected parties, for a complete review of the basis of the order. The hearing shall be conducted within 30 days of the written request. The hearing may be recorded or transcribed and the testimony may be required to be given under oath. The city council shall make a ruling on the appeal within 45 calendar days from the date of filing and shall contain the findings of facts regarding the order. 
(c)  The ruling of the city council shall be deemed a final decision, order or action by the city which any person adversely affected by such decision, order or action may appeal to the appropriate court in the county. No person may obtain judicial review of any decision, order, or enforcement action by the city under this chapter without first having exhausted his administrative remedies set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.665), 6-18-2012) 
ARTICLE VII. - FEES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 13.12.700. - Sewer service charges. 
(a)  All single-family residential dwelling units shall be charged a fixed monthly fee for each individual dwelling unit. The residential sewer charge shall be established by resolution or ordinance, as appropriate. The sewer fees shall be sufficient to cover the share of sewerage costs attributed to the residential class of users. The costs shall include all costs associated with financing, maintaining, and operating the sewerage system and developing the necessary reserve funds to ensure future development and operation of the system. 
(b)  Multifamily residential units, commercial users, and other designated users shall be charged on the basis of total water consumption during a comparable water billing cycle. Commercial users shall be placed in the appropriate sewer class based on the primary operations conducted for proper billing. The rate for each class of users shall be established by resolution or ordinance, as necessary. The sewer fees shall be sufficient to cover the share of sewerage costs attributed to this class of users. The costs shall include all costs associated with financing, maintaining, and operating the sewerage system and developing the necessary reserve funds to ensure future development and operation of the system. 
(c)  All users that discharge wastewater to the BWWTP that contains an average of more than 300 mg/l of BOD or TSS or any users that discharge large volumes of wastewater, as determined by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, shall be designated as industrial rate users and shall pay monthly sewer service fees based on the industrial rate established periodically by resolution. Unless otherwise approved by the industrial pretreatment coordinator, all industrial rate monitoring shall consist of individual 24-hour composite samples collected over three consecutive production days during the first month of the quarterly monitoring cycle. The sample analysis are averaged together to determine the BOD and TSS for each billing cycle. Monthly flow discharge rates are used to calculate the amount of BOD and TSS discharged to the BWWTP each month. All self-monitoring completed for industrial rate billing must be approved by the city and will be considered along with the data collected from city monitoring for the months remaining in the quarterly monitoring cycle. The industrial sewer rates shall be based upon total volume of wastewater discharged and city costs for providing services and treatment for the pounds of BOD and TSS discharged. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.700), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.705. - Permit fees and charges. 
    All users shall be required to pay a permit fee based on the designated class of permit issued to the user. The permit fee shall include charges for the issuance of the user's permit and the costs for routine inspections and monitoring as established by resolution for the specific class of user. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.705), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.710. - Monitoring and inspection charges. 
    All users shall be charged additional monitoring and/or inspection fees, as established by resolution, for all supplemental activities completed by the city which are necessary to verify compliance with previously issued violations of this chapter, the user's permit, applicable discharge limits, or any other related proceedings completed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.710), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.715. - Payment of fees and charges. 
    All fees, charges, and penalties established by this article or related resolution are due and payable upon receipt. All fees required of this chapter and related resolutions shall be included in the user's monthly water service bill or supplemental invoice submitted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.715), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.720. - Delinquent payment of fees and charges. 
(a)  In the event a user fails to pay any required fee, charge, or penalty established by this article, the industrial pretreatment coordinator may elect to sever all water and/or sewer service to the user. 
(b)  The city manager shall submit notice to the user a minimum of five days prior to the severance of water and/or sewer service. 
(c)  Water and/or sewer service shall not be resumed until all outstanding fees, charges, penalties, and all costs for the resumption of service have been paid by the user. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.720), 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 13.12.725. - Sewer use deposit requirements. 
(a)  Compliance deposit. The city may require a user that has been subject to enforcement and/or collection proceedings to submit a compliance deposit to the city in an amount determined necessary by the industrial pretreatment coordinator to guarantee payment of all future charges, fees, penalties, costs and expenses that may be incurred, before continued sewer service is provided by the city. 
(b)  Security deposit. The city may require a user who has been suspended or revoked sewer service to submit a security deposit to the city in an amount equal to the average total fees and charges for two calendar quarters during the preceding year. The deposit shall be used to guarantee payment of all future fees and charges incurred for sewer service provided by the city. 
(c)  Security deposit return. The city will either return the security deposit or credit the account of a user, provided the user remits all required payments in full within the time prescribed over a continuous two-year period. 
(Ord. No. 890-2012, § 1(exh. A, § 13.12.725), 6-18-2012) 
CHAPTER 13.16. - BUILDING LATERALS 

Sec. 13.16.010. - Permit required. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the chief building inspector. 
(Code 1969, § 13.16.010; Ord. No. 276, art. 3, § 1, 1968) 
Sec. 13.16.020. - Permit application. 
(a)  There shall be two classes of building lateral permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
(b)  In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the chief building inspector. 
(Code 1969, § 13.16.020; Ord. No. 276, art. 3, § 2, 1968) 
Sec. 13.16.030. - Installation costs. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building lateral shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building lateral. 
(Code 1969, § 13.16.030; Ord. No. 276, art. 3, § 3, 1968) 
Sec. 13.16.040. - Construction conformance required. 
    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building lateral, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 13.16.040; Ord. No. 276, art. 3, § 4, 1968) 
Sec. 13.16.050. - Water runoff connection to sewer prohibited. 
    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building lateral or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1969, § 13.16.050; Ord. No. 276, art. 3, § 5, 1968) 
Sec. 13.16.060. - Connection to sewer. 
    The connection of the building lateral into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 13.16.060; Ord. No. 276, art. 3, § 6, 1968) 
Sec. 13.16.070. - Street excavation; permit required. 
    All excavations for building laterals in public streets and easements require a permit from the city engineer pursuant to chapter 12.08 in addition to the permit prescribed by this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 13.16.070; Ord. No. 276, art. 3, § 7, 1968) 
CHAPTER 13.20. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 13.20.010. - Right of entry. 
    The city engineer and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of chapters 13.08 through 13.24. The city engineer or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(Code 1969, § 13.20.010; Ord. No. 276, art. 6, § 1, 1968) 
Sec. 13.20.020. - Company indemnified by city. 
    While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 13.20.010, the city engineer or fully authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees. The city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as may be caused by the company's negligence or failure to maintain safe conditions as required in BMC chapter 13.12. 
(Code 1969, § 13.20.020; Ord. No. 276, art. 6, § 2, 1968) 
CHAPTER 13.22. - SEWER USE CHARGES 

Sec. 13.22.010. - Authority. 
    This chapter is adopted pursuant to section 11 of, article XI of the State Constitution and California Health and Safety Code § 5471 et seq. 
(Code 1969, § 13.22.010; Ord. No. 374, § 1(part), 1972; Ord. No. 879-2011, § 1, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 13.22.020. - User fees. 
(1)  Sewer user fee. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 13.22.020 of the this Code, the city council hereby establishes the monthly user fee per sewer service unit (SU) to be: 
i. Effective December 1, 2011: $22.00 ii. Effective July 1, 2012: $25.00 iii. Effective July 1, 2013: $28.00 iv. Effective July 1, 2014: $31.00  
(b)  Residential sewer users shall be charged for one SU per dwelling unit per month. 
(c)  Low income discount. To apply for a sewer fee reduction for a single family owner occupied home the owner must provide a utility bill (i.e. gas, water, electric) which shows the owner is currently receiving a discount under the California Alternate Rate for Energy guidelines. 
i.  The documentation must be provided to the billing agent for the city and will be applied on the next billing cycle. It is the responsibility of the owner to update annually and notify the billing agent of any changes which may impact their eligibility. 
(2)  Non-residential user fee. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 13.22.020 of this Code, the city council hereby establishes the following user fee formula for determining the monthly sewer service units that will be charged to non-residential sewer users (excluding colleges / private schools / public schools and religious facilities) at the rate set forth in subsection (1) of this section: 
i.  SU = Q/225 x [0.457 + (BOD/200 x 0.255) + (SS/200 x 0.288)] 
 S.U. = Service Units  Q = Average user water flow in gallons per day  BOD = Average user Biochemical Oxygen Demand concentration in mg/L  SS = Average user Suspended Solids concentration In mg/L  
ii.  In order to determine the BOD and SS figures to be used in calculating the number of sewer service units to charge non-residential sewer users (excluding Educational Institutions - Land Use Code 55 & 56; Religious Facilities - Land Use Code 54; and any user identified as a Significant Industrial User - See subsection (5) of this section), city staff shall utilize the following land-use category classification table: 
LAND USE 
CATEGORY 
NUMBER LAND USE CATEGORY 
DESCRIPTION BOD (mg/l) SS (mg/l) 1 Residential 200 200 51 Office 130 80 52 Wholesale / Retail 150 150 53 Markets (w/ Garbage Disposal) 800 800 54 Religious Facility / Church / Club / Lodge 200 200 55 Elementary School 130 100 56 Secondary School and College 130 100 60 Motel / Hotel w/o Dining 310 120 61 Motel / Hotel w/ Dining 500 600 62 Restaurant 1000 600 63 Bar w/o Dining 200 200 70 Car / Vehicle Wash 20 150 71 Truck Wash / Auto Steam Cleaning 1150 1250 72 Service Station 180 280 75 Water Softening 3 55 76 Septage 5,400 12,000 80 Laundromat 150 110 81 Dry Cleaner / Commercial Laundry 450 240 82 Industrial Laundry 670 680 85 Hospital 250 200 86 Mortuary 800 800  
1.  In the event that a dispute arises between a non-residential user and city staff with regard to the land use category that the non-residential user should be classified for the purposes of determining BOD and SS, the following appeals procedure shall be used: 
a.  The non-residential user shall file a notice with the city manager seeking a review of city staff's decision. The city manager or his / her designee shall then meet with the non-residential user to review city staff's land use classification decision. 
b.  After considering all of the facts in the matter, the city manager or his / her designee shall make a final decision regarding the land use classification. The decision of the city manager or his / her designee shall be final. 
iii.  Actual water usage by each non-residential user shall be utilized for the purposes of calculating the average user water flow in gallons per day (the "Q" in the non-residential sewer service unit determination formula outlined in subsection (2)(a)(i) of this section). However, except for subsection (2)(a) and subsection (2)(a)(iii)(7), these provisions shall not apply to educational institutions (see subsection (3) of this section), religious facilities (see subsection (4) of this section) and significant industrial users (see subsection (5) of this section). 
1.  Before June 1 of each year, the city will obtain data from the water service provider for every non-residential user which identifies the actual amount of water used by each non-residential user during the prior calendar year from January 1 of the prior year through December 31 of the prior year. 
2.  Based on the data obtained from the water service provider for every non-residential user, the actual amount of water used by each non-residential user during the prior year will be converted in order to determine the average number of gallons of water used per day by each non-residential user. 
3.  The city will utilize the average number of gallons of water used per day during the prior year by each non-residential user as the "Q" in calculating the number of sewer service units to charge non-residential sewer users, 
4.  The city shall recalculate the number of sewer service units to charge each non-residential user utilizing the updated average number of gallons of water used per day (or the "Q") prior to June 1 of each year. In addition, the city shall inform each non-residential user in writing prior to June 1 of each year regarding how many sewer service units they will be charged in the upcoming year between July 1 and June 30. 
5.  Effective July 1 of each year, the city shall begin charging each non-residential user an updated number of sewer service units based on a recalculation of the average number of gallons of water used per day (or "Q") as described In subsection (2)(a) of this section. 
6.  In the event that a dispute arises between a non-residential user and city staff with regard to the amount of water the non-residential user is utilizing per day (or "Q"), the following appeals procedure shall be used: 
a.  The non-residential user shall file a notice with the city manager seeking a review of city staff's decision. The city manager or his / her designee shall then meet with the non-residential user to review how city staff determined the amount of water (or "Q") being used by the non-residential user. 
b.  After considering all of the facts in the matter, the city manager or his / her designee shall make a final decision regarding the amount of water (or "Q") being used by the non-residential user. The decision of the city manager or his / her designee shall be final. 
7.  The implementation of utilizing actual water use to determine the sewer service costs for non-residential users (including educational institutions, religious facilities, and significant industrial users) shall take effect on January 1, 2014. Each non-residential user shall have their sewer service costs for the period between January 1, 2014 through June 30, 2014, calculated based on the amount of water (or "Q") that was used during calendar year 2012. After this initial implementation period, the provisions of subsection (2)(iv) of this section shall apply as it relates to the annual recalculation of non-residential sewer service costs. 
a.  Any non-residential user (including educational institutions, religious facilities, and significant industrial users) that experiences an increase of 25 or more sewer units assessed per month as a result of transitioning to the actual water use methodology shall be eligible to have the increased rate phased in over a three year period, with the full actual water use rate required to be paid beginning in the fourth year. The phased in rate calculation shall be recalculated each year based on the non-residential users actual water use per the formulas as outlined below: 
i.  First Year Rate: the first year rate shall be determined by the following formula: 
 Current Rate + [(1/4) * (New Rate 1.Current Rate)] 
ii.  Second Year Rate: the second year rate shall be determined by the following formula: 
 Current Rate + [(2/4) * (New Rate 2.Current Rate)] 
iii.  Third Year Rate: the third year rate shall be determined by the following formula: 
 Current Rate + [(3/4) * (New Rate 3.Current Rate)] 
iv.  Fourth Year Rate: the fourth year rate shall be the full rate as determined by the actual water use methodology. 
1.  In subsection (2)(iii)(7)(a)(i) through subsection (2)(iii)(7)(a)(iv) above, the following definitions shall apply: 
 "Current Rate" means the number of sewer units assessed for the month of December 2013. 
 "New Rate 1" means the number of sewer units that would be assessed each month of the First Year Rate based on actual usage. 
 "New Rate 2" means the number of sewer units that would be assessed each month of the Second Year Rate based on actual usage. 
 "New Rate 3" means the number of sewer units that would be assessed each month of the Third Year Rate based on actual usage. 
b.  Any non-residential user (including educational institutions, religious facilities, and significant industrial users) that experiences an increase of 10 to 24 sewer units assessed per month as a result of transitioning to the actual water use methodology shall be eligible to have the increased rate phased in over a two year period, with the full actual water use rate required to be paid beginning in the third year. The phased in rate calculation shall be recalculated each year based on the non-residential users actual water use per the formulas as outlined below: 
i.  First Year Rate: the first year rate shall be determined by the following formula: 
 Current Rate + [(1/3) * (New Rate 1.Current Rate)] 
ii.  Second Year Rate: the second year rate shall be determined by the following formula: 
 Current Rate + [(2/3) * (New Rate 2.Current Rate)] 
iii.  Third Year Rate: the third year rate shall be the full rate as determined by the actual water use methodology. 
1.  In subsection (2)(iii)(7)(b)i. through subsection (2)(iii)(7)(b)(iii). above, the following definitions shall apply: 
 "Current Rate" means the number of sewer units assessed for the month of December 2013. 
 "New Rate 1" means the number of sewer units that would be assessed each month of the First Year Rate based on actual usage. 
 "New Rate 2" means the number of sewer units that would be assessed each month of the Second Year Rate based on actual usage. 
(3)  Educational institutions. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 13.22.020 of this Code, the city council hereby establishes that any non-residential sewer service user designated under Land Use Code 55 or 56 (Educational Institution) as defined in subsection (2)(ii) of this chapter shall be assessed a monthly user fee based on the number of students enrolled at the start of the prior school year per the following schedule: 
i. Effective December 1, 2011: $0.27 / student ii. Effective July 1, 2012: $0.31 / student iii. Effective January 1, 2014: $0.34 / student iv. Effective July 1, 2014: $0.38 / student  
(4)  Religious institutions. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 13.22.020 of this Code, the city council hereby establishes that any non-residential sewer service account designated under Land Use Code 54 (religious institution / church / club / lodge) as defined in subsection (2)(a)(ii) of this section shall be assessed a monthly user fee based on actual water use per the following schedule: 
Gallons Per Day (GPD) of Water Used Sewer Units Assessed Per Month 0 GPD.225 GPD 1 226 GPD.675 GPD 3 676 GPD.1125 GPD 5 1128 GPD.1575 GPD 7 1576 GPD.2025 GPD 9 2026 GPD.2475 GPD 11 2476 GPD.2925 GPD 13 2926 or more GPD 15  
(5)  Significant industrial users. 
(a)  Significant Industrial User (SIU) shall mean any sewer service user that meets any of the following conditions: 
i.  Any non-residential user that discharges industrial wastewater at an average rate of at least 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) to the Barstow Wastewater Treatment Plant (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater). 
ii.  Any non-residential user designated as a truck wash facility. 
iii.  Any non-residential user that contributes a process wastestream discharge which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the Barstow Wastewater Treatment Plant. 
iv.  Any non-residential user that is designated by the city manager or his / her designee that on the basis that the user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the Barstow Wastewater Treatment Plant or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(b)  SIUs shall pay a monthly sewer service fee based on the formula established in subsection (2)(a) of this section. The sewer rate for SIUs shall be based upon the formula established in subsection (2)(a) of this section per the following guidelines as outlined below. 
i.  BOD and SS shall be measured and updated on a monthly basis per the following guideline: 
1.  In order to calculate actual measurements of BOD and SS, wastewater sampling shall be required on a monthly basis and all sampling activity shall occur on days when the discharge from the SIU is representative of normal and typical operations. 
2.  The SIU will be required to collect a composite sample over a 24-hour period each month using a portable refrigerated Isco sampler (or comparable equipment). In addition, the SIU will be required to provide the city with a split sample for both grab and composite samples collected. 
3.  Each SIU will be required to have the collected samples analyzed by a certified ELAP and / or NELAP laboratory. 
4.  Each SIU will be required to submit a report of all analyses performed on samples collected during a given month no later than the tenth (10th) day of the month following sample collection, If the 10th day of the month falls on a weekend or national holiday, the report of sample analyses shall be submitted on the first business day following the 10th of the month. 
5.  The BOD and SS values from the samples collected will be utilized for billing purposes. 
6.  If laboratory samples differ by +/- 5% on either the BOD or SS values between the SIU sample results and city sample results, the results will be averaged to determine the monthly BOD and SS values that will be used to calculate the monthly bill. If the results are within +/- 5%, the lowest sample results between the two laboratories will determine the BOD and SS values that will be utilized. 
ii.  In order to determine the average number of gallons of water used per day for each month (or "Q") by each SIU, the following guidelines shall be used: 
1.  The city shall obtain the actual amount of water used by each SIU every month (or "Q") for the purposes of determining the sewer bill. 
2.  To determine the amount of water used by each SIU every month (or "Q"), the city will either obtain the data in one of the following two ways: 
a.  From the SIUs water service provider. Either the SIU can provide or the city will obtain the actual metered water usage from the SIUs water service provider in order to determine the Q. 
b.  From a flow monitoring device. The SIU can install a flow monitoring device to determine the Q. If this option is elected, the flow monitoring device shall be installed and maintained by the SIU in the wastewater stream located at the discharge monitoring station. Prior to installation, both the installation location and the flow monitoring device must be approved by the city. The flow monitoring device must be capable of +/- 5% accuracy throughout the flow range and shall be calibrated by a certified technician on at least a quarterly basis. Copies of calibration reports shall be submitted to the city for review. Records of instantaneous wastewater flows (in gallons per minute) and daily totalized flows (in gallons) shall be provided to the city on a monthly basis, at the same time as monthly sample laboratory analyses are reported. The records of flows to be submitted to the city shall include copies of all instantaneous flow charts, as well as daily readings of the totalized discharge flow. 
iii.  In the event that a dispute arises between an SIU and city staff with regard to the either the BOD / SS values or amount of water the SIU is utilizing per day (or "Q"), the following appeals procedure shall be used: 
a.  The SIU shall file a notice with the city manager seeking a review of city staff's decision. The city manager or his / her designee shall then meet with the SIU to review how city staff determined the BOD / SS values and / or the amount of water (or "Q") being used by the SIU. 
b.  After considering all of the facts in the matter, the city manager or his / her designee shall make a final decision regarding the BOD / SS values and / or the amount of water (or "Q") being used by the SIU. The decision of the city manager or his / her designee shall be final. 
(Code 1969, § 13.22.020; Ord. No. 374, § 1(part), 1972; Ord. No. 406, § 1, 1975; Ord. No. 513, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 575, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 590, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 600, § 1(part), 1989; Ord. No. 629, § 1, 1990; Ord. No. 754, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 822, § 1, 2007; Ord. No. 874-2011, § 1, 3-21-2011; Ord. No. 874A-2011, § 1, 3-21-2011; Ord. No. 918-2013 , §§ 1-5, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 935-2015 , § 1, 8-3-2015) 
Sec. 13.22.030. - Utility fees. 
    Utility fees are those fees derived from the sum of sewer user fees as set forth in section 13.22.020, sewer fee penalties as set forth in section 13.22.050, garbage collection fees as set forth in section 6.20.080, and garbage collection fee penalties as set forth in section 6.20.083. 
(Code 1969, § 13.22.030; Ord. No. 374, § 1(part), 1972; Ord. No. 590, § 2, 1988) 
Sec. 13.22.050. - Sewer use fees a debt. 
(a)  The sewer use fee, including any applicable penalties and collection costs, shall be a civil debt owing the city from the person subject to the fee. 
(b)  If an invoice for the sewer use fee established by this chapter is unpaid 90 days after mailing to the property owner, a penalty of ten percent shall be charged, and an additional 11/2 percent per month shall be charged until the charges, penalties, and all collection costs are paid in full. 
(c)  If court action is taken to enforce nonpayment of sewer use fees, the user shall pay all reasonable attorney's fees and costs incurred by the city. 
(d)  In addition to any other remedies provided for herein, should an invoice for the sewer use fee established by this chapter be unpaid 90 days after mailing, the user is responsible for all amounts incurred by the city to disconnect and restore sewer service. 
(Code 1969, § 13.22.050; Ord. No. 374, § 1, 1972; Ord. No. 548, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 590, § 3, 1988; Ord. No. 600, § 1(part), 1989; Ord. No. 757, § 3, 2000; Ord. No. 851-2009, § 3, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 13.22.060. - Collection procedure for delinquent accounts; creation of lien. 
(a)  Any fees authorized pursuant to this chapter which remain unpaid after the delinquent dates as set forth in section 13.22.050 may be collected thereafter by the city as provided in this section. 
(b)  The city council shall cause a report of delinquent utility fees to be prepared periodically. The city council shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the report and any objections or protests thereto. 
(c)  The city council shall cause notice of hearing to be mailed to the landowners listed on the report not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(d)  At the hearing, the city council shall hear any objections or protests of landowners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees. The city council may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed. 
(e)  The delinquent fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of land, and are a lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees, penalties and costs incurred by the city as authorized by this chapter. A certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the city clerk, or auditor appointed by the city council, for amounts of the respective parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll. The lien created attaches upon recordation, in the office of the county recorder, of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as other property taxes and penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of city ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment. 
(Code 1969, § 13.22.060; Ord. No. 374, § 1(part), 1972; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1974; Ord. No. 590, § 4, 1988; Ord. No. 851-2009, § 4, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 13.22.070. - Sewerage revenue control. 
    All monies received from the collection of the sewer use charges established in this chapter shall be controlled and used only as permitted by Health and Safety Code § 5471. 
(Code 1969, § 13.22.070; Ord. No. 374, § 1(part), 1972) 
Sec. 13.22.080. - Connection fees. 
(a)  Any person connecting premises to the wastewater collection system of the city shall first pay a connection fee in accordance with the schedule of charges, as may be set from time to time by the city council, in addition to any other fees or charges required by the building and plumbing codes of the city and by this chapter. Any person who has previously paid for construction of sewer facilities (excluding local street sewers or lateral connections) for premises located within a special sewer assessment district or reimbursement district shall not be required to pay an additional connection fee for connecting such premises to the city's wastewater collection system. 
(b)  The city council hereby establishes the amount of the connection fee for connection to the city's wastewater collection system as $1,500.00 per service unit. 
(c)  The number of service units attributable to any individual user shall be calculated using the following formula: 
S.U. = Q/225 × [0.457 + (BOD/200 × 0.255) + (SS/200 × 0.288)]. 
Where: 
S.U. = Service units. 
SS = Average user suspended solids value in mg/l. 
Q = Average flow in gallons per day. 
BOD = Average user biochemical oxygen demand value in mg/l. 
The average flow (Q) for a residential unit shall be 225 gallons per day. Average flow (Q) for all other users shall be based on typical water usage, as determined by the city, for that user's land use category, development, or activity. A user may request that their fee be based on actual water usage during the most recently available 36 months of water billings for the user, so long as: 
(1)  The user has been in operation for at least 36 months; and 
(2)  At least 36 months of usage data is made available to the city by the sewer customer's water supplier. 
No user shall be assigned less than one service unit. 
(d)  For purposes of calculating the number of service units pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the average user biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and average user suspended solids (SS) values for various land uses are assumed to be as follows: 
Land Use Categories BOD (mg/l) SS (mg/l) Residential, per dwelling unit 200 200 Office 130 80 Wholesale/retail 150 150 Markets with garbage disposal 800 800 Church, club, lodge 200 200 Elementary school 130 100 Secondary and college 130 100 Motel/hotel without dining 310 120 Motel/hotel with dining 500 600 Restaurant 1,000 600 Bar without dining 200 200 Car/vehicle wash 20 150 Truck wash/auto steam cleaning 1,150 1,250 Service station 180 280 Water softening 3 55 Septage 5,400 12,000 Laundromat 150 110 Dry cleaner/commercial laundry 450 240 Industrial laundry 670 680 Hospital 250 100 Mortuary 800 800  
(1)  Other wastewater characteristics, such as chemical oxygen demand (COD), total dissolved solids (TDS), and total solids (TS), may be utilized in lieu of BOD and SS if the city determines that these characteristics are more representative of a user's wastewater. TS is the sum of TDS and SS. 
(2)  For users which do not fall into any of the above categories, a fee shall be determined by the city manager based on the best information available as to quality and quantity of wastewater discharged into the collection system. The city manager's fee determination shall be approved by the city council. 
(e)  The city council shall review the sewer connection fees annually and consider any increase in accordance with the consumer price index (CPI) for Riverside San Bernardino Ontario Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area (U.S. Department of Labor) or higher in subject to applicable law. 
(Code 1969, § 13.22.080; Ord. No. 754, § 4, 2000; Ord. No. 829, § 1, 2007; Ord. No. 875-2011, § 1, 3-7-2011) 
CHAPTER 13.24. - REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 13.24.010. - Connection charges; designated. 
    Any person, prior to connecting a building lateral to any public sewer which has been constructed at no cost to the abutting property, shall be required to pay a connection charge in addition to any other fees or charges required by the building and plumbing codes of the city and by this chapter. The connection charge for such parcels shall be the sum of $5.00 per assessable front foot. Assessable front footage in the case of interior rectangular parcels having a depth equal to or greater than 100 feet shall be the actual frontage of the parcel on the public street right-of-way. The assessable front footage for corner parcels, parcels having a depth less than 100 feet and irregularly shaped parcels shall be a dimension which equitably represents the benefits the parcels received by virtue of the public sewer in relation to that received by similarly situated rectangular parcels. 
(Code 1969, § 13.24.010; Ord. No. 276, art. 7, § 1, 1968) 
Sec. 13.24.020. - Reserved. 
Sec. 13.24.025. - Special sewer assessment districts. 
    No parcel outside a special sewer assessment district shall be connected to a public sewer constructed under said assessment district unless sufficient capacity exists beyond the design capacity required for such district as determined by the city engineer. In such case, the connection charge for the parcel outside the special assessment district shall be computed in the same manner in which assessments were computed for those parcels within the special assessment district. 
(Code 1969, § 13.24.025; Ord. No. 440, § 2, 1978; Ord. No. 552, § 2, 1986) 
Sec. 13.24.030. - Connection charges; payment. 
    Any person prior to connecting a building lateral to any public sewer in a reimbursement district shall be required to pay the connection charge as established in the agreement creating the reimbursement district. When a parcel is included within a reimbursement district for which only an area charge is applicable to the parcel, and the parcel is subsequently served by an additional sewer at no cost to the abutting parcel, then a charge of $5.00 per assessable front foot shall be collected in addition to the area charge. If the property has subsequently been served by an additional sewer under a reimbursement agreement, the additional connection charges shall be collected as provided in the agreement. 
(Code 1969, § 13.24.030; Ord. No. 276, art. 7, § 3, 1968; Ord. No. 440, § 3, 1978) 
Sec. 13.24.040. - Plans, specifications required. 
    Requests for reimbursement contracts shall be accompanied by plans and specifications prepared in accordance with the current department of public works, standard specifications, and an engineer's estimate of the total cost of eligible items, including actual engineering fees not to exceed 15 percent of the construction cost. Upon approval by the city engineer of the plans, specifications, and engineer's estimate, applicants shall execute the agreement as furnished by the city engineer and pay a fee of $500.00 to defray the cost of administering the agreement. 
(Code 1969, § 13.24.040; Ord. No. 276, art. 7, § 4, 1968) 
Sec. 13.24.050. - Connection charges; maps. 
    The city engineer shall maintain maps showing the connection charges applicable to each and every parcel of property in the city. The maps shall be a matter of public record and shall be available for inspection by the public upon request. 
(Code 1969, § 13.24.050; Ord. No. 276, art. 7, § 5, 1968) 
Sec. 13.24.060. - Disposition of funds. 
    All fees and charges collected pursuant to this chapter and accruing to the city shall be deposited in the wastewater reclamation fund or the wastewater capital improvement fund. 
(Code 1969, § 13.24.060; Ord. No. 276, art. 7, § 6, 1968; Ord. No. 316, § 2, 1970; Ord. No. 573, § 5, 1987; Ord. No. 649, § 2, 1990) 
Sec. 13.24.070. - Health hazard abatement. 
(a)  Where the owner of a property served by a private disposal system has been served with a notice to abate a nuisance caused thereby, and where a public sewer is available to the property in accordance with the provisions of section 13.08.040, and where the owner has demonstrated an inability to pay the cost of the connection to the pubic sewer and the connection charge prescribed by this chapter, the city council may order the city engineer to make such connection and to abate said nuisance using wastewater reclamation funds. The director of finance is authorized to institute collection procedures for all unpaid costs, charges, penalties and interest thereon and to include authority for filing a property lien with the county tax collector against the property service. 
(b)  The sewer use charge and its collection, in accordance with chapter 13.22, shall commence immediately after the connection has been made or after the expiration of the 90 days given to make the connection in accordance with section 13.08.040. 
(Code 1969, § 13.24.070; Ord. No. 303, § 4, 1969; Ord. No. 573, § 6, 1987) 
CHAPTER 13.28. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 13.28.010. - Notice of violation. 
    Any person found to be violating any provision of chapters 13.08 through 13.24, except section 13.12.110, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(Code 1969, § 13.28.010; Ord. No. 276, art. 8, § 1, 1968) 
Sec. 13.28.020. - Violation deemed misdemeanor. 
    Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided for in section 13.28.010 is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 13.28.020; Ord. No. 276, art. 8, § 2(part), 1968) 
Sec. 13.28.030. - Violator liability. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of chapters 13.08 through 13.24 shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of the violation. 
(Code 1969, § 13.28.030; Ord. No. 276, art. 8, § 2(part), 1968) 
CHAPTER 13.32. - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- City authority to implement conversion of overhead utility lines to underground utility districts, Government Code § 38793; uniform procedures for special assessment proceedings regarding conversion of existing overhead electric and communication facilities to underground locations, Streets and Highways Code § 5896.1 et seq. 

Sec. 13.32.010. - Definitions. 
    Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter defined are used, they have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions, unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires: 
    Commission means the public utilities commission of the state. 
    Person means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees. 
    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
    Underground utility district or district means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited, as this area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of section 13.32.040. 
    Utility includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Code 1969, § 13.32.010; Ord. No. 282, § 1, 1968) 
Sec. 13.32.020. - Public hearing by council. 
    The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city, and the underground installation of wires and facilities and supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city council shall determine that the city or a public utility has voluntarily agreed to pay over 50 percent of all costs of conversion, except the costs of users' connections. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least 15 days prior to the date thereof. Each hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each hearing all persons interested shall be given the opportunity to be heard. In the event, at or prior to hearings, owners of 50 percent or more of the assessed value of real property in designated areas shall file written protests against such proposed action with the city clerk, such proceedings shall terminate. Not less than one year must expire before proceedings may be again commenced as to any property which was included in the designated area. 
(Code 1969, § 13.32.020; Ord. No. 282, § 2, 1968; Ord. No. 650, § 1, 1990) 
Sec. 13.32.030. - Report by city engineer. 
    Prior to holding public hearings, the city engineer shall consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at the hearing containing, among other information, the extent of the utilities' participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected property owners. The report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. 
(Code 1969, § 13.32.030; Ord. No. 282, § 3, 1968) 
Sec. 13.32.040. - District designation by council. 
    If, after any public hearing, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare the designated area an underground utility district and order the removal and underground installation. The resolution shall include a description of the area comprising the district, and shall fix the time within which removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for removal and for the installation of underground facilities. The city council may adopt by resolution at the time of the creation of any district provided for herein standard specifications for the installation of facilities to be underground, subject to appropriate laws, rules and regulations of all regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over such installations. 
(Code 1969, § 13.32.040; Ord. No. 282, § 4, 1968) 
Sec. 13.32.050. - Unlawful acts. 
    Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in section 13.32.040, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when overhead facilities are required to be moved by the resolution, except as overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance of the owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for the owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in section 13.32.100, and for the reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 13.32.050; Ord. No. 282, § 5, 1968) 
Sec. 13.32.060. - Emergency exceptions. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten days, without authority of the city engineer in order to provide emergency service. The city engineer may grant special permission, on such terms as the city engineer may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
(Code 1969, § 13.32.060; Ord. No. 282, § 6, 1968) 
Sec. 13.32.070. - Other exceptions. 
    In any resolution adopted pursuant to section 13.32.040, the city may authorize any or all of the following exceptions: 
(1)  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(2)  Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting. 
(3)  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited. 
(4)  Poles, overhead wires and associated structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts. 
(5)  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street. 
(6)  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services. 
(7)  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. 
(8)  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Code 1969, § 13.32.070; Ord. No. 282, § 7, 1968) 
Sec. 13.32.080. - Notice procedure. 
(a)  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to section 13.32.040, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying this property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or the occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location. 
(b)  Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to section 13.32.040, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Code 1969, § 13.32.080; Ord. No. 282, § 8, 1968) 
Sec. 13.32.090. - Responsibility of utility companies. 
    If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to section 13.32.040, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Code 1969, § 13.32.090; Ord. No. 282, § 9, 1968) 
Sec. 13.32.100. - Property owner responsibility. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in section 13.32.090 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served all in accordance with the rules of the public utilities commission. 
(b)  In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting the property does not comply with subsection (a) of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to section 13.32.040, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and 30 days thereafter may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. 
(Code 1969, § 13.32.100; Ord. No. 282, § 10, 1968) 
Sec. 13.32.110. - City responsibility. 
    The city shall remove, at its own expense, all city owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of the poles to remove them within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to section 13.32.040. 
(Code 1969, § 13.32.110; Ord. No. 282, § 11, 1968) 
Sec. 13.32.120. - Time extension. 
    In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to section 13.32.040 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which the act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of the limitation. 
(Code 1969, § 13.32.120; Ord. No. 282, § 12, 1968) 
Sec. 13.32.130. - General requirements. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, all electrical distribution lines of 16,000 volts or less, telephone, cable antenna television and similar service wires or cables which provide direct service to the property being developed shall be installed underground. The following exceptions shall apply: 
(1)  Utility service poles may be placed in the area within six feet of the rear lot line of the property to be developed for the sole purpose of terminating underground facilities. 
(2)  Temporary utilities, along with the necessary service poles, wires and cables, may be permitted for the period during which authorized construction is continuing for which valid building permits have been issued, or for temporary uses which comply with requirements of the zoning ordinance, building code, and other applicable regulations. 
(3)  Risers on poles and buildings are permitted and shall be provided by the developer or owner on the pole which provides service to the property. 
(4)  Appurtenances and associated equipment, including, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed aboveground. 
(5)  In residential areas where utility service poles presently exist along or near rear lot lines, overhead utility lines to serve residential structures are permitted only after approval by the city manager or his designated representative. This exception shall not apply to new residential subdivisions. 
(b)  The developer or owner is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and he shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility company for the installation of such facilities. 
(Code 1969, § 13.32.130; Ord. No. 504(part), 1983; Ord. No. 631, § 1, 1990) 
Sec. 13.32.140. - Nonconforming structures. 
    Buildings or structures, which on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or any subsequent amendments thereto are nonconforming in regard to the aboveground on-site utility lines, may continue to be used, altered or enlarged in the same manner as if such nonconforming utility lines did not exist. However, when alteration or enlargement of the buildings or structures requires the installation of utility lines at new locations on the buildings and structures, or when existing electrical capacity of the buildings or structures is increased 100 percent or more due to the alteration or enlargement of the buildings or structures, the utility lines shall comply with the requirement of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 13.32.140; Ord. No. 504(part), 1983) 
CHAPTER 13.34. - SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT FEE 

Sec. 13.34.010. - Special development fee required; annexations. 
    No permit shall be issued for the construction of any single-family or multiple-family residential building, or for the placing of any mobile home, which said single-family or multiple-family residential building or mobile home is proposed to be constructed or placed in an area which is situated outside the corporate limits of the city as the same existed on November 1, 1979, until the owner of the parcel of property upon which the building or mobile home is to be constructed or placed first pays a special development fee in addition to the fee specified in section 13.34.020 in accordance with the following schedule: 
Single-family dwelling units $250.00 each Multiple-family dwelling units $187.50 per unit Mobile home units $187.50 per unit All other users $250.00 or the sum determined by the city engineer by multiplying 250 by the user's estimated daily flow in gallons per day divided by 200, whichever is greater.  
(Code 1969, § 13.34.010; Ord. No. 460, § 1, 1979; Ord. No. 477, § 1, 1981) 
Sec. 13.34.020. - Special development fee required. 
    No permit shall be issued for the construction of any single-family or multiple-family residential building, or for the placing of any mobile home in sections 17 and 18 of Township 9 North, Range 1 West and section 13, Township 9 North, Range 2 West, San Bernardino Base Meridian, until the owner of the parcel of property upon which the building or mobile home is to be constructed or placed first pays a special development fee in accordance with the following schedule: 
Single-family dwelling units $250.00 each Multiple-family dwelling units $187.50 per unit Mobile home units $187.50 per unit All other users $250.00 or the sum determined by the city engineer by multiplying 250 by the user's estimated daily flow in gallons per day divided by 200, whichever is greater.  
(Code 1969, § 13.34.020; Ord. No. 477, § 2, 1981) 
CHAPTER 13.36. - WATER DEVELOPMENT FEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Fees for development projects, Government Code § 66000 et seq. 

Sec. 13.36.010. - Findings. 
(a)  The city council finds and determines that the adoption of a Lenwood Road/Interstate 15 (hereinafter collectively referred to as "subject area") water development fee ordinance will raise revenues sufficient to enable the city to provide for the construction of water system improvements to accommodate water and fire protection needs generated by the development and redevelopment of land within the subject area interchange more particularly described as follows: 
All of the properties within section 16; the south half of section 17; section 21, except the southwest 1/4 of the southwest 1/4 thereof; the southwest 1/4 of section 22; the west one-half of section 27, and the east one-half of section 28, Township 9 North, Range 2 West, San Bernardino Meridian in the City of Barstow, County of San Bernardino, State of California. 
(b)  The city council finds that implementation of the Lenwood Road/I-15 master water facilities plan on file in the office of the city engineer will result in a water supply system which has the capacity to accommodate additional water and fire protection needs of the Lenwood Road/I-15 area generated by anticipated future development consistent with the city's general plan. 
(c)  The city council finds that the property described in this section shall benefit from water system improvements due to the increased availability of water supply in the area as well as the resultant increase in fire protection. 
(d)  The city council finds and declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter contains a fair and equitable method of determining the extent to which a property would be benefitted and establishes a fair and equitable method for distribution of costs of subject water system improvements. 
(e)  The city council finds and declares that the Lenwood Road/I-15 Area master water facilities plan is needed in order to further implement the general plan of the city and further the health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 13.36.010; Ord. No. 571, § 1(part), 1987; Ord. No. 595, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 13.36.020. - Purposes. 
(a)  In order to better provide water to new and existing developments in the subject area, the city must impose a fee. This fee shall be known as the Lenwood Road/I-15 water development fee. 
(b)  The purpose of this chapter is to require developers of property in the subject area and existing property owners who may need to access water provided by subject water system improvements to pay a fee which is related directly to the incremental financial burden imposed upon the city by capital outlay for construction of the water system improvements as described in the Lenwood Road/I-15 master water facilities plan hereinafter collectively referred to as "plan" on file in the office of the city engineer. 
(c)  The water development fee is the most practical and equitable method of financing the construction of said water facilities. This fee is intended to recover all costs incurred by the city in providing for subject water facilities. 
(Code 1969, § 13.36.020; Ord. No. 571, § 1(part), 1987) 
Sec. 13.36.030. - Requirements and applicability. 
(a)  Each developer of a new development located in the subject area shall pay to the city as a condition precedent to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for such new development, a water development fee. 
(b)  Each property owner or tenant of property located in the subject area who wishes to be served or is required by law to be served by any portion of the water system improvements including any fire protection systems shall pay to the city a water development fee as a condition precedent to receiving water service or final approval of any permit relating thereto. 
(c)  Such water development fee shall be calculated on the basis of parcel size. Said fee shall include annual adjustments to offset inflationary conditions. The annual adjustment shall be made in conformance with the annual change in the state construction cost index as published by the state business and transportation agency. Further, such annual adjustments shall be made on July 1 of each year. 
(d)  The city engineer shall determine actual charges in accordance with the following: 
Parcel size in acres × $1,890.00 × annual adjustment = fee. 
(e)  If a developer elects to provide for any portion of the water system described in the plan at said developer's expense, such expense shall be credited against the water development fee. Such credits shall be determined by the city. In the event the developer's expense exceeds the development fee for such development, the city may, at its option, enter into a reimbursement agreement with developer for the excess costs. 
(Code 1969, § 13.36.030; Ord. No. 571, § 1(part), 1987; Ord. No. 595, § 2, 1988) 
Sec. 13.36.040. - Disposition/allocation of funds. 
(a)  The sums derived from the collection of the water development fee shall be held in trust by the treasurer of the city and shall be distributed according to the fiscal and budgetary provisions of the city and subject to the following conditions and limitations. The proceeds from the development fee including earnings from investments thereof shall be used only for the payment of expenses related to the construction of water facilities and appurtenances described in the plan. Such expenses shall include the payment or repayment of design, construction, and/or administrative expenses related thereto. 
(b)  The city treasurer is authorized and directed to deposit the sum of $525,000.00 into the water development fee fund for the purpose of initiating the first phase of subject water improvement plan. Said sum shall be transferred from the city capital outlay fund. This initial outlay of funds ($525,000.00) shall be reimbursed to the city from the proceeds of subject water development fee charges over a period of time until said funds are completely reimbursed. 
(Code 1969, § 13.36.040; Ord. No. 571, § 1(part), 1987) 
Sec. 13.36.050. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires: 
    Developer means any person, firm, property owner, or entity receiving approval from the city for a new development. 
    New development means any addition, extension, conversion, or enlargement of an existing structure, or any new construction requiring a building permit. 
(Code 1969, § 13.36.050; Ord. No. 571, § 1(part), 1987) 
CHAPTER 13.40. - WATER CONSERVATION PLAN 

Sec. 13.40.010. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires: 
    Excess runoff means water accumulation on streets, gutters, neighboring properties or other in an amount sufficient to cause flow. 
    New development means any addition, extension, conversion, or enlargement of an existing structure, or any new construction requiring a building permit. 
(Code 1969, § 13.40.010; Ord. No. 618, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 13.40.020. - Application; water users. 
    The provisions of this chapter apply to all water users; water users being those persons, customers and property served within the incorporated boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 13.40.020; Ord. No. 618, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 13.40.030. - Water user responsibility. 
    Water users are deemed to have under control at all times their water distributions and facilities and to know the manner and extent of their water use and excess runoff. 
(Code 1969, § 13.40.030; Ord. No. 618, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 13.40.040. - Water uses prohibited. 
    No water user within the city shall knowingly make, cause, use or permit the use of water for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter, or in an amount in excess of that use permitted by the conservation stages hereinafter designated: 
(1)  No water user shall cause or permit any water furnished to any property within the city to run or to escape from any hose, pipe, valve, faucet, sprinkler or irrigation device into any sidewalk, street or gutter, or to otherwise escape from the property if such running or escaping can reasonably be prevented. 
(2)  Commercial and noncommercial watering of grass, lawns, ground cover, open ground, shrubbery, crops, gardens and trees, including agricultural irrigation, in a manner or to an extent which allows substantial amounts of excess water to run off the area being watered shall not be permitted. A minimum amount of runoff which is a natural consequence of conservative watering, either by hand or mechanical sprinkling facilities, is permitted so long as such runoff is not excess as defined in section 13.40.010. 
(3)  Lawn watering, landscape irrigation, and watering of public and private recreation facilities is to be done only between 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. during the months of April through September. If a hand-held hose or drip irrigation system is used, watering may be done at any time. Watering of newly established landscaping also may be done at any time. 
(4)  Agricultural water users and commercial nurseries shall conduct watering between 6:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. during the months of April through September. If a hand-held hose or drip irrigation system is used, watering may be done at any time. Watering of livestock is permitted at any time. 
(5)  There shall be no washing down of sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, or other paved surfaces except to alleviate immediate fire or sanitation hazards. 
(6)  When not using a commercial automobile wash, the following shall apply: 
a.  Automobiles shall be washed using a bucket during the washing process. 
b.  A nozzle and hose which shuts off automatically when released shall be used for the rinsing process. 
c.  Automobiles may not be washed on public streets. 
(7)  Restaurants shall be asked not to serve water to customers, unless the customer specifically requests. 
(Code 1969, § 13.40.040; Ord. No. 618, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 13.40.050. - New development; standards. 
    All new development shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as follows: 
(1)  Any additions to existing structures shall be equipped with low-flush toilets, as per California Health and Safety Code § 17921.3, and with low-flow showers and faucets, as per title 24, part 6, article 1, T20-1406F of the California Administrative Code, in addition to the insulating of all hot water lines, according to state energy commission regulations. 
(2)  Prior to project approval, guarantee of an adequate supply of potable water sufficient to meet essential private and domestic, sanitation and fire protection needs for the entire project shall be provided by a water purveyor or appropriate government agency. 
(3)  Prior to project approval for the development of a commercial vehicle wash, guarantee must be provided that a water recycling system shall be installed and efficiently utilized. 
(4)  Require that all environmental evaluations for proposed development include projections for the consumption of potable and (where feasible) reclaimed water, and for the generation and disposal of liquid and solid wastes. 
(5)  The use of drought tolerant plant species for landscaping purposes is suggested and encouraged. 
(6)  Large water users shall be encouraged to implement water recycling and reuse processes. 
(7)  Large water users shall be encouraged to submit a water conservation plan to the city manager's office and promote implementation of same. 
(Code 1969, § 13.40.050; Ord. No. 618, § 2(part), 1989) 
Sec. 13.40.060. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The prohibited or restricted uses of water under this chapter shall not be applicable in those instances when the city manager or his designee finds: 
(1)  The use is essential to avoid an undue hardship for a water user; 
(2)  Special circumstances exist for a particular water user, as distinguished from other water users, which justify allowing an exception; 
(3)  The use is essential for required government or public utility services, including but not limited to, police protection, fire protection, sanitation, and other critical or emergency services; or 
(4)  The use is essential to maintain the public health and safety. 
(b)  Upon granting an exception, the city manager or his designee shall notify each member of the city council of the exception and the reason therefor. 
(Code 1969, § 13.40.060; Ord. No. 618, § 2(part), 1989; Ord. No. 628, § 2, 1990) 
Sec. 13.40.070. - Notice and penalties. 
(a)  The city manager, city building officer, code enforcement officer or law enforcement officer shall give first-time violators of this chapter a courtesy notice of the violation. Upon second and subsequent violations, the violator shall receive a citation and fine. 
(b)  The first warning notice shall specify the nature of the violation, the date on which it occurred and the corrective measures to be taken. Upon a second violation, the water user shall be charged with an infraction and shall be subjected to the following fines: 
(1)  $50.00 for the first conviction. 
(2)  $100.00 for the second conviction. 
(3)  $200.00 for the third and each subsequent conviction, where the third and subsequent conviction constitutes a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 13.40.070; Ord. No. 618, § 2(part), 1989) 
Title 14 - BUILDING AND PROPERTY REHABILITATION 
CHAPTER 14.02. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14.02.010. - Applicability of provisions. 
    The provisions of this title shall apply to all substandard, dangerous or unsafe buildings or property as defined herein. 
(Code 1969, § 14.02.010; Ord. No. 519, § 1, 1983) 
Sec. 14.02.020. - Continuation of occupancies; conditions. 
    Occupancies in existing buildings may be continued as provided in section 104 of the building code, as adopted in chapter 15.08, except such structures as are found to be substandard, dangerous or unsafe as defined in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 14.02.020; Ord. No. 519, § 2, 1983; Ord. No. 749, § 1, 1999) 
CHAPTER 14.04. - BUILDING REHABILITATION CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior ordinance history- Ord. Nos. 519, 577, 620, 684 and 722. 

Sec. 14.04.010. - Building rehabilitation code adopted. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, and the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, are adopted by reference as the building rehabilitation code of the city. A copy of the building rehabilitation code has been filed, and shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection, and the building rehabilitation code is adopted with the same full force and effect as though set out herein. 
(Code 1969, § 14.04.010; Ord. No. 749, § 2, 1999) 
Sec. 14.04.020. - Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 edition, amendments. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 14.04.010, chapter 8, section 802.1-General, is amended by substituting the words "public works superintendent or his or her designee" for the words "director of public works." 
(Code 1969, § 14.04.020; Ord. No. 749, § 3, 1999) 
Sec. 14.04.030. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure, or cause or permit the same to be done, in violation of the building rehabilitation code. Each such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the building rehabilitation code is committed, continued, or permitted. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation shall remove, deface, alter, or obstruct from view a posted notice of the building official, or his authorized representative, when such notice constitutes a stop work order or a warning of substandard or hazardous conditions or prohibits or restricts the occupancy or use of a building or structure regulated by the building rehabilitation code. 
(c)  Every violation of the building rehabilitation code shall be deemed a misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in section 1.01.150. 
(Code 1969, § 14.04.030; Ord. No. 749, § 4, 1999) 
CHAPTER 14.06. - SUBSTANDARD PROPERTY REHABILITATION CODE 

Sec. 14.06.010. - General provisions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all substandard property as defined in section 14.06.020. 
(Code 1969, § 14.06.010; Ord. No. 519, § 5(part), 1983) 
Sec. 14.06.020. - Definition of substandard property. 
    Structures, grounds or premises maintained in such a manner that any one or more of the following conditions are found to exist shall constitute substandard property: 
(1)  Unpainted buildings causing dry rot, warping, splitting or termite infestation. 
(2)  Broken windows and doors constituting hazardous conditions and inviting trespassers and malicious mischief. 
(3)  Overgrown trees and other vegetation that are: 
a.  Causing detriment to neighboring properties and property values; or 
b.  Dangerous to public safety and welfare. 
(4)  Dead trees, weeds and debris that are: 
a.  Constituting unsightly appearances; 
b.  Dangerous to public safety and welfare; or 
c.  Detrimental to nearby property or property values. 
(5)  Any premises which are painted in a garish manner or which contain signs of such size, type, and/or quantity which are inconsistent with section 19.06.060. 
(6)  Property, including, but not limited to, building exteriors which are maintained in such condition as to become so defective, unsightly, or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes appreciable diminution of the property values of surrounding property or is materially detrimental to proximal properties and improvements. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or disposing of, or the scattering over the property or premises of any of the following: 
a.  Lumber, junk, trash, or debris. 
b.  Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment, such as automobiles, trailers, campers, boats, bus bodies, and similar objects or equipment. 
c.  Any device, decoration, design, fence, structure or vegetation which is unsightly by reason of its inappropriate location. 
d.  Any wall, fence or hedge in such condition as to constitute a hazard to persons or property or to cause depreciation in the value of any adjacent or nearby property. 
e.  Any premises upon which there exists or is conducted, maintained or permitted any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence, including, but not being limited to, abandoned or unused wells, shafts, basements, excavations or foundations. 
(7)  Any one or more of the conditions listed under Health and Safety Code § 17920.3 as an endangerment to the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or the occupants of a building or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guestroom or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located. 
(Code 1969, § 14.06.020; Ord. No. 519, § 5(part), 1983; Ord. No. 806, § 3, 2005) 
State Law reference- List of conditions that endanger health, safety, and welfare of occupants so as to deem the structure a substandard building, Health and Safety Code § 17920.3. 
Sec. 14.06.030. - Administration. 
    The State Administrative Code, as adopted in chapter 15.08, shall govern the administration of the chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 14.06.030; Ord. No. 519, § 5(part), 1983; Ord. No. 577, § 2, 1988; Ord. No. 620, § 3, 1990; Ord. No. 684, § 3, 1992; Ord. No. 727, § 3, 1996; Ord. No. 749, § 5(part), 1999) 
State Law reference- Administrative enforcement actions and proceedings to correct unsafe conditions or to abate nuisances in substandard buildings or the lot upon which they are situated, Health and Safety Code § 17980 et seq. 
Sec. 14.06.040. - Enforcement. 
    Chapter 2, Enforcement of the Uniform Housing Code, as adopted in chapter 14.04, shall govern enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 14.06.040; Ord. No. 519, § 5(part), 1983; Ord. No. 577, § 3, 1988; Ord. No. 620, § 4, 1990; Ord. No. 684, § 4, 1992; Ord. No. 727, § 4, 1996; Ord. No. 749, § 5(part), 1999) 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State Housing Law, Health and Safety Code § 17910 et seq.; city authority to regulate the construction, repair, or alteration of buildings, Government Code § 38660. 

CHAPTER 15.04. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 15.04.010. - Applicability of regulations. 
    The provisions of this title shall apply to the regulation of the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and/or structures in the city. 
(Code 1969, § 15.04.010; Ord. No. 518, § 2(part), 1983) 
CHAPTER 15.08. - BUILDING CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 950-2017, § 1, adopted January 17, 2017, amended ch. 15.08 in its entirety, save and except § 15.08.060 to read as herein set out. Former 15.08.010-15.08.070 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ordinance No. 786, § 1(part), adopted 2003; and Ordinance No. 838, §§ 1-3, adopted 2008; and Ordinance No. 870-2010 § 1, adopted January 18, 2011; and Ord. No. 925-2014, adopted July 21, 2014. 
State Law reference- City building department required to enforce state building standards code, state housing law, and other rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to them, Health and Safety Code § 17960. 

Sec. 15.08.010. - Codes adopted. 
    The following codes, including their appendices unless otherwise provided (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "codes") are adopted for the purpose of regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all building or structures; regulating the design, construction, quality of materials erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances and plumbing systems in the city; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and providing for penalties for the violation thereof. A copy of each of the codes has been filed, and shall remain on file, in the office of the city building official for public inspection, and the codes are adopted with the same full force and effect as though set out herein. The city adopts the following codes by this reference, as amended by this chapter: 
(1)  The California Standards Administrative Code, 2016 edition (Part 1, Title 24, California Code of Regulations); 
(2)  The California Building Code, 2016 edition (Part 2, Title 24, California Code of Regulations) (but only appendices B, C, F, G, H, I, J); 
(3)  The California Residential Code, 2016 edition (Part 2.5, Title 24, California Code of Regulations) (but only appendices A, B, C, D, E, G, H, I, J, K, N, O, P, Q); 
(4)  The California Electrical Code, 2016 edition (Part 3, Title 24, California Code of Regulations); 
(5)  The California Mechanical Code, 2016 edition (Part 4, Title 24, California Code of Regulations); 
(6)  The California Plumbing Code, 2016 edition (Part 5, Title 24, California Code of Regulations); 
(7)  The California Energy Code, 2016 edition (Part 6, Title 24, California Code of Regulations); 
(8)  The California Historical Building Code, 2016 edition (Part 8, Title 24, California Code of Regulations); 
(9)  The California Existing Building Code, 2016 edition (Part 10, Title 24, California Code of Regulations); 
(10)  The California Green Building Standards Code, 2016 edition (Part 11, California Code of Regulations), (excluding appendix chapters A4 and A5); 
(11)  The California Referenced Standards Code, 2016 edition (Part 12, Title 24, California Code of Regulations). 
(12)  The Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition (Chapter 3-Permits and Inspections). 
(Code 1969, § 15.08.010; Ord. No. 870-2010, § 1, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 925-2014, § 1, 7-21-2014; Ord. No. 950-2017, § 1, 1-17-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.08.020. - Building code amendments. 
(a)  Chapter 1, Section 109.2 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follow: 
Section 109.2.1-Exemption. The city, county, state, federal government, school districts and Barstow Fire Protection District are exempt from paying fees. 
(b)  Sections 105.2 and 105.2.4 of the California Building Code are amended to read: 
Block walls (garden walls) that are not over 3 feet in height measured from the top of footing to the top of the wall. 
( Ord. No. 950-2017, § 1, 1-17-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.08.030. - Green building code amendments. 
(a)  Section 305 of the Green Building Standards Code is deleted in its entirety. 
(b)  Section 306 of the Green Building Standards Code is deleted in its entirety. 
(c)  Section 4.408.2 of the Green Building Standards Code is amended by adding Section 4.408.2(6)-Waste Management Plan Application and shall read as follows: 
Section 4.408.2(6)-Waste Management Plan Application. 
A Waste Management Plan Application from the City of Barstow shall be completed with each applicable building permit application. 
(d)  Chapters A4 and A5 of the Appendix to the Green Building Standards Code are deleted in their entirety. 
( Ord. No. 950-2017, § 1, 1-17-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.08.040. - Residential building code amendments. 
(a)  A new section AG101.1.1 is hereby added to Appendix Chapter G (Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs) of the Residential Building Code and shall read as follows: 
Section AG101.1.1-Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs. 
(1)  Equipment shall be so installed as to provide ready accessibility for cleaning, operating maintenance, and servicing. 
(2)  Any swimming pool constructed after the effective date of the requirements set forth in this section shall be constructed so that there are at least five feet between the swimming pool and: 
a.  The main building. 
b.  Any lot line. 
c.  Any building (including auxiliary buildings) unless the swimming pool is specially designed to maintain the structural integrity of the buildings or structure involved, even though they are within five feet of the pool. 
(3)  The owner of any swimming pool may request approval of modifications or variances from the fencing requirement by submitting to the building official written application, setting forth a description of the pool and an alternate safeguard or condition of the site by which entry into the swimming pool may be restricted or prevented. The building official may approve such alternate safeguard or obstruction upon finding that one of the following conditions exists: 
a.  That the physical conditions of the site would make the erection of a fence or wall impractical or purposeless: 
b.  That the proposed limitation of access or conditions of control thereof which would be continuously effective would accomplish the intent of the enclosure requirements; or 
c.  That the degree of protection afforded by the substitute devises or structures is not less than the protection afforded by the enclosure and/or safety features, which are required by the code. 
(b)  Section AG105.2.1 (Barrier Requirements) of Appendix Chapter G (Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs) of the Residential Building Code is amended as follows: 
The top of the barrier is to be 60 inches above grade. The remainder of the section remains the same. 
( Ord. No. 950-2017, § 1, 1-17-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.08.050. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish equipment, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure, plumbing or mechanical systems or equipment, or cause or permit the same to be done, in violation of the codes. Each such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the codes is committed, contained or permitted. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation shall remove, deface, alter or obstruct from view a posted notice of the building official, or his or her authorized representative, when such notice constitutes a stop work order or a warning of substandard or hazardous conditions or prohibits or restricts the occupancy or use of any building or structure, plumbing or mechanical systems or equipment regulated by the codes. 
(c)  Every violation of the codes shall be deemed a misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in section 1.01.110 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 950-2017, § 1, 1-17-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.08.060. - Board of appeals. 
(a)  Established. In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of this Code, there is created a board of appeals. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The board of appeals shall: 
(1)  Hear and determine appeals from the rulings of the building official concerning any of the codes adopted by the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(2)  Have the authority to approve the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this Code, provided that the proposed design is satisfactory and that the material or method of work offered is for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this Code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. Each approval of the use of an alternate material or method of construction shall be singular and shall not be applied as a modification of the regulations of this Code. 
(3)  Adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its hearings and meetings; the rules shall be called the bylaws of the building board of appeals. 
(4)  In connection with hearing appeals from the rulings of the building official, the board shall render all findings of facts and decisions in writing. A copy of each of such findings and decisions shall be sent to the building official and the appellant. 
(5)  The decisions of the board of appeals may be appealed to the city council within ten days. The review by the city council of a decision of the board of appeals shall be based solely upon the administrative record as presented before the board of appeals. The review of the city council shall be limited to whether the findings of the city council are supported by the evidence. The decisions of the city council shall be final. 
(6)  Recommend to the city council any new legislation necessary or any change to existing regulations it deems necessary. 
(c)  Method of appeals. 
(1)  Appeals shall be made and conducted as provided under state law. 
(2)  Appeals from decisions of the building official shall be in writing on forms provided by the building division. 
(3)  Each separate appeal shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount as established by the city council from time to time. 
(4)  The board of appeals shall hear the appeal within ten working days after application has been filed with the building official and shall render their findings to the appellant in writing within five days after the hearing. 
State Law reference- Local appeals board authorized by board of supervisors to hear appeals regarding building requirements of the city, Health and Safety Code § 17920.5. 
Sec. 15.08.070. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 950-2017 , § 1, adopted January 17, 2017, repealed § 15.08.070, which pertained to violations and penalties, and derived from Code 1969, § 15.08.050; Ord. No. 870-2010, § 1, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 925-2014, § 1, 7-21-2014. 
CHAPTER 15.10. - EXPEDITED REVIEW PROCESS FOR ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (10 KW OR LESS) FOR ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING 

Sec. 15.10.010. - Purpose. 
    California Government Code § 65850.5 provides that, on or before September 30, 2015, every city, county, or city and county shall adopt an ordinance that creates an expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential roof top solar energy systems (10kW or less) for one- and two-family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 936-2015 , § 1, 8-17-2015) 
Sec. 15.10.020. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise more particularly defined, the following terms are hereby defined: 
(a)  Electronic submittal means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
(1)  E-mail, 
(2)  The internet, 
(3)  Facsimile (fax). 
(b)  Small residential rooftop solar energy system means all of the following: 
1.  A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal. 
2.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. 
3.  A solar system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(c)  Solar energy system has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated form time to time. 
(d)  Feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by a city, county, or city and county on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. A city, county, or city and county shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (a) and (b) or paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of section 714 of the Civil Code. 
(e)  Specific, adverse impact means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 936-2015 , § 1, 8-17-2015) 
Sec. 15.10.030. - Duties of the building department. 
(a)  As per California Government Code § 65850.5, the building department shall develop an expedited permitting process which shall include the adoption of a checklist of all requirements for which a small residential solar energy system may be eligible for expedited review. 
(b)  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the city's website. 
(C)  An applicant may submit the permit application and associated documentation to the city's building department in person, by mail, or by electronic submittal along with the permit fee, as adopted in the city's Master Fee Schedule. 
(d)  In the case of electronic submittal, an applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, application and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. For purposes of this section, the city will accept as an electronic signature an electronic copy, such as a facsimile image or an electronic image (such as a PDF), of an applicant's original signature. 
(Ord. No. 936-2015 , § 1, 8-17-2015) 
Sec. 15.10.040. - Permit review and inspection. 
(a)  Applications received either in person or electronic submittal will be plan checked within three business days. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the building department shall issue a written correction notice within the same time frame, which details all deficiencies in the application and provide any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. 
(b)  Review of an application shall be limited to the building official's review of whether the application meets the requirements of the adopted checklist and the California Building Standards Code (whichever edition has been most recently adopted by the city council). In the event the building official makes a finding, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety, the applicant may be required to apply for a use permit. 
(c)  In the case that a use permit is required to install a solar energy system, its applicant may not be denied unless written findings are made based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. The findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives of preventing the adverse impact. 
(d)  In most cases only one consolidated inspection shall be performed, in a timely manner, for small residential rooftop solar energy systems which are permitted under expedited review. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails an inspection, subsequent inspection(s) shall be authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  The building official shall not condition approval of any solar energy system on the approval of a solar energy system by an association, as that term is defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code. 
(Ord. No. 936-2015 , § 1, 8-17-2015) 
CHAPTER 15.12. - GRADING 

Sec. 15.12.010. - General provisions. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this chapter apply to grading, excavation and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments and the control of grading site runoff, including erosion sediments and construction-related pollutants. The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, limb, property, and the public welfare by regulating grading on private property. 
(b)  Flood hazard areas. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to grading, excavation and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, in floodways within flood hazard areas established or in flood hazard areas where design flood elevations are specified but floodways have not been designated, unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed work will not result in any increase in the level of the base flood. 
(c)  General hazards. Whenever the building official determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the building official shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment to eliminate the hazard and to be in conformance with the requirements of this Code. 
(d)  Safety precautions. If at any stage of the work the building official determines by inspection that further grading as authorized is likely to endanger any public or private property or result in the deposition of debris on any public way or interfere with any existing drainage course, the building official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall immediately stop such work. The building official may authorize the work to proceed if the building official finds adequate safety precautions can be taken or corrective measures incorporated in the work to avoid the likelihood of such danger, deposition or interference. If the grading work as done has created or resulted in a hazardous condition, the building official shall give written notice requiring correction thereof as specified in section 15.12.050. 
(e)  Protection of utilities. The owner of any property on which grading has been performed and that requires a grading permit under section 15.12.030 shall be responsible for the prevention of damage to any public utilities or services. 
(f)  Protection of adjacent property. The owner of any property on which grading has been performed and that requires a grading permit under section 15.12.030 is responsible for the prevention of damage to adjacent property and no person shall excavate on land sufficiently close to the property line to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public or private property without supporting and protecting such property from settling, cracking or other damage that might result. Special precautions approved by the building official shall be made to prevent imported or exported materials from being deposited on the adjacent public way and/or drainage courses. 
(g)  Stormwater control measures. The owner of any property on which grading has been performed and that requires a grading permit under section 15.12.030 shall put into effect and maintain all precautionary measures necessary to protect adjacent watercourses and public or private property from damage by erosion, flooding, and deposition of mud, debris, and construction-related pollutants originating from the site during grading and related construction activities. 
(h)  Maintenance of private devices. The owner of any property on which grading has been performed pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this Code, or any other person or agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good condition and repair all drainage structures and other protective devices when they are shown on the grading plans filed with the application for grading permit and approved as a condition precedent to the issuance of such permit. 
(i)  Conditions of approval. In granting any permit under this Code, the building official may include such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent creation of a nuisance or hazard to public or private property. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Improvement of any existing grading to comply with the standards of this Code; 
(2)  Requirements for fencing of excavations or fills which would otherwise be hazardous. 
(Code 1969, § 15.12.010; Ord. No. 870-2010, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 925-2014, § 2, 7-21-2014) 
Sec. 15.12.020. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the terms, phrases, and words listed in this section and their derivatives have the indicated meanings, unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires: 
    Bench means the relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed. 
    Borrow means earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site. 
    Civil engineer means a professional engineer registered in the state to practice in the field of civil works. 
    Civil engineering means the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics, and the properties of materials to the evaluation, design, and construction of civil works. 
    Compaction means the densification of a fill by mechanical means. 
    Cut. See Excavation. 
    Design engineer means the civil engineer responsible for the preparation of the grading plans for the site grading work. 
    Desilting basins means physical structures constructed for the removal of sediments from surface water runoff. 
    Down drain means a device for collecting water from a swale or ditch located on or above a slope, and safely delivering it to an approved drainage facility. 
    Earth material means any rock, natural soil, or fill or any combination thereof. 
    Engineering geologist means a geologist experienced and knowledgeable in engineering geology holding a valid certificate of registration as a geologist in the specialty of engineering geology issued by the state under the applicable provisions of the Geologist and Geophysicist Act of the Business and Professions Code. 
    Engineering geology means the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works. 
    Erosion means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, or ice. 
    Excavation means the removal of earth material by artificial means, also referred to as a cut. 
    Field engineer means the civil engineer responsible for performing the functions as set forth in section J105.2 of the CBC appendix J. 
    Fill means the deposition of earth materials by artificial means. 
    Geotechnical engineer. See Soils engineer. 
    Geotechnical hazard means an adverse condition due to landslide, settlement, and/or slippage. These hazards include but are not limited to loose debris, slope wash, and mud flows from natural or graded slopes. 
    Grade means the vertical location of the ground surface. 
    Grade, existing, means the grade prior to grading. 
    Grade, final. See section 15.12.050(g)(4). 
    Grade, finished, means the grade of the site at the conclusion of all grading efforts. 
    Grade, initial. See section 15.12.050(g)(2). 
    Grade, rough. See section 15.12.050(g)(3). 
    Grading means an excavation or fill or combination thereof. 
    Key means a compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material generally constructed at the toe of the slope. 
    Landscape architect means a person who holds a certificate to practice landscape architecture in the state under the applicable landscape architecture provisions of division 3, chapter 3.5 of the Business and Professions Code. 
    Line means and refers to the horizontal location of the ground surface. 
    Permittee. See section 15.120.050(f). 
    Private sewage disposal system means a septic tank with effluent discharging into a subsurface disposal field, into one or more seepage pits or into a combination of subsurface disposal field and seepage pit or such other facilities as may be permitted. 
    Professional inspection means the inspection required by this Code to be performed by the project consultants. Such inspections shall be sufficient to form an opinion relating to the conduct of the work. 
    Project consultants means the professional consultants required by this Code which may consist of the design engineer, field engineer, soils engineer, engineering geologist, and landscape architect as applicable to this chapter. 
    Site means a lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted. 
    Slope means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. 
    Soil means naturally occurring superficial deposits overlying parent bedrock. 
    Soil testing agency means an agency regularly engaged in the testing of soils and rock under the direction of a civil engineer experienced in soil testing. 
    Soils engineer (geotechnical engineer) means an engineer experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of soils engineering (geotechnical) engineering. 
    Soils engineering (geotechnical engineering) means the application of the principles of soils mechanics in the investigation, evaluation, and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection or testing of construction thereof. 
    Storm drain system means a conveyance or system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, and manmade channels, designed or used for collecting and conveying stormwater. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) means a site drawing with details, notes and related documents that identify the measures proposed by the permittee to: 
(1)  Control erosion and prevent sediment and construction-related pollutants from being carried off-site by stormwater; and 
(2)  To prevent non-stormwater discharges from entering the storm drain system. 
    Surface drainage means flows over the ground surface. 
    Terrace means a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope for drainage and maintenance purposes. 
(Code 1969, § 15.12.020; Ord. No. 870-2010, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 925-2014, § 2, 7-21-2014) 
Sec. 15.12.030. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits required. Except as exempted in subsection (b) of this section, no grading shall be performed without first having obtained a permit from the building official. A grading permit does not include the construction of retaining walls or other structures. A separate permit shall be obtained for each site and may cover both excavations and fills. Any engineered grading as described in section 15.12.040 shall be performed by a contractor licensed by the state to perform the work described hereon. Regular grading less than 5,000 cubic yards may require a licensed contractor if the building official determines that special conditions or hazards exist. 
(b)  Exemptions. A grading permit shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  When approved by the building official, grading in an isolated, self-contained area, provided there is no danger to the public, and that such grading will not adversely affect adjoining properties; 
(2)  Excavation for construction of a structure permitted under this Code; 
(3)  Cemetery graves; 
(4)  Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations; 
(5)  Excavations for wells, or trenches for utilities; 
(6)  Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand, gravel, aggregate, or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support of, or significantly increase stresses in, soil on adjoining properties; 
(7)  Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a soils engineer or engineering geologist. This shall not exempt grading of access roads or pads created for exploratory excavations. Exploratory excavations must be restored to existing conditions, unless approved by the building official; 
(8)  An excavation that does not exceed 50 cubic yards (38.3 m3) and complies with one of the following conditions: 
a.  Is less than two feet (0.6 m) in depth; 
b.  Does not create a cut slope greater than five feet (1.5 m) measured vertically upward from the cut surface to the surface of the natural grade and is not steeper than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (50 percent slope); 
(9)  A fill not intended to support a structure, that does not obstruct a drainage course and complies with one of the following conditions: 
a.  Is less than one foot (0.3 m) in depth and is placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than five units horizontal to one unit vertical (20 percent slope); 
b.  Is less than three feet (0.9 m) in depth at its deepest point measured vertically upward from natural grade to the surface of the fill, does not exceed 50 cubic yards, and creates a fill slope no greater than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (50 percent slope); 
c.  Is less than five feet (1.5 m) in depth at its deepest point measured vertically upward from natural grade to the surface of the fill, does not exceed 20 cubic yards, and creates a fill slope no steeper than two units horizontal and one unit vertical (50 percent slope). 
Exemption from the permit requirements of this section shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Unpermitted grading. A person shall not own, use, occupy or maintain any site containing unpermitted grading. For the purposes of this Code, unpermitted grading shall be defined as any grading that was performed, at any point in time, without the required permits having first been obtained from the building official, pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Availability of permit at site. No person shall perform any grading that requires a permit under this chapter unless a copy of the grading permit and approved grading plans is in the possession of a responsible person and available at the site for the building official. 
(Code 1969, § 15.12.030; Ord. No. 870-2010, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 925-2014, § 2, 7-21-2014) 
Sec. 15.12.040. - Permit application submittals. 
(a)  Submittal requirements. In addition to the provisions of California Building Code (CBC) appendix J, section 104, the applicant shall state the estimated quantities of excavation and fill. 
(b)  Site plan requirements. In addition to the provisions of CBC appendix J section 104, a grading plan shall show the existing grade and finished grade in contour intervals of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work and show in detail that it complies with the requirements of this Code. The plans shall show the existing grade on adjoining properties in sufficient detail to identify how grade changes will conform to the requirements of this Code. 
(c)  Grading designation. Grading in excess of 5,000 cubic yards (3,825 m 3 ) or for the support of a structure shall be performed in accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a civil engineer, and shall be designated as "engineered grading." Grading involving less than 5,000 cubic yards (3,825 m 3 ) and not for the support of a structure shall be designated "regular grading" unless the permittee chooses to have the grading performed as engineered grading, or the building official determines that special conditions or unusual hazards exist, in which case grading shall conform to the requirements for engineered grading. 
(d)  Regular grading requirements. In addition to the provisions of CBC chapter 1, division II, section 107, and subsection (b) of this section, an application for a regular grading permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans in sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work. The plans shall give the location of the work, the name of the owner, and the name of the person who prepared the plan. The plan shall include the following information: 
(1)  General vicinity of the proposed site; 
(2)  Limits and depths of cut and fill; 
(3)  Location of any buildings or structures where work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or structures within 15 feet (4.57 m) of the proposed grading; 
(4)  Contours, flow areas, elevations, or slopes which define existing and proposed drainage patterns. 
(e)  Engineered grading requirements. 
(1)  In addition to the provisions of CBC chapter 1, division II, section 107, and subsection (b) of this section, an application for an engineered grading permit shall be accompanied by four sets of plans and specifications, and supporting data consisting of a soils engineering report and engineering geology report. The plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by an individual licensed by the state to prepare such plans or specifications when required by the building official. 
(2)  Specifications shall contain information covering construction and material requirements. Plans shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this Code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give location of the work, the name and address of the owner, and the person by whom they were prepared. 
(3)  The plans shall include but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  General vicinity of the proposed site; 
b.  Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of terrain and area drainage; 
c.  Limiting dimensions, elevations, or finish contours to be achieved by the grading, proposed drainage channels, and related construction; 
d.  Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams, and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as a part of, the proposed work. A map showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains shall also be provided; 
e.  Location of any existing or proposed buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners who are within 15 feet (4.57 m) of the property that may be affected by the proposed grading operations; 
f.  Recommendations in the soils engineering report and the engineering geology report shall be incorporated into the grading plans or specifications. When approved by the building official, specific recommendations contained in the soils engineering report and the engineering geology report that are applicable to grading may be included by reference; 
g.  The dates of the soils engineering and engineering geology reports together with the names, addresses, and phone numbers of the firms or individuals who prepared the reports; 
h.  A statement of the earthwork quantities of material to be excavated and/or filled. Earthwork quantities shall include quantities for geotechnical and geological remediation. In addition, a statement of material to be imported or exported from the site; 
i.  A statement of the estimated starting and completion dates for work covered by the permit; 
j.  A statement signed by the owner acknowledging that a field engineer, soils engineer and engineering geologist, when appropriate, will be employed to perform the services required by this Code, whenever approval of plans and issuance of permit are to be based on the condition that such professional persons be so employed. These acknowledgements shall be on a form furnished by the building official; 
k.  A drainage plan for that portion of a lot or parcel to be utilized as a building site (building pad), including elevations of floors with respect to finish site grade and locations of proposed stoops, slabs and fences that may affect drainage; 
l.  Location and type of any proposed private sewage disposal system; 
m.  Location of existing and proposed utilities, drainage facilities, and recorded public and private easements; 
n.  Location of all recorded natural drainage courses and drainage easements. 
(f)  Soils engineering report. The soils engineering report required by subsection (e) of this section shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures, including buttress fills, when necessary, and opinion on adequacy for the intended use of sites to be developed by the proposed grading as affected by soils engineering factors, including the stability of slopes. Supplemental reports and data may be required as the building official may deem necessary. Recommendations included in the reports and approved by the building official shall be incorporated in the grading plan or specifications. 
(g)  Engineering geology report. The engineering geology report required by subsection (e) of this section shall include an adequate description of the geology of the site, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, and opinion on the adequacy for the intended use of sites to be developed by the proposed grading, as affected by geologic factors. The engineering geology report shall include a geologic map and cross sections utilizing the most recent grading plan as a base. Supplemental reports and data may be required as the building official may deem necessary. Recommendations included in the reports and approved by the building official shall be incorporated in the grading plan or specifications. 
(Code 1969, § 15.12.040; Ord. No. 870-2010, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 925-2014, § 2, 7-21-2014) 
Sec. 15.12.050. - Grading inspection. 
(a)  General. Grading inspections shall be governed by CBC chapter 1, division II, section 110. Grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official. Professional inspection of grading operations shall be provided by the field engineer, soils engineer and the engineering geologist retained to provide such services in accordance with this section for engineered grading and as required by the building official for regular grading. 
(b)  Special and supplemental inspections. 
(1)  The special inspection requirements of CBC section 1704.7 shall apply to work performed under a grading permit where required by the building official. In addition to the called inspections specified in subsection (g) of this section, the building official may make such other inspections as may be deemed necessary to determine that the work is being performed in conformance with the requirements of this Code. Investigations and reports by an approved soil testing agency, soils engineer and/or engineering geologist, and field engineer may be required. Inspection reports shall be provided when requested by the building official. 
(2)  Continuous inspection of drainage devices by the field engineer in accordance with this section may be required when the building official determines the drainage devices are necessary for the protection of the structures in accordance with section 15.12.090. 
(c)  Field engineer. The field engineer shall provide professional inspection within such engineer's area of technical specialty, oversee and coordinate all field surveys, set grade stakes, and provide site inspections during grading operations to ensure the site is graded in accordance with the approved grading plan and the appropriate requirements of this Code. During site grading, and at the completion of both rough grading and final grading, the field engineer shall submit statements and reports required by sections 15.12.110 and 15.12.120. If the revised grading plans are required during the course of work, they shall be prepared by a civil engineer and approved by the building official. 
(d)  Soils engineer. The soils engineer shall provide inspection within such engineer's area of technical specialty, which shall include observation during grading and testing for required compaction. The soils engineer shall provide sufficient observation during the preparation of the natural ground and placement and compaction of the fill to verify that such work is being performed in accordance with the conditions of the approved plan and the appropriate requirements of this chapter. Revised recommendations relating to conditions differing from the approved soils engineering and engineering geology reports shall be submitted to the permittee, the building official and the field engineer. 
(e)  Engineering geologist. The engineering geologist shall provide professional inspection within such engineer's area of technical specialty, which shall include professional inspection of the excavation to determine if conditions encountered are in conformance with the approved report. Revised recommendations relating to conditions differing from the approved engineering geology report shall be submitted to the soils engineer. 
(f)  Permittee. The permittee shall be responsible for the work to be performed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in conformance with the provisions of this Code and the permittee shall engage project consultants, if required, to provide professional inspections on a timely basis. The permittee shall act as a coordinator between the project consultants, the contractor, and the building official. In the event of changed conditions, the permittee shall be responsible for informing the building official of such change and shall provide revised plans for approval. 
(g)  Building official. The building official shall inspect the project site at the following various stages of work requiring approval to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the project consultants: 
(1)  Pre-grade. Before any construction or grading activities occur at the site, the permittee shall schedule a pre-grade inspection with the building official. The permittee is responsible for coordinating that all project consultants are present at the pre-grade inspection; 
(2)  Initial. When the site has been cleared of vegetation and unapproved fill and it has been scarified, benched or otherwise prepared for fill. No fill shall have been placed prior to this inspection; 
(3)  Rough. When approximate final elevations have been established; drainage terraces, swales, and other drainage devices necessary for the protection of the building sites from flooding are installed; berms are installed at the top of the slopes; and the statements required by subsection (l) of this section have been received; 
(4)  Final. When grading has been completed; all drainage devices necessary to drain the building pad are installed; slope planting is established, irrigation systems are installed; and the as-graded plans and required statements and reports have been submitted. 
(h)  Notification of noncompliance. If, in the course of fulfilling their respective duties under this chapter, the field engineer, the soils engineer or the engineering geologist finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this chapter or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies and corrective measures which should be taken shall be reported immediately in writing to the permittee and to the building official. 
(i)  Transfer of responsibility. If the field engineer, the soils engineer, or the engineering geologist of record is changed during the grading, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed in writing to accept their responsibility within the area of technical competence for approval upon completion of the work. It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the building official in writing of such change prior to the recommencement of such grading. 
(j)  Noninspected grading. No person shall own, use, occupy, or maintain any noninspected grading. For the purpose of this Code, noninspected grading shall be defined as any grading for which a grading permit was first obtained, pursuant to section 15.12.030, but which has progressed beyond any point requiring inspection and approval by the building official without such inspection and approval having been obtained. 
(k)  Routine field inspections and reports. Unless waived by the building official, routine inspection reports shall be provided by the field engineer for all engineered grading projects. The field engineer shall file these reports, with the building official as follows: 
(1)  Bi-weekly during all times when grading of 400 cubic yards or more per week is active on the site; 
(2)  Monthly, at all other times; and 
(3)  At any time when requested in writing by the building official. 
Such reports shall certify to the building official that the field engineer has inspected the grading site and related activities and has found them in compliance with the approved grading plans, the building code, grading permit conditions, and other applicable ordinances and requirements. 
(l)  Completion of work. Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work, the following reports and drawings and supplements thereto are required for engineered grading or when professional inspection is required by the building official: 
(1)  An as-built grading plan prepared by the field engineer retained to provide such services in accordance with subsection (c) of this section showing all plan revisions as approved by the building official. This shall include original ground surface elevations, as-built ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns, and the locations and elevations of surface drainage facilities and the outlets of subsurface drains. As-built locations, elevations and details of subsurface drains shall be shown as reported by the soils engineer. The field engineer shall state in a report, to the building official, that to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibility was done in accordance with the final approved grading plan; 
(2)  A report prepared by the soils engineer retained to provide such services in accordance with subsection (d) of this section including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests, other substantiating data, and comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the approved soils engineering report. Soils engineers shall submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibilities is in accordance with the approved soils engineering report and applicable provisions of this chapter. The reports shall contain a finding regarding the safety of the completed grading and any proposed structures against hazard from landslide, settlement, or slippage; 
(3)  A report prepared by the engineering geologist retained to provide such services in accordance with subsection (e) of this section including a final description of the geology of the site and any new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of same on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. Engineering geologists shall submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibility is in accordance with the approved engineering geologist report and applicable provisions for this chapter. The report shall contain a finding regarding the safety of the completed grading and any proposed structures against hazard from landslide, settlement, or slippage. The report must contain a final as-built geologic map and cross sections depicting all the information collected prior to and during grading; 
(4)  The grading contractor shall submit in a form prescribed by the building official a statement of conformance to said as-built plan and the specifications. 
(m)  Notification of completion. The permittee shall notify the building official when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all erosion control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan, and the required reports have been submitted and approved. 
(n)  Change of ownership. If a grading permit has been issued on a property and the building official has not approved the final grading when a property changes ownership, a new grading application and permit will be required from the new property owner. 
(Code 1969, § 15.12.050; Ord. No. 870-2010, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 925-2014, § 2, 7-21-2014) 
Sec. 15.12.060. - Excavations. 
(a)  General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soils engineering or engineering geology report, cuts shall conform to the provisions of this section. In the absence of an approved soils engineering or engineering geology report, these provisions may be waived, as approved by the building official, for minor cuts not intended to support structures or subject to a surcharge. 
(b)  Maximum cut slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use and shall be no steeper than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (50 percent slope) unless the permittee furnishes a soils engineering or an engineering geology report, or both, stating that the site has been investigated and giving an opinion that a cut at a steeper slope will be stable and not create a hazard to public or private property. The building official may require the excavation to be made with a cut face flatter in slope than two units horizontal to one unit vertical if the building official finds it necessary for stability and safety. 
(c)  Slope surface protection. All slopes must be stabilized against surface erosion. Stabilization may be accomplished through the application of erosion control blankets, soil stabilizers or other means as approved by the building official. 
(Code 1969, § 15.12.060; Ord. No. 870-2010, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 925-2014, § 2, 7-21-2014) 
Sec. 15.12.070. - Fills. 
(a)  General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soils engineering report, fills shall conform to the provisions of this section. In the absence of an approved soils engineering report, and if approved by the building official, these provisions may be waived for minor fills not intended to support structures. 
FIGURE 15.12.070. BENCHING DETAILS 

(b)  Preparation of ground. Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (50 percent slope). The ground structure shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials scarifying to provide a bind with the new fill. Where slopes are steeper than five units horizontal to one unit vertical (20 percent slope) and the height is greater than five feet (1.53 m), the ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by benching into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by the soils engineer. The ground preparation shall be in accordance with figure 15.12.070 or as determined by the soils engineer. The key under the toe of the fill on a slope steeper than five units horizontal to one unit vertical (20 percent slope) shall be at least ten feet (3.05 m) wide. The area beyond the toe of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain shall be provided. When fill is to be placed over a cut, the key shall be at least ten feet (3.05 m) wide. The cut shall be made before placing the fill and the soils engineer or engineering geologist or both shall accept the cut as suitable for the foundation and placement of fill material. 
(c)  Subdrains. Except where recommended by the soils engineer or engineering geologist as not being necessary, subdrains shall be provided under all fills placed in natural drainage courses and in other locations where seepage is evident. Such subdrainage systems shall be of a material and design approved by the soils engineer and acceptable to the building official. The soils engineer shall provide continuous inspection during the process of subdrain installation to conform to the approved plans and the engineering geologist's and soil engineer's recommendation. Testing of materials shall be done by a soil testing agency based on the soil engineer's or engineering geologist's recommendation. The location of the subdrains shall be shown on a plan by the soils engineer. Excavations for the subdrains shall be inspected by the engineering geologist when such subdrains are included in the recommendations of the engineering geologist. 
(d)  Fill material. 
(1)  Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be permitted in fills. Unless approved by the building official, no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension of greater than 12 inches (0.305 m) shall be buried or placed in fills. 
(2)  Exception: The building official may permit placement of larger rock when the soils engineer properly devises a method of placement, and continuously inspects its placement and approves the fill stability. The following conditions shall also apply: 
a.  Prior to issuance of the grading permit, potential rock disposal areas shall be delineated on the grading plan; 
b.  Rock sizes greater than 12 inches (0.305 m) in maximum dimension shall be ten feet (3.05 m) or more below grade, measured vertically; 
c.  Rocks shall be placed so as to assure filling of all voids with well-graded soil; 
d.  The reports submitted by the soils engineer shall acknowledge the placement of the oversized material and whether the work was performed in accordance with the engineer's recommendations and the approved plans; 
e.  The location of the oversized rock dispersal areas shall be shown on the as-built plan. 
(e)  Compaction. 
(1)  All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of 90 percent of maximum density. Fills shall be compacted throughout their full extent to a minimum relative compaction of 90 percent of maximum dry density within 40 feet (12.19 m) below finished grade and 93 percent of maximum dry density deeper than 40 feet (12.19 m) below finished grade, unless a lower relative compaction (not less than 90 percent of maximum dry density) is justified by the soils engineer. The relative compaction shall be determined by A.S.T.M. soil compaction test D1557 where applicable. Where not applicable, a test acceptable to the building official, shall be used unless the owner furnishes a soils engineering report conforming with the requirements of section 15.12.040(e), stating that the site has been investigated and giving an opinion that a fill at a steeper slope will be stable and not create a hazard to public or private property. Substantiating calculations and supporting data may be required where the building official determines that such information is necessary to verify the stability and safety of the proposed slope. The building official may require the fill slope be constructed with a face flatter in slope than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (50 percent slope) if the building official finds it necessary for stability and safety. 
(2)  Field density shall be determined by a method acceptable to the building official. However, not less than ten percent of the required density tests, uniformly distributed, shall be obtained by the sand cone method. 
(3)  Fill slopes steeper than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (50 percent slope) shall be constructed by the placement of soil a sufficient distance beyond the proposed finish slope to allow compaction equipment to operate at the outer surface limits of the final slope surface. The excess fill is to be removed prior to completion or rough grading. Other construction procedures may be utilized when it is first shown to the satisfaction of the building official that the angle of slope, construction method and other factors will comply with the intent of this section. 
(f)  Maximum fill slope. The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. Fill slopes shall be no steeper than two units horizontal in one unit vertical (50 percent slope) unless calculations are provided by a soils engineer which indicate a steeper slope will be stable and approved by the building official. 
(g)  Slopes to receive fill. Where fill is to be placed above the top of an existing slope steeper than three units horizontal to one unit vertical (33 percent slope), the toe of the fill shall be set back from the top edge of the slope a minimum distance of six feet (1.83 m) measured horizontally or such other distance as may be specifically recommended by a soils engineer or engineering geologist and approved by the building official. 
(h)  Inspection of fill. For engineered grading, the soils engineer shall provide sufficient inspections during the preparation of the natural ground and the placement and compaction of the fill ensuring that the work is being performed in accordance with the conditions of plan approval and the appropriate requirements of this chapter. In addition to the above, the soils engineer shall be present during the entire fill placement and compaction of fills that will exceed a vertical height or depth of 30 feet (9.14 m) or result in a slope surface steeper than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (50 percent slope). 
(i)  Testing of fills. Sufficient tests of the fill soils shall be made to determine the density and to verify compliance of the soil properties with the design requirements. This includes soil types and shear strengths in accordance with referenced standards in section 15.12.120. 
(Code 1969, § 15.12.070; Ord. No. 870-2010, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 925-2014, § 2, 7-21-2014) 
Sec. 15.12.080. - Setbacks. 
(a)  General. Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from the property lines in accordance with this section. Setback dimensions shall be horizontal distances measured perpendicular to the property line and shall be as shown in figure 15.12.080 unless substantiating data is submitted justifying reduced setbacks is recommended by soils engineering and engineering geology reports approved by the building official. 
(b)  Top of slope. The setback at the top of a cut slope shall not be less than that shown in figure 15.12.080, or than is required to accommodate any required interceptor drains, whichever is greater. For manufactured slopes the grading design must be such that the property line between adjacent lots will be at the apex of the berm at the top of the slope. Property lines between adjacent lots cannot be located on a graded slope equal to five units horizontal to one unit vertical (20 percent slope). 
FIGURE 15.12.080 SETBACK DIMENSIONS 

(c)  Toe of fill slope. The setback from the toe of a fill slope shall not be less than that shown by figure 15.12.080. Where required to protect adjacent properties at the toe of a slope from adverse effects of the grading, additional protection, approved by the building official, shall be included. Such protection may include but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Setbacks greater than those required by figure 15.12.080; 
(2)  Provisions for retaining walls or similar construction; 
(3)  Erosion protection of the fill slopes; 
(4)  Provision for the control of surface waters. 
(d)  Alternate setbacks. The building official may approve alternate setbacks. The building official may require an investigation and recommendation by a qualified engineer or engineering geologist to demonstrate that the intent of this section has been satisfied. 
(Code 1969, § 15.12.080; Ord. No. 870-2010, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 925-2014, § 2, 7-21-2014) 
Sec. 15.12.090. - Drainage and terracing. 
(a)  General. Unless otherwise recommended by a registered design professional, and approved by the building official, drainage facilities and terracing shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of subsection (b) of this section for all cut and fill slope where the ground slope is steeper than three units horizontal to one unit vertical (33 percent slope). For slopes flatter than three units horizontal to one unit vertical (33 percent slope) and steeper than five units horizontal to one unit vertical (20 percent slope), a paved swale or ditch shall be provided at 30-foot (9.14 m) vertical intervals to control surface drainage and debris. Swales shall be sized based on contributory area and have adequate capacity to convey intercepted waters to the point of disposal as defined in subsection (e) of this section. Swales must be paved with reinforced concrete not less than three inches (0.0762 m) in thickness, reinforced with six-inch (0.153 m) by six-inch (0.153 m) "No. 10 by No. 10" welded wire fabric or equivalent reinforcing centered in the concrete slab or an approved equal. Swales must have a minimum gradient of not less than five percent. There shall be no reduction in grade along the direction of flow unless the velocity of flow is such that slope debris will remain in suspension on the reduced grade. 
(b)  Drainage terraces. Drainage terraces at least eight feet (2.44 m) in width shall be established at not more than 30-foot (9.14 m) vertical intervals on all cut and fill slopes to control surface drainage and debris. When only one terrace is required, it shall be mid-height. For cut or fill slopes greater than 100 feet (30.5 m) and up to 120 feet (36.576 m) in vertical height, one terrace at approximately mid-height shall be 20 feet (6 m) in width. Terrace widths and spacing for cut and fill slopes greater than 120 feet (36.6 m) in height shall be designed by the civil engineer and approved by the building official. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance. Drainage swales on terraces shall have a longitudinal grade of not less than five percent and no more than 12 percent and a minimum depth of one foot (0.305 m) at the flow line. There shall be no reduction in grade along the direction of flow unless the velocity of flow is such that slope debris will remain in suspension on the reduced grade. Such terraces must be paved with reinforced concrete not less than three inches (0.076 m) in thickness, reinforced with six-inch (0.2 m) by six-inch (0.152 m) "No. 10 by No. 10" welded wire fabric or equivalent reinforcing centered in the concrete slab or an approved equal paving. They shall have a minimum depth at the deepest point of one foot (0.3 m) and a minimum paved width of five feet (1.524 m). Drainage terraces exceeding eight feet (2.438 m) in width need only be so paved for a width of eight feet (2.438 m), provided such pavement provides a paved swale at least one foot (0.305 m) in depth. Down drains or drainage outlets shall be provided at approximately 300-foot (91.44 m) intervals along the drainage terrace or at equivalent locations. Down drains and drainage outlets shall be of approved materials and of adequate capacity to convey the intercepted waters to the point of disposal as defined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(c)  Interceptor drains and overflow protection. 
(1)  Berms, interceptor drains, swales, or other devices shall be provided at the top of cut or fill slopes to prevent surface waters from overflowing onto and damaging the face of a slope. Berms used for slope protection shall not be less than 12 inches (3.0 m) above the level of the pad and shall slope back at least four feet (1.22 m) from the top of the slope. 
(2)  Interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of manufactured slopes greater than five feet in height receiving drainage from a slope with a tributary width greater than 30 feet (9.1 m) measured horizontally. They shall have a minimum depth of one foot (0.305 m) and a minimum width of three feet (0.914 m). The slope shall be approved by the building official, but shall not be less than 50 horizontal to one vertical (two percent). The drain shall be paved with concrete not less than three inches (0.076 m) in thickness, or by other materials suitable to the application and reinforced as required for drainage terraces. Discharge from the drain shall be accomplished in a manner to prevent erosion and shall be approved by the building official. 
(d)  Drainage across property lines. Drainage across property lines shall not exceed that which existed prior to grading. Excess or concentrated drainage shall be contained on site or directed to an approved drainage facility. Erosion of the ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of nonerosive down drains or other devices. 
(e)  Disposal. 
(1)  All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest practicable street, storm drain, or natural watercourse drainage way approved by the building official or other appropriate governmental agency jurisdiction, provided it is a safe place to deposit such waters. Erosion of ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of nonerosive down drains or other devices. Desilting basins, filter barriers or other methods, as approved by the building official, shall be utilized to remove sediments from surface waters before such waters are allowed to enter streets, storm drains, or natural watercourses. If the drainage device discharges onto natural ground, riprap or a similar energy dissipater may be required. 
(2)  Building pads shall have a minimum drainage gradient of two percent toward approved drainage facilities, a public street or drainage structure approved to receive stormwaters unless waived by the building official. A lesser slope may be approved by the building official for sites graded in relatively flat terrain, or where special drainage provisions are made, when the building official finds such modification will not result in unfavorable drainage conditions. 
(Code 1969, § 15.12.090; Ord. No. 870-2010, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 925-2014, § 2, 7-21-2014) 
Sec. 15.12.100. - Slope planting and erosion control. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion. This control shall consist of effective planting, erosion control blankets, soil stabilizers or other means as approved by the building official. 
(2)  Exception: Erosion control measures need not be provided on cut slopes not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of materials as approved by the project consultants to the satisfaction of the building official. 
(3)  Erosion control for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to calling for final inspection. 
(b)  Other devices. Where necessary, check dams, cribbing, riprap or other devices or methods shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety. 
(c)  Planting. 
(1)  The surface of all cut slopes more than five feet (1.52 m) in height and fill slopes more than three feet (0.9144 m) in height shall be protected against damage by erosion. Slopes exceeding 15 feet (4.57 m) in vertical height shall be planted with shrubs, spaced at not to exceed ten feet (3.048 m) on centers; or trees, spaced at not to exceed 20 feet (6.096 m) on centers; or a combination of shrubs and trees at equivalent spacings. The plants selected and planting methods used shall be suitable for the soil and climatic conditions of the site. Plant material shall be selected which will produce a coverage of permanent planting to effectively control erosion. Consideration shall be given to deep-rooted plant material needing limited watering, maintenance, high root to shoot ratio, wind susceptibility and fire retardant characteristics. All plant materials must be approved by the building official. 
(2)  Planting may be modified for the site if specific recommendations are provided by both the soils engineer and a landscape architect. Specific recommendations must consider soils and climatic conditions, irrigation requirements, planting methods, fire retardant characteristics, water efficiency, maintenance needs, and other regulatory requirements. Recommendations must include a finding that the alternative planting will provide a permanent and effective method of erosion control. This modified planting shall be approved by the building official. 
(d)  Irrigation. Slopes required to be planted by subsection (c) of this section shall be provided with an approved system of irrigation that is designed to cover all portions of the slope. Irrigation system plans shall be submitted and approved prior to installation. A functional test of the system may be required. Specific recommendations must consider soils and climatic conditions, plant types, planting methods, fire retardant characteristics, water efficiency, maintenance needs, and other regulatory requirements. Modifications for irrigation systems shall be approved by the building official. 
(e)  Plans and specifications. Planting and irrigation plans shall be submitted for slopes required to be planted and irrigated by subsections (c) and (d) of this section. Except as waived by the building official for minor grading, the plans for slopes 20 feet (6.096 m) or more in vertical height shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer or landscape architect. If requested by the building official, planting and irrigation details shall be included on the grading plan. 
(f)  Release of security. The planting and irrigation systems required by this section shall be installed as soon as practical after rough grading. Prior to final approval of grading and before the release of the grading security, the planting shall be well established and growing on the slopes. 
(Code 1969, § 15.12.100; Ord. No. 870-2010, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 925-2014, § 2, 7-21-2014) 
Sec. 15.12.110. - National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) compliance. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  All grading plans and permits shall comply with the provisions of this section for NPDES compliance. 
(2)  All best management practices shall be installed before grading begins. All best management practices shall be updated as necessary to prevent erosion and control construction-related pollutants from discharging from the site. All best management practices shall be maintained in good working order to the satisfaction of the building official unless final grading approval has been granted by the building official and all permanent drainage and erosion control systems, if required, are in place. 
(b)  Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). When requested by the building official, no grading permit shall be issued unless the plans for such work include a stormwater pollution prevention plan with details of best management practices, including desilting basins or other temporary drainage or control measures, or both, as may be necessary to control construction-related pollutants which originate from the site as a result of construction-related activities. 
(Code 1969, § 15.12.110; Ord. No. 870-2010, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 925-2014, § 2, 7-21-2014) 
Sec. 15.12.120. - Referenced standards. 
(a)  These regulations establish minimum standards and are not intended to prevent the use of alternate materials, methods or means of conforming to such standards, provided such alternate has been approved. 
(1)  The building official shall approve such an alternate, provided he or she finds that the alternate is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this Code in quality, strength, effectiveness, durability and safety. 
(2)  The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims regarding the alternate. 
(b)  The standards listed below are recognized standards: 
1.1 ASTM D 1557-Laboratory Characteristics Compaction of Soil Using Modified Effort. 
1.2 ASTM D 1556-Density and Unit Weight of Soils in Place by the Sand Cone Method. 
1.3 ASTM D 2167-Density and Unit Weight of Soils in Place by the Rubber-Balloon Method. 
1.4 ASTM D 2937-Density of Soils in Place by the Drive-Cylinder Method. 
1.5 ASTM D 2922-Density of Soil and Soil Aggregate in Place by Nuclear Methods. 
1.6 ASTM D 3017-Water Content of Soil and Rock in Place by Nuclear Methods. 
(Code 1969, § 15.12.120; Ord. No. 870-2010, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 925-2014, § 2, 7-21-2014) 
CHAPTER 15.14 - STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL 

Sec. 15.14.010. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "City of Barstow Storm Water Management and Discharge Control Ordinance." 
( Ord. No. 951-2017, § 2, 3-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.14.020. - Findings. 
(a)  The Federal Clean Water Act (33 USC I251 et seq.) provides for the regulation and reduction of pollutants discharged into the waters of the United States by extending National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter "NPDES") requirements to storm water and urban runoff discharge into municipal storm drain systems. 
(b)  Storm water and urban runoff flows from individual properties onto streets, then through storm drains passing through the City of Barstow (hereinafter "city"). 
(c)  The city is a co-permittee under the "Waste Discharge Requirements for Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Discharges within the Mohave River Watershed (Order No. 2013-0001 DWQ), NPDES Permit No. CAS000004, effective July 1, 2013, issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board and any successor permit to that permit (the "Municipal NPDES Permit"), and, as a co-permittee under the Municipal NPDES Permit, the city is required to implement and enforce the requirements contained in the Municipal NPDES Permit, to control discharges to and from those portions of the MS4 over which it has jurisdiction, and to hold dischargers to the MS4 accountable for their contributions of pollutants and flows. 
(d)  Section E.6.a(ii)(a) of the Municipal NPDES Permit requires the city to prohibit, for the portion of the MS4 for which it is an owner or operator, non-storm water discharges into the MS4, except where such discharges are identified and in compliance with Section B.3 of the Municipal NPDES Permit. 
(e)  In order to control, in a cost effective manner, the quantity and quality of storm water and urban runoff to the maximum extent practicable, the adoption of reasonable regulations, as set forth herein, is essential. 
( Ord. No. 951-2017, § 2, 3-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.14.030. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the future health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city and the water quality of the receiving waters and surrounding areas by: 
(1)  Reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable; 
(2)  Regulating illicit connections and illicit discharges and thereby reducing the level of contamination of storm water and dry weather runoff into the MS4; and 
(3)  Regulating non-storm water discharges to the MS4. 
(b)  The intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the quality of watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands within the city in a manner consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act, the California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and the Municipal NPDES Permit. 
(c)  This chapter is also intended to provide the city with the legal authority necessary to control discharges to and from those portions of the MS4 over which it has jurisdiction as required by the Municipal NPDES Permit, and thereby fully and timely comply with the terms of the Municipal NPDES Permit. 
(d)  This chapter also sets forth requirements for the construction and operation of certain "commercial development," "new development" and "redevelopment" and other projects (as further defined herein) which are intended to ensure compliance with the storm water mitigation measures prescribed in the current version of the Municipal NPDES Permit, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(e)  This chapter authorizes the authorized enforcement officer to define and adopt applicable best management practices (BMPs) and other storm water pollution control measures, to grant emergency self-waivers from Municipal NPDES Permit requirements, as provided herein in order to conduct repairs of essential public service systems and infrastructure in emergency situations, to cite infractions and to impose fines pursuant to this chapter. This chapter also authorizes the authorized enforcement officer to carry out inspections, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter and the Municipal NPDES Permit. Except as otherwise provided herein, the authorized enforcement officer shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 951-2017, § 2, 3-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.14.040. - Definitions. 
    Except as specifically provided herein, any term used in this chapter shall be defined as that term is defined in the current Municipal NPDES Permit, or if it is not specifically defined in the Municipal NPDES Permit, then as such term is defined in the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and/or the regulations promulgated thereunder. The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter: 
    Area susceptible to runoff. Any surface directly exposed to precipitation or in the path of runoff caused by precipitation which path leads off the parcel on which the surface is located. 
    Authorized enforcement officer. The city manager, his/her designee, or any staff empowered by the Municipal NPDES Permit to enforce this chapter. 
    Best management practices (BMPs). Practices or physical devices or systems designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from storm water or non-storm water discharges to receiving waters, or designed to reduce the volume of storm water or non-storm water discharged to the receiving water. Examples of BMPs may include public education and outreach, proper planning of development projects, proper cleaning of catch basin inlets, and proper sludge- or waste-handling and disposal, or treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site run-off spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage, among others. 
    Bioretention. A LID BMP that reduces storm water runoff by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy or groundcover, and through evapotranspiration and infiltration. 
    Construction. Any project, including projects requiring coverage under the construction general permit (CGP), that involves soil disturbing activities including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, paving, disturbances to ground such as stockpiling, and excavation. 
    Construction general permit. The NPDES General Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction and Land Disturbance Activities, Order No. 2009-0009-DWQ (NPDES No. CAS000002), adopted September 2, 2009, revised by Order No. 2010-0014-DWG and Order No. 2012-0006-DWQ, and any successor permit to that permit. 
    Control. To minimize, reduce, eliminate, or prohibit by technological, legal, contractual or other means, the discharge of pollutants from an activity or activities. 
    Development. Any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail and other nonresidential projects, including public agency projects; or mass grading for future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety. 
    Discharge. When used without qualification, means the discharge of a pollutant. 
    Discharger. Any responsible party or site owner or operator within the permittees' jurisdiction whose site discharges storm water runoff, or a non-storm water discharge. 
    Discharge of a pollutant. Any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to waters of the United States from any point source or, any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft which is being used as a means of transportation. The term discharge of a pollutant includes additions of pollutants into waters of the United States from: surface runoff which is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a state, municipality, or other person which do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances, leading into privately-owned treatment works. 
    Discretionary project. Shall be defined in the same manner as in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 15357 of the Guidelines for Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act, as amended, and means a project which requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation when the city decides to approve or disapprove a particular activity, as distinguished from situations where the city merely has to determine. 
    Disturbed area. An area that is altered as a result of clearing, grading, and/or excavating, unless solely for the purposes of landscape maintenance or fire prevention. 
    Enforcement response plan. Describes enforcement measures to employ any combination of actions to escalate responses where necessary to correct persistent non-compliance, repeat or escalating violations, or incidents of major environmental harm. 
    Environmentally sensitive area (ESA). An area in which plant or animal life or its habitats is either rare or especially valuable because of its special nature or role in an ecosystem, and which would be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and developments (Cal. Public Resources Code §30107.5). Areas subject to storm water mitigation requirements are areas designated as a significant natural area by the California Department of Fish and Game's Significant Natural Areas Program, provided that area has been field verified by the Department of Fish and Game; an area listed in the basin plan as supporting the rare, threatened, or endangered species (RARE) beneficial use; and an area identified by the city as environmentally sensitive. 
    Hillside. Property located in an area with known erosive soil conditions, where the development contemplates grading on any natural slope that is 25 percent or greater and where grading contemplates cut or fill slopes. 
    Illicit connection. Any man-made conveyance that is connected to the MS4 without a permit, excluding roof drains and other similar type connections. Examples include channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly to the MS4. 
    Illicit discharge. Any discharge to the MS4 that is prohibited under local, state or federal statutes, ordinances, codes or regulations. This includes all non-storm water discharges, except authorized non-storm water discharges; conditionally exempt non-storm water discharges; and non-storm water discharges resulting from natural flows specifically identified in Section B. of the Municipal NPDES Permit. 
    Industrial development. Development or redevelopment of property to be used for industrial purposes, such as factories, manufacturing buildings, and research and development parks. 
    Infiltration. The downward entry of water into the surface of the soil. 
    Inspection. Entering and conducting an on-site review of a facility and its operations, at reasonable times, to determine compliance with specific municipal or other legal requirements. The steps involved in performing an inspection, include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Pre-inspection documentation research; 
(2)  Request for entry; 
(3)  Interview of property owner, resident and/or occupant(s); 
(4)  Property walk-through; 
(5)  Visual observation of the condition of property; 
(6)  Examination and copying of records as required; 
(7)  Sample collection (if necessary or required); 
(8)  Exit discussion (to discuss preliminary evaluation) as appropriate; and 
(9)  Report preparation, and if appropriate, recommendations for coming into compliance. 
    Low impact development (LID). Building or landscape features designed to retain or filter storm water runoff. 
    Material. Any substance including, but not limited to garbage and debris; lawn clippings, leaves, and other vegetation; biological and fecal waste; sediment and sludge; oil and grease; gasoline; paints, solvents, cleaners, and any fluid or solid containing chemicals. 
    Municipal NPDES Permit. Waste discharge requirements for small municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) Discharges within the Mohave River Watershed (Order No. 2013-0001 DWQ), NPDES Permit No. CAS000004, effective July 1, 2013, issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, and any successor permit to that permit. 
    MS4 (Municipal separate storm sewer system). A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains): 
(1)  Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, storm water, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States; 
(2)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water; 
(3)  Which is not a combined sewer; and 
(4)  Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR 122.2. 
    New development. Land-disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision. To qualify as new development, the development must occur on an open (pervious) lot that has not formerly been developed. 
    Non-storm water discharge. Any discharge to the MS4 or from the MS4 into a receiving water that is not composed entirely of storm water. 
    NPDES permit. NPDES is an acronym for National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. NPDES is the national program for administering and regulating Sections 307, 318, 402, and 405 of the Clean Water Act (CWA). In California, the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) has issued a General Permit for stormwater discharges. 
    Parking lot. Land area or a facility for the parking or storage of motor vehicles used for businesses, commerce, industry or personal use. 
    Pollutant. Those pollutants defined in Section 502(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 USC 1362(6)), or incorporated into California Water Code § 13373. Examples of pollutants include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Commercial and industrial waste (such as fuels, solvents, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizers, pesticides, slag, ash, and sludge); 
(2)  Metals (such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium; and non-metals such as phosphorus and arsenic); 
(3)  Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease); 
(4)  Excessive eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials in amounts which may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the state; 
(5)  Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables, and show facilities); 
(6)  Substances having characteristics such as pH less than six or greater than nine, or unusual coloration or turbidity, or excessive levels of fecal coliform, or fecal streptococcus, or enterococcus; 
(7)  The term pollutant shall not include uncontaminated storm water, potable water or reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility. The term pollutant also shall not include any substance identified in this definition, if through compliance with the BMPs available, the discharge of such substance has been reduced or eliminated to the maximum extent practicable. In an enforcement action, the burden shall be on the person who is the subject of such action to establish the reduction or elimination of the discharge to the maximum extent practicable through compliance with the BMPs available. 
    Project. All development, redevelopment, and land-disturbing activities. The term project is not limited to project as defined under the California Environmental Quality Act under California Public Resources Code Section 21065. 
    Rainfall harvest and use. A LID BMP system designed to capture runoff, typically from a roof but can also include runoff capture from elsewhere within the site, and to provide for temporary storage until the harvested water can be used for irrigation or non-potable uses. The harvested water may also be used for potable water uses if the system includes disinfection treatment and is approved for such use by the local building department. 
    Redevelopment. Land-disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition or replacement of exterior impervious surface area on a site on which some past development has occurred. Redevelopment does not include trenching, excavation and resurfacing associated with LUPs; pavement grinding and resurfacing of existing roadways; construction of new sidewalks, pedestrian ramps, or bike lanes on existing roadways; or routine replacement of damaged pavement such as pothole repair or replacement of short, noncontiguous sections of roadway. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to the following activities that meet the minimum standards set forth in this definition: 
(1)  The expansion of a building footprint; 
(2)  Addition or replacement of a structure; 
(3)  Replacement of impervious surface that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and 
(4)  Land-disturbing activities related to structural or impervious surfaces. 
    Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities that are conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, original purpose of facility or emergency redevelopment activity required to protect public health and safety. 
    Regional board. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board-Lahontan Region. 
    Routine maintenance. Includes, but is not limited to, projects conducted to: 
(1)  Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of facility; 
(2)  Perform as needed restoration work to preserve the original design grade, integrity and hydraulic capacity of flood control facilities; 
(3)  Carry out road shoulder work, regrading dirt or gravel roadways and shoulders and performing ditch cleanouts; 
(4)  Update existing lines and facilities, including the replacement of existing lines with new materials or pipes, to comply with applicable codes, standards and regulations regardless of such projects result in increased capacity; 
(5)  Repair leaks; 
(6)  Conduct landscaping activities without changing existing or natural grades; and 
(7)  Conduct brush cleaning and grubbing for fire prevention. 
    Routine maintenance does not include construction of new lines or facilities resulting from compliance with applicable codes, standards, and regulations. New lines are those that are not associated with existing facilities and are not part of a project to update or replace existing lines. 
    Runoff. Any runoff, including storm water and dry weather flows from a drainage area that reaches a receiving water body or subsurface. During dry weather it is typically comprised of base flow either contaminated with pollutants or uncontaminated, and nuisance flows. 
    Site. The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity. 
    Source control BMP. Any schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, managerial practices or operational practices that aim to prevent storm water pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source of pollution. 
    Storm water runoff. That part of precipitation (rainfall or snow melt) which travels via flow across a surface to the MS4 or receiving waters from impervious, semi-pervious or pervious surfaces. 
    Structural BMP. Any structural facility designed and constructed to mitigate the adverse impacts of storm water and urban runoff pollution (e.g. canopy, structural enclosure). Structural BMPs may include both treatment control BMPs and source control BMPs. 
    Treatment. Any method, technique, or process designed to remove pollutants and/or solids from polluted storm water runoff, wastewater, or effluent. 
    Treatment control BMP. Any engineered system designed to remove pollutants. 
    Verbal warnings. Verbal warnings are primarily consultative in nature. At a minimum, verbal warnings shall specify the nature of the violation and required corrective action. 
    Written notices. Written notices shall include nature of the violation and the required corrective action, with deadlines for taking such action. 
( Ord. No. 951-2017, § 2, 3-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.14.050. - Construction and application. 
    This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, applicable implementing regulations, and the Municipal NPDES Permit, and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof. 
( Ord. No. 951-2017, § 2, 3-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.14.060. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  Illicit discharges and connections. No person shall commence, establish, use, maintain, or continue any illicit connections to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) or any illicit discharges to the MS4. This prohibition against illicit connections applies to the use, maintenance, or continuation of any illicit connection, whether that connection was established prior to, or after the effective date of this chapter. 
(b)  Littering. Littering on public property is prohibited. 
(c)  Non-storm water discharges. All non-storm water discharges into the MS4 are prohibited unless those flows are: 
(1)  Compliant with a separate NPDES Permit; 
(2)  Pursuant to a discharge exemption by the regional board, the regional board's executive officer, or the State Water Resources Control Board; 
(3)  Associated with emergency firefighting activities (i.e., flows necessary for the protection of life or property); 
(4)  Conditionally exempt non-storm water discharges as defined in accordance with the Municipal NPDES Permit; or 
(5)  Discharges through the MS4 of material other than storm water to waters of the U.S. shall be effectively prohibited, except as allowed under this provision or as otherwise authorized by a separate NPDES permit. The following non-storm water discharges are not prohibited provided any pollutant discharges are identified and appropriate control measures to minimize the impacts of such discharges, are developed and implemented under the permittee's storm water program. This provision does not obviate the need to obtain any other appropriate permits for such discharges. 
a.  Water line flushing; 
b.  Individual residential car washing; 
c.  Diverted stream flows; 
d.  Rising ground waters; 
e.  Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20)) to separate storm sewers; 
f.  Uncontaminated pumped ground water; 
g.  Discharges from potable water sources; 
h.  Foundation drains; 
i.  Air conditioning condensation; 
j.  Springs; 
k.  Water from crawl space pumps; 
l.  Footing drains; 
m.  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
n.  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and 
o.  Incidental runoff from landscaped areas (as defined and in accordance with Section B.4 of this Order). 
Discharges or flows from fire-fighting activities are excluded from the effective prohibition against non-storm water and need only be addressed where they are identified as significant sources of pollutants to waters of the U.S. 
If city appointed authorized enforcement officer or a regional water board executive officer determines that any individual or class of non-storm water discharge(s) listed above may be a significant source of pollutants to waters of the U.S. or physically interconnected MS4, or poses a threat to water quality standards (beneficial uses), the city or regional water board executive officer may require and enforce an immediate stop of activity, monitor, report, and/or require the implementation of BMPs on the discharge. 
(d)  Discharges in violation of the Municipal NPDES Permit. Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of the Municipal NPDES Permit, either separately or in combination with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and such person(s) shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city from all losses, liabilities, claims, or causes of actions in any administrative or judicial action relating to such discharge. 
( Ord. No. 951-2017, § 2, 3-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.14.070. - Exempted discharges, conditionally exempted discharges or designated discharges. 
    Discharges from those activities specifically identified in or pursuant to Section B.3 of the Municipal NPDES Permit as being exempted discharges, conditionally exempted discharges, or designated discharges shall not be considered a violation of this chapter, provided that any such discharges are consistent with the Municipal NPDES Permit and: 
(a)  Applicable BMPs developed pursuant to the Municipal NPDES Permit are implemented to minimize any adverse impacts from such identified sources; 
(b)  The discharger meets all notification, reporting and recordkeeping requirements; and 
(c)  The discharger has conducted all applicable monitoring requirements. 
( Ord. No. 951-2017, § 2, 3-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.14.080. - Requirements for existing properties. 
    Owners and occupants of property and owners of businesses within the city shall comply with 40 CFR 131.12 including an anti-degradation policy consistent with the federal policy. The State Water Board established California's anti-degradation policy in State Water Board Resolution No. 68-16. Resolution No. 68-16 incorporates the federal anti-degradation policy where the federal policy applies under federal law. Resolution No. 68-16 requires that existing quality of waters be maintained unless degradation is justified based on specific findings. The Regional Water Board's Water Quality Control Plans (Basin Plans) implement, and incorporate by reference, both the State and federal anti-degradation policies. 
    May include, but not limited to: 
(a)  Storage of materials, machinery, and equipment. Machinery or equipment that is to be repaired or maintained in areas susceptible to or exposed to storm water shall be placed in a manner so that leaks, spills and other maintenance-related pollutants are not discharged to the MS4. 
(b)  Removal and disposal of debris from industrial/commercial motor vehicle parking lots. Industrial/commercial motor vehicle parking lots with more than 25 parking spaces that are located in areas potentially exposed to storm water shall be swept regularly, or other equally effective measures shall be utilized to remove oil, chemicals, debris, or other pollutionnable materials from such parking lots. 
(c)  Best-management practices. BMPs shall be used in areas exposed to storm water for the removal and lawful disposal of all fuels, chemicals, fuel and chemical wastes, animal wastes, garbage, batteries, or other materials which have potential adverse impacts on water quality. 
(d)  Septic waste. No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or otherwise expose any chemical or septic waste in an area where a discharge to city streets or the MS4 may or does occur. 
(e)  Use of water. Runoff of water used for irrigation purposes shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable. Runoff of water from the permitted washing down of paved impervious areas shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable, and diverted so that flow is directed to landscaped areas for infiltration where possible. 
(f)  Food and liquid wastes. Food and liquid wastes generated by nonresidential food service and food distribution sources shall be properly disposed of and in a manner so such wastes are not discharged to the MS4. 
(g)  Maintenance of structural BMPs. Structural BMPs required by the city or any state or federal agency shall be properly operated and maintained, as specified by an approved storm water mitigation plan, or otherwise determined by the authorized enforcement officer. Records and documentation of such maintenance shall be provided to the public works director upon request. 
( Ord. No. 951-2017, § 2, 3-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.14.090. - Requirements for industrial/commercial and construction activities. 
(a)  Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger described in any general NPDES permit addressing such discharges, as may be issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the regional board, shall comply with all requirements of such permit and the provisions of this chapter. Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit. Proof of compliance with any such NPDES permit may be required in a form acceptable to the authorized enforcement officer, or designated representative, prior to the issuance of any grading, building or occupancy permits, or any other type of permit or license issued by the city. 
(b)  Non-storm water discharges to the MS4 from industrial, commercial, or construction activities in violation of any applicable NPDES permit or the provisions of this chapter are prohibited. 
(c)  Industrial and commercial dischargers and dischargers associated with construction activities shall implement effective BMPs, including source control BMPs, in accordance with the California Storm Water Quality Association (CASQA) Best Management Practice Handbooks or equivalent, as required by Section E.6.a(ii)(e) of the Municipal NPDES Permit unless a particular pollutant generating activity does not occur on a facility's site. 
( Ord. No. 951-2017, § 2, 3-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.14.100. - Planning and land development program requirements for new development and redevelopment-Low impact development. 
(a)  Objective. The provisions of this section establish requirements for construction activities and facility operations of development and redevelopment projects to comply with the current Municipal NPDES Permit, to lessen the water quality impacts of development by using smart growth practices, and to integrate low impact development (LID) practices and standards for storm water pollution mitigation through means of infiltration, evapotranspiration, biofiltration, and rainfall harvest and use. LID shall be inclusive of new development and/or redevelopment requirements. 
(b)  Scope. This section contains requirements for storm water pollution control measures in development and redevelopment projects and authorizes the city to further define and adopt storm water pollution control measures, and to develop LID principles and requirements, including but not limited to the objectives and specifications for integration of LID strategies, grant alternative compliance measures from the LID requirements for projects that demonstrate technical infeasibility to retain the hydraulic sizing design criteria on-site or where an opportunity exists for regional groundwater replenishment as defined in the Municipal NPDES Permit, and collect funds for projects that are granted alternative compliance measures. Except as otherwise provided herein, the city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Applicability. This section applies to the following new development and redevelopment projects that are subject to city conditioning and approval for the design and implementation of post-construction controls and other BMPs to mitigate storm water pollution, prior to completion of the project(s), as follows: 
(1)  Site design measures. Implementation of site design measures for all projects that create and/or replace (including projects with no net increase in impervious footprint) between 2,500 square feet and 5,000 square feet of impervious surface, including detached single family homes that create and/or replace 2,500 square feet or more of impervious surface and are not part of a larger plan of development. Site design measures as specified in this section are not applicable to linear underground/overhead projects (LUPs). 
(2)  Regulated projects. All projects that create and/or replace 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface (regulated projects) shall require to implement measures for site design, source control, runoff reduction, storm water treatment and baseline hydromodification management. 
(3)  Priority site-specific projects. Projects selected based on site activities and operations, location, or hydrologic conditions where pollutants of concern are increased, and/or project requires alternative post-construction treatment strategies. 
(4)  Source control measures. Regulated projects with pollutant-generating activities and sources shall be required to implement standard permanent and/or operation source control measures as applicable to meet requirements on the water quality management plan (WQMP). 
(5)  Low impact development (LID) design standards. Regulated projects shall implement LID standards designed to reduce runoff, treat storm water, and provide baseline hydromodification management to the extent feasible, to meet the numeric sizing criteria for storm water retention and treatment. 
A.  Numeric sizing criteria includes site assessment, and drainage management areas (DMAs) to manage runoff from each DMA using site design measures, source controls and/or storm water treatment and baseline hydromodification measures, as defined in Municipal NPDES Permit. 
1.  Volumetric criteria: 
a.  The maximized capture storm water volume for the tributary area, on the basis of historical rainfall records, determined using the formula and volume capture coefficients in urban runoff quality management, WEF Manual of Practice No. 23/ASCE Manual of Practice No. 87 (1998) pages 175-178 (that is, approximately the 85th percentile 24-hour storm runoff event); or 
b.  The volume of annual runoff required to achieve 80 percent or more capture, determined in accordance with the methodology in Section 5 of the CASQA's Stormwater Best Management Practice Handbook, New Development and Redevelopment (2003), using the San Bernardino County 85th percentile precipitation isohyetal map. 
2.  Flow-based criteria: 
a.  The flow of runoff produced from a rain event equal to at least 0.2 inches per hour intensity; or 
b.  The flow of runoff produced from a rain event equal to at least two times the 85th percentile hourly rainfall intensity as determined from local rainfall records. 
B.  After implementation of site design measures, the facilities must be demonstrated to be at least as effective as a bioretention system with the following design parameters: 
1.  Maximum surface loading rate of five inches per hour, based on the flow rates calculated. A sizing factor of four percent of tributary impervious area may be used. 
2.  Minimum surface reservoir volume equal to surface area times a depth of six inches. 
3.  Minimum planting medium depth of 18 inches. The planting medium must sustain a minimum infiltration rate of five inches per hour throughout the life of the project and must maximize runoff retention and pollutant removal. A mixture of sand (60 percent-70 percent) meeting the specifications of American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) C33 and compost (30 percent-40 percent) may be used. 
4.  Subsurface drainage/storage (gravel) layer with an area equal to the surface area and having a minimum depth of 12 inches. 
5.  Underdrain with discharge elevation at top of gravel layer. 
6.  No compaction of soils beneath the facility, or ripping/loosening of soils if compacted. 
7.  No liners or other barriers interfering with infiltration. 
8.  Appropriate plant palette for the specified soil mix and maximum available water use. 
(6)  Hydromodification measures. Hydromodification management projects are regulated projects that create and/or replace one acre or more of impervious surface. A project that does not increase impervious surface area over the pre-project condition is not a hydromodification management project. 
A.  Post-project runoff shall not exceed estimated pre-project flow rate for the 10-year, 24-hour storm in the following geomorphic provinces. 
(7)  Operation and maintenance (O & M) of storm water control measures. All regulated projects shall implement an operations and maintenance verification program of signed legal statement accepting responsibility for the O & M of structural control measure(s) until such responsibility is legally transferred to another entity. 
(d)  Issuance of discretionary permits. No discretionary permit may be issued for any new development or redevelopment project identified in this section until the authorized enforcement officer confirms the project plans comply with the applicable requirements of this section. 
(e)  Issuance of certificates of occupancy. As a condition for issuing a certificate of occupancy for new development or redevelopment projects identified in this chapter, the authorized enforcement officer shall require property owners or their representative(s) to build all the storm water pollution control BMPs and structural or treatment control BMPs that are shown on the approved project plans and consistent with the storm water mitigation plan and to submit a signed certification statement stating that the site and all structural or treatment control BMPs will be maintained in compliance with the Municipal NPDES Permit, the storm water mitigation plan, and other applicable regulatory requirements. 
(1)  If no grading permit has been issued or no construction has begun on a project within a period of 180 days of approval of LID/WQMP plan(s), the LID/WQMP plan(s) for that project shall expire. The authorized enforcement officer may extend the time by written extension for action by the applicant for a period not to exceed 180 days upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant prevented the construction from commencing. In order to renew the LID plan(s), the applicant shall resubmit all necessary forms and other data and pay any applicable plan check fees. 
(f)  Transfer of properties subject to requirement for maintenance of structural and treatment control BMPs. 
(1)  The transfer or lease of a property subject to a requirement for maintenance of structural and treatment control BMPs shall include conditions requiring the transferee and its successors and assigns to either: 
A.  Assume responsibility for maintenance of any existing structural or treatment control BMP; or 
B.  To replace an existing structural or treatment control BMP with new control measures or BMPs meeting the current standards of the city and the Municipal NPDES Permit. Such requirement shall be included in any sale or lease agreement or deed for such property. The condition of transfer shall include a provision that the successor property owner or lessee conduct maintenance inspections of all structural or treatment control BMPs at least once a year and retain proof of inspection. 
(2)  For residential properties where the structural or treatment control BMPs are located within a common area which will be maintained by the community association, appropriate arrangements shall be made with the association regarding the responsibility for maintenance. 
(3)  If structural or treatment control BMPs are located within an area proposed for dedication to a public agency, they will be the responsibility of the developer until the dedication is accepted. 
(g)  CEQA. Provisions of this section shall be complementary to, and shall not replace, any applicable requirements for storm water mitigation required under the California Environmental Quality Act, Pub. Res. Code §§ 21000 et seq. 
( Ord. No. 951-2017, § 2, 3-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.14.110. - Scope of inspections. 
(a)  Entry to inspect. The authorized enforcement officer or designated representative may enter property to investigate the source of any discharge to any public street, inlet, gutter, storm drain or any other part of the MS4 located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Compliance assessments. The authorized enforcement officer may inspect property for the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals used and materials stored on or contained within the property; 
(2)  Identifying point(s) of discharge of all wastewater, process water systems and pollutants; 
(3)  Investigating the natural slope at the location, including drainage patterns and manmade conveyance systems; 
(4)  Establishing the location of all points of discharge from the property, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system; 
(5)  Locating any illicit connection or the source of prohibited discharge; 
(6)  Evaluating compliance with any permit issued relating to a discharge to the storm water drainage system. 
(c)  Portable equipment. For purposes of verifying compliance with this chapter, the authorized enforcement officer may inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck or other mobile equipment. 
(d)  Records review. The authorized enforcement officer may inspect all records of the owner or occupant of property relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously occurring on-site, including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, storm water pollution prevention plans, monitoring program plans and any other record(s) relating to illicit connections, prohibited discharges, or any other source of contribution or potential contribution of pollutants to the storm water drainage system. 
(e)  Sample and test. The authorized enforcement officer may inspect, sample and test any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the storm water drainage system. The authorized enforcement officer may investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, any legal nonconforming connection or other pipelines on the property using appropriate tests, including but not limited to smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The authorized enforcement officer may take photographs or video tape, make measurements or drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the property. 
(f)  Monitoring. The authorized enforcement officer may erect and maintain monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring or sampling any discharge or potential source of discharge to the storm water drainage system. 
(g)  Test results. The owner or occupant of property subject to inspection shall, on submission of a written request, receive copies of all monitoring and test results conducted by the authorized enforcement officer. 
( Ord. No. 951-2017, § 2, 3-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.14.120. - Fees. 
    Fees for plan reviews, inspections, violations, corrections, and tasks associated with this chapter will be established in the City of Barstow;'s Master Fee Schedule. 
( Ord. No. 951-2017, § 2, 3-6-2017 ) 
Sec. 15.14.130. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
(1)  Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the following is hereby determined to be a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, is declared and deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated or restored by any authorized enforcement officer, and a civil or criminal action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be brought by the city attorney: 
(i)  Any of the provisions of this chapter; or 
(ii)  Any failure to comply with any applicable requirement of the planning and land development program or the Municipal NPDES Permit; or 
(iii)  Any false certification or verification, or any failure to comply with a certification or verification provided by a project applicant or the applicant's successor in interest; or 
(iv)  Any failure to properly operate and maintain any structural or treatment control BMP on a property in accordance with an approved storm water mitigation plan, the planning and land development program, or the Municipal NPDES Permit. 
(2)  The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property and the cost thereof shall be invoiced to the owner of the property, as provided by law or ordinance for the recovery of nuisance abatement costs. 
(b)  Concealment. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of such provision. 
(c)  Civil actions. In addition to any other remedies provided in this section, any violation of this section may be enforced by civil action brought by the city. In any such action, the city may seek, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies: 
(1)  A temporary and/or permanent injunction. 
(2)  Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this division. 
(3)  Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from violation. 
(4)  Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. 
(d)  Administrative enforcement powers. In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this chapter, any authorized enforcement officer has the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies: 
(1)  Cease and desist orders. When an authorized enforcement officer finds that a discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation of this chapter, the officer may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge, or practice, or operation likely to cause such discharge and direct that those persons not complying shall: 
(i)  Comply with the requirement to cleanup and abate the discharge(s); 
(ii)  Comply with a time schedule for compliance within 72 hours of discharge, spill, or pollutant release, and where high risk spill shall be cleaned up as soon as possible; and 
(iii)  Comply with abatement within 30 days of notification, for uncontrolled sources of pollutants that could pose an environmental threat; and 
(iv)  Take appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the violation from recurring. 
(2)  Notice to clean. Whenever an authorized enforcement officer finds any oil, earth, debris, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds, which may result in pollutants entering the MS4 or a non-storm water discharge to the MS4, he or she may give notice to the owner or occupant of the adjacent property to remove such oil, earth, debris, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or other material, in any manner that he or she may reasonably provide. The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice. 
(e)  Penalties. Violation of this chapter shall be an infraction punishable as provided in section 1.01.150 of this Code. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Costs endured by the city for cleanup, restoration, maintenance, or protection shall be billed to the responsible party in additional to the violation fees of section 1.01.150. 
(f)  Permit revocation. To the extent the city makes a provision of this chapter or any identified BMP a condition of approval to the issuance of a permit or license, any person in violation of such condition is subject to the permit revocation procedures set forth in this code. 
(g)  Burden of proof. In an enforcement action, the burden of proof shall be on the person who is the subject of such action to establish that the reduction or elimination of the discharge to the maximum extent practicable has been accomplished through compliance with the best management practices available, including applicable monitoring, notifications and reporting requirements. 
(h)  Remedies. Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(i)  Reporting. An enforcement response plan shall obtain records and documentation of the following occurrences as described in the Municipal NPDES Permit: 
(1)  Verbal warnings, and 
(2)  Written notices, and 
(3)  Escalated enforcement measures. 
a.  Citations (with fines); 
b.  Stop work orders; 
c.  Explanation of withholding of plan approvals or other authorizations; and 
d.  Additional measures, that may include written notices to appropriate regional water board, or authorities of interest, where NPDES compliance(s) is mandated. 
( Ord. No. 951-2017, § 2, 3-6-2017 ) 
CHAPTER 15.16. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Prior ordinance history- Ord. Nos. 449, 566, 588, 651, 718 and 762. 

Sec. 15.16.010. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods. 
(a)  Statutory authorization. The legislature of the state has, in Government Code §§ 65302, 65560, and 65800, conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city has adopted the following floodplain management regulations. 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the city. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in special flood hazard areas which increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood losses. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all pub-licly and privately owned land within floodprone or flood-related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges located in special flood hazard areas; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of special flood hazard areas so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a special flood hazard area; and 
(8)  Ensure that those who occupy the special flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their actions. 
(d)  Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities. 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters. 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage. 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Code 1969, § 15.16.010; Ord. No. 836, § 1(part), 2007) 
Sec. 15.16.020. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    100-year flood. See Base flood. 
    Accessory structure means a structure that is either: 
(1)  Solely for the parking of motor vehicles; or 
(2)  A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than 120 square feet and $1,500.00 in value. 
    Accessory use means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
    Alluvial fan means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base flood means a flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the 100-year flood). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, AO, A1-30, VE, and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade (i.e., below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building. See Structure. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures, or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    Exceptional hardship means that the hardship is exceptional, unusual, and unique to the property subject to the variance. Economic or financial hardship is not an exceptional hardship. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot qualify as an exceptional hardship. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before February 1, 1980. 
    Expansion of an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood, flooding, or floodwater means: 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
(2)  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the floodway. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Flood-related erosion means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical level or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or by some similarly unusually and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See Flooding. 
    Floodplain administrator is the city engineer as set forth in section 15.16.040 herein charged with the responsibility to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations in this chapter. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
    Floodplain management regulations means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control), and other application of police power which control development in floodprone areas. This term "floodplain management regulations" describes federal, state, or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
    Floodway encroachment lines means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state, and local floodplain maps where encroachment is not permitted. 
    Floodway fringe is that area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted. 
    Fraud and victimization means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the BFE are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
    Governing body is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means: 
(1)  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see Basement ). 
(2)  An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The flood openings standard in section 15.16.050(a)(3)c; 
b.  The anchoring standards in section 15.16.050(a)(1); 
c.  The construction materials and methods standards in section 15.16.050(a)(2); and 
d.  The standards for utilities in section 15.16.050(b). 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "mobile home or modular factory built home" means manufactured home. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value is defined in the city's substantial damage/improvement procedures in section 15.16.040(b)(2)a. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program and the city, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum to which the city's flood insurance rate maps reference. 
    New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after February 1, 1980, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after February 1, 1980. 
    Obstruction means and includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
    Program deficiency means a defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations. 
    Public safety concerns and nuisance means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
    Reasonably safe from flooding means base floodwaters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the SFHA and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Sheet flow area. See Area of shallow flooding. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means an area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH. 
    Start of construction means and includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. 
    Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. The term "watercourse" includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
    Zone A means a special flood hazard area that is inundated by the base flood with no BFEs determined. See Special flood hazard area. 
(Code 1969, § 15.16.020; Ord. No. 836, § 1(part), 2007) 
Sec. 15.16.030. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas as defined in this chapter within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas. The special flood hazard areas subject to this chapter are those identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the flood insurance study (FIS), dated January 17, 1997, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), dated March 18, 1996, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, and are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file with the floodplain administrator at 220 East Mountain View St., Suite A, Barstow, California 92311. 
(c)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(d)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(e)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(f)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes, and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, the state, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Code 1969, § 15.16.030; Ord. No. 836, § 1(part), 2007) 
Sec. 15.16.040. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of the floodplain administrator. The city engineer is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Permit review. Review all development permits to determine: 
a.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures; 
b.  All other required local, state, and federal permits have been obtained; 
c.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; 
d.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where BFEs have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city; 
e.  Require within Zones AH and AO adequate paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures; and 
f.  All letters of map revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the start of construction definition. 
(2)  Development of substantial improvement and substantial damage procedures. 
a.  Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings," and FEMA 311, "Guide on Estimating Substantial Damage Using the NFIP Residential Substantial Damage Estimator," develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining the term "market value." 
b.  Ensure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by city staff. 
(3)  Review, use and development of other base flood data. When BFE data has not been provided in accordance with section 15.16.030(b), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer section 15.16.050 A BFE shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations," dated July 1995. 
(4)  Notification of other agencies. 
a.  Alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
1.  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of water resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
2.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
3.  Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
b.  BFE changes due to physical alterations: 
1.  Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or ensure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
2.  All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the start of construction definition. Such submissions are necessary so that, upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data. 
3.  Changes in the city's jurisdictional boundaries: Notify FEMA in writing whenever the jurisdictional boundaries of the city have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the city clearly delineating the new jurisdictional limits. 
(5)  Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
a.  Certification required by section 15.16.050(a) and (d) (lowest floor elevations); 
b.  Certification required by section 15.16.050(a) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
c.  Certification required by section 15.16.050(a)(3) (wet floodproofing standard); 
d.  Certification of elevation required by section 15.16.050(c) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards); 
e.  Certification required by section 15.16.050(f) (floodway encroachments); and 
f.  Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(6)  Map determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(7)  Remedial action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in section 15.16.030(c). 
(8)  Biennial report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA. 
(9)  Planning. Ensure city's general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. 
(10)  Nonconversion of enclosed areas below the lowest floor. To ensure that the areas below the BFE shall be used solely for parking vehicles, limited storage, or access to the building and not be finished for use as human habitation without first becoming fully compliant with the floodplain management ordinance in effect at the time of conversion, the floodplain administrator shall: 
a.  Determine which applicants for new construction and/or substantial improvements have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are five feet or higher; 
b.  Enter into a nonconversion agreement for construction within flood hazard areas, or equivalent, with the city. The agreement shall be recorded with the county recorder as a deed restriction. The nonconversion agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the floodplain administrator and city attorney; and 
c.  Have the authority to inspect any area of a structure below the BFE to ensure compliance upon prior notice of at least 72 hours. 
(c)  Development permit. A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any special flood hazard area established in section 15.16.030(b). Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information: 
(1)  Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
a.  Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location; 
b.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities; 
c.  Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities; 
d.  Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable; 
e.  BFE information as specified in section 15.16.030(b) or subsection (b)(3) of this section; 
f.  Proposed elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and 
g.  Proposed elevation to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required of section 15.16.050(a) and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93. 
(2)  Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in section 15.16.050(a)(3). 
(3)  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required of section 15.16.050(a) and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93. 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  All appropriate certifications listed in subsection (b)(5) of this section. 
(d)  Determinations on development permits. The floodplain administrator shall make determinations on development permits under this section in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(e)  Appeals. Appeals of any requirement, decision or determination of the floodplain administrator related to development permits shall be governed by section 15.16.070. 
(Code 1969, § 15.16.040; Ord. No. 836, § 1(part), 2007) 
Sec. 15.16.050. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  Standards of construction. In all special flood hazard areas the following standards are required: 
(1)  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Specific requirements shall be that: 
a.  Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of manufactured home with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side; 
b.  Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, with manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side; 
c.  All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and 
d.  Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed: 
a.  With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the BFE; 
b.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
c.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
d.  If located within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(3)  Elevation and floodproofing. 
a.  Residential construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
1.  If located within Zones AE, AH, A1-30, elevated one foot above the BFE. 
2.  If located within Zone AO, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height one foot above the number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
3.  In Zone A, without BFEs specified on the FIRM, elevated one foot above the BFE as determined in section 15.16.040(b)(3) (Review, use, and development of other base flood data). All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, include BFE data. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
b.  Nonresidential construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with this chapter or: 
1.  Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended in subsection (a)(3)a of this section, so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
2.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
3.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of subsections (a)(3)b.1 and 2 of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
c.  Flood openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  For nonengineered openings: 
(i)  Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices; provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and 
(iv)  Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow floodwater to directly enter; or 
2.  For engineered openings designs shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect. 
d.  Manufactured homes. See subsection (d) of this section. 
e.  Garages and low cost accessory structures. 
1.  Attached garages. 
(i)  A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters. See subsection (a)(3)c of this section. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials. See subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(ii)  A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6. 
2.  Detached garages and accessory structures. 
(i)  Accessory structures used solely for parking (two car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in section 15.16.020, may be constructed such that its floor is below the BFE, provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage; 
(b)  The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials; 
(c)  The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
(d)  Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE; 
(e)  The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in subsection (f) of this section; and 
(f)  The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters in accordance with this chapter. 
(ii)  Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the standards in subsection (a)(3)e.2(i) of this section must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in this chapter. 
f.  Crawl space construction. No subgrade crawl spaces shall be permitted. The term "subgrade" shall be defined as below grade on all four sides. 
(b)  Standards for utilities. 
(1)  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
a.  Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and 
b.  Discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
(2)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(3)  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(c)  Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development. 
(1)  All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall: 
a.  Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and BFE. 
b.  Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans which shall meet the requirements of subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
c.  If the site is filled above the BFE, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain administrator for approval prior to submittal to FEMA: 
1.  Lowest floor elevation. 
2.  Pad elevation. 
3.  Lowest adjacent grade. 
LOMR-F applications are available online at www.fema.gov. 
(2)  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(4)  All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
(1)  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites located: 
a.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
b.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
c.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
d.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, shall: Within Zones A, A1-30, AH, AO, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one foot above the BFE and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(2)  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A, A1-30, AH, AO, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (d)(1) of this section will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
a.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the BFE; 
b.  Lots are large enough to permit steps; 
c.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade; 
d.  Piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart; and 
e.  Reinforcement is provided for pilings more than six feet above the ground level. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(e)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A, A1-30, AH, AO, and AE will either: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
(3)  Meet the permit requirements of section 15.16.040(c) and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes described by subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(f)  Floodways. Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city. 
(2)  Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  If subsections (f)(1) and (2) of this section are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Prohibit the placement of any manufactured home temporary or permanent. 
(Code 1969, § 15.16.050; Ord. No. 836, § 1(part), 2007) 
Sec. 15.16.060. - Variance procedure. 
(a)  Nature of variances. 
(1)  The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance. 
(2)  The variance criteria set forth in this section of the ordinance are based on the general principle of zoning law that the variance pertain to a piece of property and is not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
(3)  It is the duty of the city to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of ensuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(b)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  An applicant may apply for a variance based on the following property conditions: 
a.  New construction, substantial improvement of property, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of sections 15.16.040 and 15.16.050 have been fully considered and at the discretion of the floodplain administrator as pertaining to subsection (b)(4) of this section. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
b.  For the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures as defined in this chapter upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
c.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(2)  In making a determination on a variance application, the floodplain administrator shall use the criteria set forth in section 15.16.070(c)(2). In addition, variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. The term "minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
(3)  Conditions of approval of a variance. The floodplain administrator may attach such other conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(4)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of the floodplain administrator that: 
a.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and 
b.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the county recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
(5)  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Code 1969, § 15.16.060; Ord. No. 836, § 1(part), 2007) 
Sec. 15.16.070. - Appeals. 
(a)  General. This section shall govern appeals of any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator pertaining to development permits and variances. 
(b)  Development permits. 
(1)  A requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator pertaining to a development permit may be appealed by any interested person to the planning commission when the basis for the appeal alleges an error or abuse of discretion or that the application for a development permit did meet or failed to meet the qualifications or standards set forth in this chapter. 
(2)  The decision of the floodplain administrator on a development permit may be appealed in writing to the planning commission, within five business days of the floodplain administrator's decision; thereafter the floodplain administrator's decision becomes final. Such appeal shall be filed in the office of the city clerk during normal business hours. The appeal before the planning commission shall be governed by the procedures set forth in section 19.44.050 as they apply to appeals before the planning commission, except that such appeal shall be a public hearing. The decision of the planning commission shall be final, unless appealed to the city council. 
(3)  The decision of the planning commission may be appealed by any interested person in writing to the city council, within five business days of the planning commission's decision; thereafter the planning commission's decision becomes final. Such appeal shall be filed in the office of the city clerk during normal business hours. The appeal shall be governed by the procedures set forth in section 19.44.050 as they apply to appeals before the city council, except that such appeal shall be a public hearing. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(c)  Variances. 
(1)  The floodplain administrator's decision on an application for a variance may be appealed by any interested person to the planning commission within five business days of the floodplain administrator's decision; thereafter the floodplain administrator's decision becomes final. Such appeal shall be filed in the office of the city clerk during normal business hours. The appeal before the planning commission shall be governed by the procedures set forth in section 19.44.050 of this Code as they apply to appeals before the planning commission, except that such appeal shall be a public hearing. The decision of the planning commission shall be final, unless appealed to the city council. 
(2)  In reviewing an appeal for a variance, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the following: 
a.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
d.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
g.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; 
k.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges; 
l.  Whether the applicant has shown good and sufficient cause for the variance as defined in this chapter; 
m.  Whether the applicant has shown that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, as defined in this chapter, to the applicant; and 
n.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, result in public safety concerns and nuisance as defined in this chapter, or extraordinary public expense cause fraud and victimization of the public as defined in this chapter, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  The decision of the planning commission may be appealed by any interested person in writing to the city council, within five business days of the planning commission decision; thereafter the planning commission's decision becomes final. Such appeal shall be filed in the office of the city clerk during normal business hours. The appeal shall be governed by the procedures set forth in section 19.44.050 as they apply to appeals before the city council, except that such appeal shall be a public hearing. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Code 1969, § 15.16.070; Ord. No. 836, § 1(part), 2007) 
CHAPTER 15.24. - MOBILE HOME PARKS 

Sec. 15.24.010. - Fees for application of permit. 
(a)  There shall be a fee of $50.00 for plan check to be submitted with the plans and application. 
(b)  There shall be construction permit fees, plumbing and electrical fees as permitted by the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Electrical Code and the Health and Safety Code. 
(Code 1969, § 15.24.010; Ord. No. 336, § 5(part), 1971; Ord. No. 652, § 1, 1990) 
Sec. 15.24.020. - Mobile home parks. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide regulations for the use, construction and operation of mobile home parks in the city, in order to promote, protect and secure the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(1)  Definitions: See State of California Administrative Code, Health and Safety Code, division 13, Part 2.1. 
(2)  Fees for application of permit shall be the same as section 15.24.010. 
(3)  Parking for automobiles: 
a.  Two parking spaces shall be provided on the individual site for each mobile home lot in the park. 
b.  Each parking space shall be a minimum size of ten feet by 20 feet, tandem parking permitted. 
c.  There shall be provided for visitors and guests a minimum of one parking space for every five mobile home sites in the development. Space minimum size of nine feet by 20 feet double-striped. 
d.  No mobile home site shall be further than 200 feet from guest parking. All parking shall be paved. 
(4)  The following permanent improvements shall be installed on each lot prior to placing a mobile home on the lot: 
a.  A concrete slab containing at least 200 square feet. 
b.  All utilities shall be provided and the utilities shall be underground. 
(5)  Minimum area of a mobile home park shall be 200,000 square feet. 
(6)  Storage area. An open storage area shall be provided in the mobile home park for the storage of boats and trailers, and travel trailers. 
(7)  Signs. One double face identification sign (park name and address only) at the main point of entry to the development not exceeding 18 square feet in area for each. 
(Code 1969, § 15.24.020; Ord. No. 336, § 5(part), 1971) 
Sec. 15.24.030. - Mobile homes. 
    All mobile homes shall comply with the Health and Safety Code, division 13, Part 2. 
(Code 1969, § 15.24.030; Ord. No. 336, § 5(part), 1971) 
Sec. 15.24.040. - Recreational trailer parks and campgrounds. 
    All recreational trailer parks and campgrounds shall comply with the California Administrative Code, Title 25, Health and Safety Code, division 13. 
(Code 1969, § 15.24.040; Ord. No. 336, § 5(part), 1971) 
Sec. 15.24.050. - Enforcement. 
    The state department of housing and community development shall be the enforcement agency for the provisions of the Health and Safety Code, division 13, Part 2.1 (Mobile Home Park Act) and related regulations of the California Code of Regulations, Title 25 pertaining to mobile home parks. 
(Code 1969, § 15.24.050; Ord. No. 522, § 7, 1983; Ord. No. 841U, § 1, 2008; Ord. No. 842, § 1, 2008) 
CHAPTER 15.28. - SURFACE MINING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, Public Resources Code § 2710 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 15.28.010. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Surface Mining Ordinance of the City of Barstow." 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.010; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.020. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate surface mining operations in accordance with the requirements of the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, the regulations adopted thereunder, and Public Resources Code § 2207. This chapter is further intended to secure the continued availability of important mineral resources while also ensuring that: 
(1)  Adverse environmental effects are prevented or mitigated; and 
(2)  Mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition readily adaptable for alternative land uses. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.020; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.030. - Incorporation by reference. 
    The provisions of the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, the regulations adopted thereunder, and Public Resources Code § 2207, as those provisions and regulations may be amended from time to time, are made a part of this chapter by reference with the same force and effect as if they were specifically and fully set out herein. Notwithstanding the preceding, when the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive than correlative state provisions, then the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.030; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.040. - Requirements for surface mining operations. 
    Except as provided in section 15.28.050, no person shall conduct a surface mining operation on public or private property without first obtaining approval of all of the following: 
(1)  A surface mining permit; 
(2)  A reclamation plan; and 
(3)  Financial assurances. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.040; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.050. - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Excavations or grading conducted for farming or on-site construction or for the purpose of restoring land following a flood or natural disaster. 
(2)  On-site excavation and on-site earthmoving activities that are both an integral and necessary part of a construction project and undertaken to prepare a site for construction of structures, landscaping, or other land improvements, including the related excavation grading, compaction, or the creation of fills, road cuts, and embankments, whether or not surplus materials are exported from the site. This exemption shall not be applicable unless all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.  All required permits for the construction, landscaping, or related land improvements have been approved by a public agency in accordance with applicable provisions of state law and locally adopted plans and ordinances, including, but not limited to, CEQA. 
b.  Approval of the construction project included consideration of the on-site excavation and on-site earthmoving activities pursuant to CEQA. 
c.  The approved construction project is consistent with the general plan designation and zoning of the site. 
d.  Surplus materials shall not be exported from the site unless and until actual construction work has commenced and shall cease if it is determined that construction activities have terminated, have been indefinitely suspended, or are no longer being actively pursued. 
(3)  Operation of a plant site used for mineral processing, including associated on-site structures, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials. This exemption shall include the on-site stockpiling and on-site recovery of mined materials. This exemption shall not be applicable unless all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.  The plant site is located on lands designated for industrial or commercial uses in the general plan. 
b.  The plant site is located on lands zoned industrial or commercial. 
c.  None of the minerals being processed are being extracted on site. 
d.  All reclamation work has been completed pursuant to the approved reclamation plan for any mineral extraction activities that occurred on site after January 1, 1976. 
(4)  Prospecting for, or the extraction of, minerals for commercial purposes and the removal of overburden in total amounts of less than 1,000 cubic yards in any one location of one acre or less. 
(5)  Surface mining operations that are required by federal law in order to protect a mining claim, if those operations are conducted solely for that purpose. 
(6)  Any other surface mining operations that the state mining and geology board determines to be of an infrequent nature and which involve only minor surface disturbances. 
(7)  The solar evaporation of sea water or bay water for the production of salt and related minerals. 
(8)  Emergency excavations or grading conducted by the state department of water resources or the state reclamation board for the purpose of averting, alleviating, repairing, or restoring damage to property due to imminent or recent floods, disasters, or other emergencies. 
(9)  Excavations or grading for the exclusive purpose of obtaining materials for roadbed construction and maintenance conducted in connection with timber operations or forest management on land owned by the same person or entity. This exemption is limited to excavation and grading that is conducted adjacent to timber operation or forest management roads. This exemption is available only if slope stability and erosion are controlled in accordance with state regulations and upon closure of the site, where necessary, revegetation measures and postclosure uses are implemented in consultation with the state department of forestry and fire protection. This exemption does not apply to on site excavation or grading that occurs within 100 feet of a Class One watercourse or within 75 feet of a Class Two watercourse. This exemption also does not apply to excavations for materials that are, or have been, sold for commercial purposes. 
(10)  Excavations, grading or other earthmoving activities in an oil or gas field that are integral to, and necessary for, ongoing operations for the extraction of oil or gas. This exemption shall not be applicable unless all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.  The operations are being conducted in accordance with division 3 of the Public Resources Code (commencing with section 3000). 
b.  The operations are consistent with the general plan designation and zoning for the site. 
c.  The earthmoving activities are within oil or gas field properties under a common owner or operator. 
d.  No excavated materials are sold for commercial purposes. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.050; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.060. - Vested rights. 
    No person who has obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining operations prior to January 1, 1976, shall be required to secure a surface mining permit pursuant to this chapter as long as the vested right continues and as long as no substantial changes have been made in the operation except in accordance with SMARA, the regulations promulgated thereunder, and this chapter. A person shall be deemed to have vested rights if, prior to January 1, 1976, the person has, in good faith and in reliance upon a permit or other authorization, if the permit or other authorization was required, diligently commenced surface mining operations and incurred substantial liabilities for work and materials necessary therefore. The reclamation plan and the financial assurances requirements of this chapter shall apply to operations conducted after January 1, 1976. In those cases where an overlap exists (in the horizontal or vertical sense) between pre- and post-SMARA mining, the reclamation plan shall call for reclamation proportional to that disturbance caused after January 1, 1976. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.060; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 15.28.070. - Backfilling. 
    The term "backfilling" means to replace material removed during mining with earth, overburden, mine waste or imported material. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.070; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.080. - Borrow pitting. 
    The term "borrow pitting" means to create an excavation by the surface mining of rock, unconsolidated geologic deposits or soil to provide material (borrow) for fill elsewhere. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.080; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.090. - CEQA. 
    The abbreviation "CEQA" means the California Environmental Quality Act, located at Public Resources Code § 21000 et seq., as amended. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.090; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.100. - Commission. 
    The term "commission" means the planning commission of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.100; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.110. - Critical gradient. 
    The term "critical gradient" means the maximum stable inclination of an unsupported slope under the most adverse conditions that it will likely experience, as determined by current engineering technology. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.110; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.120. - Department. 
    The term "department" means the community development department of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.120; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.130. - Director. 
    The term "director" means the community development director of the city, or the designee thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.130; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.140. - Financial assurances. 
    The term "financial assurances" mean security posted by the owner or operator of a surface mining operation to guarantee satisfactory performance of a reclamation plan. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.140; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.150. - Grading. 
    The term "grading" means to bring an existing surface to a designed form by cutting, filling and smoothing operations. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.150; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.160. - Idle. 
    The term "idle" means to curtail a surface mining operation for a period of one year or more, with the intent to resume those surface mining operations at a future date, by more than 90 percent of the operation's previous maximum annual mineral production within any of the last five years during which an interim management plan has not been approved. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.160; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.170. - Interim management plan. 
    The term "interim management plan" means a report setting forth the measures that will be implemented to maintain the site of an idle surface mining operation in compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.170; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.180. - Mined lands. 
    The term "mined lands" means the surface, subsurface, and groundwater of an area in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted, including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from, or are used in, surface mining operations are located. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.180; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.190. - Minerals. 
    The term "minerals" means any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of elements or compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances, including, but not limited to, coal, peat, and bituminous rock. The term "minerals" shall not include geothermal resources, natural gas, and petroleum. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.190; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.200. - Operator. 
    The term "operator" means any person who is engaged in surface mining operations, or who contracts with others to conduct operations on his behalf, except a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as an employee with wages as his sole compensation. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.200; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.210. - Overburden. 
    The term "overburden" means soil, rock, or other materials that lie above a natural mineral deposit or in between mineral deposits, before or after their removal by surface mining operations. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.210; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.220. - Reclamation. 
    The term "reclamation" means the combined process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and create no danger to public health or safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.220; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.230. - Reclamation plan. 
    The term "reclamation plan" means a completed and approved plan for reclaiming the lands impacted by a surface mining operation conducted after January 1, 1976. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.230; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.240. - Resoiling. 
    The term "resoiling" means the process of artificially building or reconstructing a soil profile. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.240; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.250. - SMARA. 
    The abbreviation "SMARA" means the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, located at Public Resources Code § 2710 et seq., as amended. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.250; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.260. - Stream bed skimming. 
    The term "stream bed skimming" means excavation of sand and gravel from stream bed deposits above the mean summer water level or stream bottom, whichever is higher. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.260; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.270. - Surface mining operation. 
    The term "surface mining operation" means all, or any part of, the process involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work incident to an underground mine. The term "surface mining operation" includes, but is not limited to, in place distillation or retorting or leaching, the production and disposal of mining waste, prospecting and exploratory activities, borrow pitting, stream bed skimming, and segregation and stockpiling of mined materials (and recovery of same). 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.270; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
ARTICLE III. - SURFACE MINING PERMITS 

Sec. 15.28.280. - Application. 
    Applications for a surface mining permit shall be filed with the department on a form provided by the director. The application shall include all environmental review forms and information required by the director, and shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.280; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.290. - Notification of filing. 
(a)  No later than 30 days after acceptance of a surface mining permit application as complete, the director shall notify the state department of conservation of the filing of the application. 
(b)  No later than 30 days after acceptance of a surface mining permit application as complete, the director shall notify the state department of transportation of the filing of the application if both of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The proposed mining operations are in the 100-year floodplain of any stream, as shown in Zone A of the flood insurance rate maps issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
(2)  The proposed mining operations are within one mile, upstream or downstream, of any state highway bridge. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.290; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.300. - Approval or denial of surface mining permit. 
(a)  The commission shall approve or deny an application for a surface mining permit after conducting a public hearing. If notification of the application filing has been given pursuant to section 15.28.290(b), then such hearing shall not be held until the state department of transportation submits its comments or until 45 days from the date the application was accepted as complete, whichever occurs first. 
(b)  The commission may approve a surface mining permit application upon making the following findings: 
(1)  The proposed surface mining operation will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  The proposed surface mining operation is consistent with the requirements of SMARA, the regulations promulgated thereunder, and this chapter. 
(c)  The commission may impose such conditions as deemed reasonably necessary when approving a surface mining permit. 
(d)  The director shall send a copy of each approved surface mining permit, and any conditions imposed on such permit, to the department of conservation. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.300; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.310. - Expansion of surface mining operation. 
(a)  No expansion of a surface mining operation for which a surface mining permit has been issued shall occur without the prior approval of a modification of such permit. For purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  The term "expansion" means an increase in the land area on which a surface mining operation is conducted. 
(2)  The term "minor expansion" means an increase in the land area on which a surface mining operation is conducted by an amount that does not result in the total land area of such operation exceeding the land area originally approved for such operation by more than 25 percent. 
(b)  Applications for modification of a surface mining permit shall be processed in the same manner as applications for a surface mining permit; provided, however, that applications related to minor expansions shall be approved or denied by the director without a public hearing. 
(c)  The commission or the director may approve an application for modification of a surface mining permit upon making the following findings: 
(1)  The proposed expansion of the surface mining operation will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  The proposed expansion of the surface mining operation is consistent with the requirements of SMARA, the regulations promulgated thereunder, and this chapter. 
(d)  The commission or the director may impose such conditions as deemed reasonably necessary when approving a modification of a surface mining permit. 
(e)  The director shall send a copy of each approved modification of a surface mining permit, and any conditions imposed in conjunction with such approval, to the department of conservation. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.310; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
ARTICLE IV. - RECLAMATION PLANS 

Sec. 15.28.320. - General requirements. 
(a)  Reclamation plans shall contain all of the information and elements required by SMARA and the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(b)  An item of information or document required pursuant to subsection (a) of this section that has already been prepared as part of the application for a surface mining permit, or as part of an environmental document prepared pursuant to CEQA, may be included in the reclamation plan by reference, if that item of information is attached to the reclamation plan. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.320; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.330. - Application. 
    A proposed reclamation plan shall be filed with the department. Applicants shall sign a statement accepting responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with the reclamation plan. Applications for reclamation plan approval shall include all environmental review forms and information required by the director. All documentation for the reclamation plan shall be submitted at one time. The proposed reclamation plan shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.330; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.340. - Transmittal of copies. 
(a)  Within 30 days of receipt of a complete reclamation plan, the director shall submit copies of all of the following to the state department of conservation: 
(1)  The reclamation plan. 
(2)  Information from any related document prepared, adopted or certified pursuant to CEQA. 
(3)  Any other pertinent information. 
(b)  In conjunction with such submission, the director shall certify to the state department of conservation that the reclamation plan is in compliance with the applicable requirements of Public Resources Code §§ 2772 and 2773 and article 1 (commencing with section 3500) of chapter 8 of division 2 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations in effect at the time. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.340; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.350. - Evaluation of comments. 
(a)  The state department of conservation shall have 30 days from its receipt of a reclamation plan to prepare comments if it so chooses. The director shall prepare a written response to any comments received from the state department of conservation. Such written response shall describe the disposition of the major issues raised by the state department of conservation. Additionally, if the director's position is at variance with any of the recommendations made or objections raised in the state department of conservation's comments, then the written response shall address, in detail, why specific comments and suggestions were not accepted. 
(b)  The director shall forward to the operator copies of any written responses received from the state department of conservation, as well as the responses prepared by the director. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.350; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.360. - Approval or denial of reclamation plan. 
(a)  The commission shall approve or deny an application for a proposed reclamation plan after conducting a public hearing. At the public hearing, the commission shall consider any comments received from the state department of conservation. 
(b)  The commission may approve a reclamation plan upon making the following findings: 
(1)  The reclamation plan complies with SMARA, the regulations promulgated thereunder and this chapter. 
(2)  The reclamation plan and potential use of reclaimed land pursuant to such plan are consistent with this chapter, the general plan and any applicable resource plan or element. 
(3)  The reclamation plan has been reviewed pursuant to CEQA and the city's environmental review guidelines, and all significant adverse impacts from reclamation of the mined lands are mitigated to the maximum extent feasible. 
(4)  Either: 
a.  The land and resources to be reclaimed (e.g., waterbodies) will be restored to a condition that is compatible with, and blends in with, the surrounding natural environment, topography and other resources; or 
b.  Suitable off-site development will compensate for related disturbance to resource values. 
(5)  The reclamation plan will ensure that the mined lands are restored to a useable condition that is readily adaptable for alternative land uses consistent with the general plan and any applicable resource plan or element. 
(6)  Section 15.28.340 has been satisfied. 
(c)  If the commission does not approve a reclamation plan, the director shall return the plan to the applicant within 60 days. The applicant shall have 60 days from the date on which the reclamation plan is returned to revise the plan to address identified deficiencies. 
(d)  The director shall send a copy of each approved reclamation plan to the department of conservation. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.360; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.370. - Performance of reclamation. 
    Reclamation activities shall be initiated at the earliest possible time on those portions of the mined lands that will not be subject to further disturbance from mining activity. Reclamation may be performed on an annual basis, in stages compatible with continuing operations, or on completion of all excavation, removal, or fill, as approved by the director. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.370; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL ASSURANCES 

Sec. 15.28.380. - General requirements. 
(a)  Financial assurances may take the form of surety bonds, irrevocable letters of credit, trust funds, or other forms specified by the state department of conservation, which the director reasonably determines are adequate to perform reclamation in accordance with the operator's approved reclamation plan. The financial assurances shall be made payable to the city and the state department of conservation. 
(b)  The amount of required financial assurances shall be based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The estimated costs of reclamation for the years or phases stipulated in the approved reclamation plan, including any maintenance of reclaimed areas as may be required, subject to adjustment for the actual amount required to reclaim lands disturbed by surface mining activities since January 1, 1976, and new lands to be disturbed by surface mining activities in the upcoming year. 
(2)  An analysis of physical activities necessary to implement the approved reclamation plan, the unit costs for these activities, the number of units of each of these activities, and the actual administrative costs. 
(3)  Financial assurances to ensure compliance with revegetation, restoration of water bodies, restoration of aquatic or wildlife habitat, and any other applicable element of the approved reclamation plan shall be based on cost estimates that include, but are not limited to, labor, equipment, materials, mobilization of equipment, administration, and reasonable profit by a commercial operator other than the operator. 
(4)  A contingency factor of ten percent. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.380; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.390. - Application. 
    A financial assurances proposal shall be filed with the department prior to the securing of financial assurances. Such proposal shall be prepared by a state registered professional engineer approved by the director. The financial assurances proposal shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.390; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.400. - Transmittal of copies. 
    Within 30 days of receipt of a complete financial assurances proposal, the director shall forward a copy of the proposal, together with any documentation supporting the proposal, to the state department of conservation for review. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.400; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.410. - Evaluation of comments. 
(a)  The state department of conservation shall have 45 days from its receipt of a financial assurances proposal to prepare comments if it so chooses. The director shall prepare a written response to any comments received from the state department of conservation. Such written response shall describe the disposition of the major issues raised by the state department of conservation. Additionally, if the director's position is at variance with any of the recommendations made or objections raised in the state department of conservation's comments, then the written response shall address, in detail, why specific comments and suggestions were not accepted. 
(b)  The director shall forward to the operator copies of any written responses received from the state department of conservation, as well as the responses prepared by the director. 
(c)  If the state department of conservation does not comment within 45 days of receipt of the financial assurances proposal, the director shall assume that the cost estimates contained within the proposal are adequate unless there is reason to determine that additional costs may be incurred. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.410; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.420. - Approval or denial of financial assurances proposal. 
(a)  The commission shall approve or deny a financial assurances proposal after conducting a public hearing. At the public hearing, the commission shall consider any comments received from the state department of conservation. 
(b)  The commission may approve a financial assurances proposal upon making the following findings: 
(1)  The financial assurances proposal complies with SMARA, the regulations promulgated thereunder and this chapter. 
(2)  The financial assurances proposal is sufficient to fund reclamation of lands remaining disturbed by the surface mining operation. 
(c)  If the commission does not approve a financial assurances proposal, the director shall return the proposal to the applicant within 60 days. The applicant shall have 60 days from the date on which the financial assurances proposal is returned to revise the proposal to address identified deficiencies. 
(d)  The director shall send a copy of each approved financial assurances proposal to the department of conservation. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.420; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.430. - Securing and maintenance of financial assurances. 
    Financial assurances shall be secured in accordance with the approved financial assurances proposal prior to conducting surface mining operations. The financial assurances shall remain in effect for the duration of the surface mining operation and any additional period until reclamation is completed. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.430; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.440. - Revision. 
    Each year, no later than 45 days prior to the anniversary date of the approval of the financial assurances proposal, the operator shall submit any revisions to the financial assurances to the director. If revisions to the financial assurances are not required, the operator shall explain, in writing, why revisions are not required. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.440; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.450. - Annual adjustment. 
    The director shall annually adjust the amount of financial assurances required for a surface mining operation for any one year to account for new lands disturbed by surface mining operations, inflation, and reclamation of lands accomplished in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.450; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.460. - New ownership. 
    If a mining operation is sold or ownership is transferred to another person, the existing financial assurances shall remain in force until new financial assurances are secured from the new owner and have been approved in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.460; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.470. - Forfeiture. 
    If the director determines that an operator is financially incapable of performing reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation plan, or has abandoned its surface mining operation without commencing reclamation, the director shall do the following: 
(1)  Notify the operator by personal service or certified mail that the city intends to take appropriate action to forfeit the financial assurances. Such notification shall specify the reasons for forfeiting the financial assurances. 
(2)  Allow the operator 60 days to commence or cause the commencement of reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. Reclamation shall be completed within the time limits specified in the approved reclamation plan or some other time period mutually agreed upon by the director and the operator. 
(3)  Take appropriate action to require forfeiture of the financial assurances if the operator does not substantially comply with subsection (b) of this section. 
(4)  Use the proceeds from the forfeited financial assurances to conduct and complete reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. In no event shall the financial assurances be used for any other purpose. The operator shall be responsible for the costs of conducting and completing reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation plan that are in excess of the proceeds from the forfeited financial assurances. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.470; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.480. - Release. 
    Upon determining that reclamation has been completed in accordance with the approved reclamation plan, the director shall release financial assurances for that surface mining operation. The director shall give written notice of the release of the financial assurances to the operator and to the state department of conservation. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.480; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
ARTICLE VI. - INTERIM MANAGEMENT PLANS 

Sec. 15.28.490. - Application. 
    Within 90 days of a surface mining operation becoming idle, the operator shall file with the department an interim management plan for review and approval. The interim management plan shall provide measures the operator will implement to maintain the surface mining operation site in compliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, all permit conditions. The interim management plan shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.490; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.500. - Transmittal of copies. 
    Within 30 days of acceptance of an interim management plan for filing, the director shall forward a copy of the interim management plan to the state department of conservation for review. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.500; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.510. - Approval or denial of interim management plan. 
(a)  The commission shall approve or deny a proposed interim management plan within 60 days of the acceptance of a proposed plan for filing, unless the operator consents to a longer period. Such decision shall not be made before the state department of conservation has had 30 days to review the proposed interim management plan. The commission shall approve a proposed interim management plan upon making a finding, based on substantial evidence, that the interim management plan is consistent with the requirements of SMARA, the regulations promulgated thereunder, and this chapter. 
(b)  If the commission denies a proposed interim management plan, the director shall notify the operator in writing of any deficiencies in the plan. The operator shall have 30 days from such notice, or any longer period mutually agreed upon by the director and the operator, to submit a revised plan. 
(c)  The commission shall approve or deny approval of a revised interim management plan within 60 days of receipt. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.510; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.520. - Duration. 
    The interim management plan shall remain in effect for a period not to exceed five years. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.520; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.530. - Expiration. 
    Upon expiration of an interim management plan, the director shall take one of the following actions: 
(1)  Renew the interim management plan for another period not to exceed five years. An interim management plan shall not be renewed if the operator has not fully complied with the plan. 
(2)  Require the operator to commence reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.530; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.540. - Maintenance of financial assurances. 
    Financial assurances required by this chapter shall remain in effect during the period that a surface mining operation is idle. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.540; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
ARTICLE VII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 15.28.550. - Appeals. 
(a)  The applicant, the city council, or any interested party may appeal to the city council any decision approving or denying a surface mining permit, modification of a surface mining permit, a reclamation plan, financial assurances or an interim management plan. No appeal shall be processed unless filed in accordance with this section. 
(b)  An appeal shall be made within five days of the date of the decision being appealed by filing an application of appeal with the director. The application shall state all of the grounds for the appeal. An appeal filed by the city council shall not require a statement of the grounds for the appeal. Upon receipt of a timely appeal, the director shall transmit to the city clerk the application of appeal and all other documents constituting the record upon which the decision was made. 
(c)  An appeal shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the city council to cover the cost of processing the appeal. An appeal by the city council shall not be subject to the payment of a fee. 
(d)  The effectiveness of any decision approving or denying a surface mining permit, modification of a surface mining permit, a reclamation plan, financial assurances or an interim management plan shall be stayed during: 
(1)  The appeal period set forth in this section; and 
(2)  The pendency of any appeal. 
(e)  Within 45 days of the filing of a timely appeal, the city council shall adopt a resolution affirming, reversing or modifying the decision being appealed. The city council shall hold at least one public hearing on the appeal prior to making a decision. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.550; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.560. - Annual operations report. 
    The owner or operator shall file with the department an annual operations report as required by Public Resources Code § 2207(b). 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.560; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.570. - Inspection. 
(a)  The director shall arrange for inspection of a surface mining operation within six months of receipt of the annual operations report required by this chapter in order to determine whether the surface mining operation is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and state regulations. In no event shall less than one inspection be conducted in any calendar year. The director may cause such inspections to be conducted by a state-registered geologist, state-registered civil engineer, state-licensed landscape architect, or state-registered forester, who is experienced in land reclamation and who has not been employed by the mining operation in any capacity during the previous 12 months. 
(b)  All inspections shall be conducted using the form provided by the state. 
(c)  The operator shall be solely responsible for the reasonable cost of the inspection. 
(d)  The director shall notify the state department of conservation within 30 days of completion of the inspection that said inspection has been conducted. The notice shall contain a statement regarding the surface mining operation's compliance with SMARA, shall include a copy of the completed inspection form, and shall specify which aspects of the surface mining operation, if any, are inconsistent with that statute. If the operator has a review of its reclamation plan, financial assurances, or an interim management plan pending before the state department of conservation or the commission, the notice shall so indicate. The director shall forward to the operator a copy of the notice, a copy of the completed inspection form, and any supporting documentation, including, but not limited to, any inspection report prepared by the geologist, civil engineer, landscape architect, or forester. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.570; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.580. - Abandonment. 
    Unless review of an interim management plan is pending before the commission, or an appeal is pending before the city council, a surface mining operation that remains idle for over one year after becoming idle without obtaining approval of an interim management plan shall be considered abandoned. The owner of a surface mining operation which has been deemed abandoned pursuant to this section shall commence and complete reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.580; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.590. - Notice of change of address. 
    Every operator shall notify the director of each change of address. Notice shall be given no more than seven days after the change is effective and shall be given on a form provided by the department. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.590; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.600. - Notice of change of ownership of property. 
    Any person who owns real property on which a surface mining operation is being conducted for which a surface mining permit has been issued shall file a certified report with the department within 30 days of encumbering, selling, transferring or conveying the property or part thereof or permitting the property or part thereof to be encumbered, sold, transferred or conveyed. The report shall be made on a form provided by the director. The director shall transmit a copy of the report to the state department of conservation and shall file a copy with the county clerk within five business days of its receipt. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.600; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.610. - Annual update report. 
    By July 1 of each year, for each active and idle surface mining operation, the director shall submit to the state department of conservation either of the following: 
(1)  A copy of any amendments to the surface mining permit and reclamation plan for such operation; or 
(2)  A statement that there have been no amendments during the previous year. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.610; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.620. - Notice of public hearing. 
    Notice of all public hearings required by this chapter shall be given in accordance with the provisions of section 19.40.010. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.620; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.630. - Fees. 
    The city council may establish by resolution such fees as it deems necessary to cover the reasonable costs incurred in implementing this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.630; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.640. - Regulations nonexclusive. 
    The provisions of this chapter are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other applicable provisions of the Barstow Municipal Code or other law. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.640; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Sec. 15.28.650. - Failure to comply. 
(a)  Upon determining that a surface mining operation is not in compliance with SMARA or this chapter, the director may notify the operator of the violation by personal service or certified mail. 
(b)  If the violation extends beyond 30 days after the notification given pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, then the director may issue an order by personal service or certified mail requiring compliance; provided, however, that such order may require cessation of further mining activities if the operator does not have an approved reclamation plan or financial assurances. The order shall specify the violations, a time for compliance and shall set a date for a hearing before the commission. In setting a compliance date, the director shall take into account the seriousness of the violation and any good faith efforts to comply made by the operator. The date of the commission hearing shall not be sooner than 30 days after the date of the order. The order shall not take effect until the operator has been provided a hearing before the commission. 
(c)  The director may impose an administrative penalty of not more than $5,000.00 per day on any operator that violates or fails to comply with an order issued under subsection (a) of this section after the order's effective date. Such penalty shall be imposed by means of an order to the operator that is served by personal service or certified mail. The penalty shall be assessed from the original date of noncompliance. In determining the amount of the administrative penalty, the director shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation; 
(2)  Any prior history of violations; 
(3)  The degree of culpability; 
(4)  Any economic savings resulting from the violation; and 
(5)  Any other matters justice may require. Administrative penalty orders shall be effective upon issuance. The operator shall make payment for an administrative penalty within 30 days unless a petition for review has been filed pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Within 30 days of the issuance an administrative penalty order pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the operator may petition the city council for review of the order. The city council shall notify the operator by personal service or certified mail whether it will review the order setting administrative penalties. The city council may affirm, modify, or set aside, in whole or in part, any order setting administrative penalties that it reviews. The decision of the city council shall be by resolution, shall be effective upon issuance and shall be served on the operator by personal service or certified mail. The operator shall make payment for the administrative penalty ordered by the city council within 30 days of service of the order. 
(e)  Any operator aggrieved by decision of the city council pursuant to subsection (d) of this section may obtain judicial review in accordance with Public Resources Code § 2774.2(e). Payment of the administrative penalty shall be held in an interest bearing impound account pending the resolution of a duly filed petition for judicial review. 
(Code 1969, § 15.28.650; Ord. No. 747, § 1(part), 1999) 
Title 16 - FIRE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fire protection generally, Government Code § 38600 et seq.; city authorized to adopt ordinances, rules, or regulations to provide fire prevention restrictions or regulations necessary to meet local conditions of weather, vegetation, or other fire hazards, Public Resources Code § 4117. 

CHAPTER 16.04. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 16.04.010. - Adopted. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, the California Fire Code, 2010 edition (part 9, title 24, California Code of Regulations), which incorporates and amends the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, published by the ICC, including appendix chapters A, B, C, D, E, F, and G, is hereby adopted by reference as the fire code of the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions to life and property from fire, hazardous materials or explosion. A copy of the fire code has been filed, and shall be maintained on file, in the office of the city building official for public inspection, and the fire code is adopted with the same full force and effect as though set out herein. 
(Code 1969, § 16.04.010; Ord. No. 786, § 2(part), 2003; Ord. No. 838, § 5(part), 2008) 
Sec. 16.04.020. - References to officials in adopted technical codes. 
    Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this chapter, then that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said technical code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned. 
Sec. 16.04.030. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited. 
    The limits referred to in the state code in which the storages of flammable or combustible liquids is restricted are hereby established as follows: 
    The storage of flammable and combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited in all mercantile districts, congested commercial areas, developed residential areas and other areas where it is determined by the fire chief having jurisdiction that the installation of flammable and combustible liquid aboveground tanks will create a hazard to the occupants and/or property owners in the area. 
(Code 1969, § 16.04.020; Ord. No. 786, § 2(part), 2003; Ord. No. 838, § 5(part), 2008) 
Sec. 16.04.040. - Establishment of limits in which storage of liquefied petroleum gases is prohibited. 
    The limits referred to in the California Fire Code, in which storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as follows: 
    The aggregate capacity of any one installation for the bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas shall not exceed 2,000 water gallons in any congested commercial, developed residential or any other area where, in the opinion of the fire chief, the location of bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas could create a hazard or threat to the occupants and/or property owners. 
(Code 1969, § 16.04.030; Ord. No. 786, § 2(part), 2003; Ord. No. 838, § 5(part), 2008) 
Sec. 16.04.050. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents are prohibited. 
    The limits referred to in the California Fire Code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: 
    The storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited in developed residential areas, principal business districts, congested commercial areas, and in any heavily populated area. The fire chief, having jurisdiction, shall be the final determining authority. 
(Code 1969, § 16.04.040; Ord. No. 786, § 2(part), 2003; Ord. No. 838, § 5(part), 2008) 
Sec. 16.04.060. - Fire code amendments. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 16.04.010, article 1, Administration, is amended by adding a new section 111.2.1.1.2.1 to read as follows: 
Section 111.2.1.1.2.1 Other Persons Authorized to Enforce Provisions of the Fire Code. The following positions are authorized to enforce the provisions of the fire code: 
1.  City building official; 
2.  Senior construction inspector; 
3.  Any construction inspector of the city; 
4.  Any police officer of the city; 
5.  Any officer or employee designated by the city manager; 
6.  City attorney; and 
7.  Any code enforcement officer of the city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 16.04.010, chapter 27, Hazardous Materials, of the fire code is amended by adding a new section 2703.10.4 to read as follows: 
2703.10.4.1 Parking and garaging. Parking of vehicles containing hazardous materials shall be in accordance with this section. 
Near residential, education, and institutional occupancies and other high-risk areas. Any vehicle containing hazardous materials shall not be left unattended at any time on any residential street, or within 500 feet of a residential area, apartment of hotel complex, education facility, hospital or care facility, or at any other place that would, in the opinion of the fire chief, present an extreme life hazard. 
Exceptions: In cases of accident, breakdown or other emergencies, the vehicles are allowed to be parked and left unattended at any location while the operator is obtaining assistance. 
On thoroughfares. Any vehicle containing hazardous materials shall not be left un-attending on a street, highway, avenue or alley. 
Exceptions: The necessary absence in connection with loading or unloading the vehicle. The vehicle location shall be in accordance with section 2703.10. Stops for meals during the day or night, if the street is well lighted at the point of parking. The vehicle location shall be in accordance with section 2703.10. 
Durations exceeding one hour. Any vehicle containing hazardous materials shall not be parked at any one point for longer than an hour. 
Exceptions: Off the streets, highways, avenues or alleys. At other approved locations not less than 50 feet from buildings other than those approved for the storage or servicing of such vehicle. When, in cases of accident, breakdown or other emergency, the operator must leave the vehicle to take necessary action to correct the emergency. 
Garaging. Vehicles containing hazardous materials shall not be parked or garaged in any buildings other than those specifically approved for such use by the fire chief. 
(Code 1969, § 16.04.050; Ord. No. 786, § 2(part), 2003; Ord. No. 838, § 5(part), 2008) 
Sec. 16.04.070. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any land, building or structure, machine or equipment, or cause or permit the same to be done, in violation of the fire code. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the fire code is committed, continued, or permitted. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation shall remove, deface, alter, or obstruct from view a posted notice of the fire chief, or his authorized representative, when such notice constitutes a stop work order or a warning of substandard or hazardous conditions or prohibits or restrict the occupancy or use of any land, building or structure, machine or equipment regulated by the fire code. 
(c)  Every violation of the fire code shall be deemed a misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in section 1.01.150. 
(Code 1969, § 16.04.060; Ord. No. 786, § 2(part), 2003; Ord. No. 838, § 5(part), 2008) 
CHAPTER 16.08. - BURNING 

Sec. 16.08.010. - Unlawful burning. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the corporate limits of the city to burn, or cause to be burned, any inflammable or combustible waste or refuse or any substance of any nature whatever outside of any buildings; provided expressly, however, that upon application to and express written approval from the fire department and in conformity with the regulations of the air pollution control district. 
(Code 1969, § 16.08.010; Ord. No. 518, § 2 (part), 1983) 
Title 18 - PLATS AND SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior ordinance history- Ord. Nos. 284, 405 and 524. 
State Law reference- Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq. 

CHAPTER 18.02. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 18.02.010. - Citation and authority. 
    This title is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., and may be cited as the subdivision ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 18.02.010; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.02.020. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this title to regulate and control the division of land within the city and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act concerning the design, improvement and survey data of subdivisions, the form and content of all maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act, and the procedure to be followed in securing the official approval of the planning commission, the city engineer, the community development department and city council regarding such maps. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, to promote orderly growth and development, and to promote open space, conservation, protection, and proper use of land and to ensure provision for adequate traffic circulation, utilities, and services. 
(Code 1969, § 18.02.020; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.02.030. - Conformity to general plan, specific plan, and zoning ordinances. 
(a)  No land shall be subdivided and developed for any purpose which is not in conformity with the general plan and any specific plan of the city or permitted by the zoning chapter or other applicable provisions of the Code. 
(b)  The type and intensity of land use as shown on the general plan shall determine the type of streets, roads, highways, utilities and public services that shall be provided by the subdivider. 
(Code 1969, § 18.02.030; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.02.040. - Application. 
    The regulations set forth in this title shall apply to all or parts of subdivisions within the city and to the preparation of subdivision maps and to other maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act. Each subdivision and each part lying within the city shall be made and each map shall be prepared and presented for approval as provided for and required. 
(Code 1969, § 18.02.040; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
CHAPTER 18.04. - MAPS REQUIRED 

Sec. 18.04.010. - General. 
    The necessity for preliminary, tentative, final and parcel maps shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18.04.010; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.04.020. - Division of land-Five or more parcels. 
(a)  A preliminary, tentative, and final map shall be required for all divisions of land when determined by the community development director that such land may be divided into five or more parcels, five or more condominiums, as defined in Civil Code § 783, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units, except where: 
(1)  The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body; 
(2)  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of 20 acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; 
(3)  The land consists of parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths; or 
(4)  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than 40 acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section. 
(b)  A parcel map shall be required for these subdivisions described in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(4) of this section. 
(Code 1969, § 18.04.020; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.04.030. - Same-Four or less parcels. 
(a)  A tentative map and parcel map shall not be required for: 
(1)  Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, defined by Public Utilities Code § 230, which are created by short-term leases terminable by either party on not more than 30 days' notice in writing. 
(2)  Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to the public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map. 
(3)  Lot line adjustments, provided: 
a.  No additional parcels or building site have been created. 
b.  The adjustment does not create the potential to further divide either of the two parcels into more parcels than would have been otherwise possible. 
c.  There are no resulting violations of the Barstow Municipal Code. 
(4)  Parcel maps waived by the city engineer, as specified in chapter 18.08. 
(b)  A plat map, in a form as required by the city engineer, and a certificate of compliance shall be required for lot line adjustments, mergers, certificates of compliance and parcel map waivers. 
(Code 1969, § 18.04.030; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.04.040. - Fees and deposits. 
    All persons submitting maps as required by this chapter shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by the city's resolution establishing fees and charges. 
(Code 1969, § 18.04.040; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
CHAPTER 18.06. - SUBDIVISION OF FIVE OR MORE PARCELS-TENTATIVE AND FINAL MAPS 
ARTICLE I. - TENTATIVE MAP 

Sec. 18.06.010. - General. 
    The form and contents, submittal and approval of tentative maps shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18.06.010; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.06.011. - Form and contents. 
    The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the community development department and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on one sheet and contain not less than the following: 
(1)  A title which shall contain the subdivision number, subdivision name, and type of subdivision. 
(2)  Name and address of legal owner, subdivider, and person preparing the map, including registration or license number. 
(3)  Sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed subdivision. 
(4)  Date, north arrow, scale, contour interval, and source and date of existing contours. 
(5)  Existing and proposed land use. 
(6)  A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining subdivisions, towns, creeks, railroads, and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relation to the community. 
(7)  Existing topography of the proposed site and at least 100 feet beyond its boundary, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Existing contours at two-foot intervals if the existing ground slope is less than ten percent and not less than five-foot intervals for existing ground slopes equal to or greater than ten percent. Contour intervals shall not be spread more than 150 feet apart. Existing contours shall be represented by dashed lines or by screened lines. 
b.  The approximate location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Structures to be removed shall be so marked. 
c.  The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation by 100-year storms and the location, width and direction of flow of each watercourse, as certified by the engineer preparing that map, or as shown in an adopted master plan of drainage. 
d.  The location, pavement, and right-of-way width, grade and name of existing streets or highways. 
e.  The widths, location and identity of all existing easements. 
f.  The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, water mains, and storm drains. The approximate slope of existing sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. The location of existing overhead utility lines on peripheral streets. 
(8)  Proposed improvements to be shown shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  The location, grade, centerline radius and arc length of curves, pavement, right-of-way width and name of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown. 
b.  The location and radius of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs. 
c.  The location, width and purpose of all easements. 
d.  The angle of intersecting streets, if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than four degrees. 
e.  The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot and of each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate finished grading of each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut and fill slopes to scale and the number of each lot. 
f.  Proposed contours at two-foot intervals shall be shown if the existing ground slope is less than ten percent and not less than five-foot intervals for existing ground slopes of ten percent or more. A separate grading plan may be submitted. 
g.  The location and size of sanitary sewers, water mains, and storm drains. Proposed slopes and approximate elevations of sanitary sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. 
(9)  The names of any geologist or soils engineer whose services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map. 
(10)  All lettering size shall be one-eighth inch minimum. 
(11)  If the subdivider plans to develop the site in units, the proposed units and their proposed sequence of construction shall be shown. 
(12)  If additional information, data or drawings are required in order to review and evaluate the tentative map, the community development director may require that such information be submitted. Such requirements shall be specified within 15 days of the filing of the tentative map. 
(Code 1969, § 18.06.011; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.06.012. - Accompanying data and reports. 
(a)  The tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data or reports. 
(1)  Soils report. A preliminary soils report prepared in accordance with the city's grading ordinance shall be submitted. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, the soils report accompanying the final map shall contain an investigation of each lot within the subdivision. 
(2)  Title report. A preliminary title report showing the legal owners at the time of filing the tentative map. 
(3)  Engineering geology and/or seismic safety report. If the subdivision lies within a medium risk or high risk geologic hazard area, as shown on maps on file in the community development department, a preliminary engineering geology and/or seismic safety report, prepared in accordance with guidelines established by the community development department. If the preliminary engineering geology and/or seismic safety report indicates the presence of geologic hazards or seismic hazards which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, an engineering geology and/or seismic safety report shall accompany the final map and shall contain an investigation of each lot within the subdivision. 
(4)  Environmental impact study. The various time limits set forth in this chapter for taking action on tentative maps shall not be deemed to commence until the subdivision is found exempt or an initial study is completed and a negative declaration or environmental impact report, as appropriate, is prepared, processed and considered in accordance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act. The subdivider shall provide such additional data and information and deposit and pay such fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents. 
(5)  Other reports. Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the community development department. 
(b)  Subsections (a)(1) and (a)(3) of this section shall not apply to condominium conversions. 
(Code 1969, § 18.06.012; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.06.013. - Submittal to community development department. 
(a)  The tentative map shall be considered complete only when such map conforms to section 18.06.011 and when all accompanying data or reports, as required by section 18.06.012 have been submitted to and accepted by the community development department. 
(b)  The subdivider shall file the application, together with 12 copies of the tentative map, with the community development department. The application must be signed by the record owner, or be accompanied by a letter of consent from the record owner. 
(Code 1969, § 18.06.013; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.06.014. - Community development department review and subdivision conference. 
(a)  The community development department shall forward copies of the tentative map to the affected public agencies which may in turn forward to the community development department their findings and recommendations. Public agencies and utilities shall certify that the subdivision can be adequately served. 
(b)  Within ten days of the filing of a tentative map, the community development department shall send a notice of the filing of the tentative map to the governing board of the school district within the boundaries of which the subdivision is proposed to be located. The notice shall also contain information about the location of the proposed subdivision, the number of units, density, and any other information which would be relevant to the affected school district. The governing board may review the notice and may send a written report to the agency required by law to approve the tentative map. The report shall indicate the impact of the proposed subdivision on the affected school district and shall make recommendations as the governing board of the district deems appropriate. In the event the school district fails to respond within a 20-working-day period from receipt of notice of the tentative map, the failure shall be deemed approval of the proposed subdivision by the school district. The planning commission shall consider the report from the school district in approving or conditionally approving the tentative map. 
(Code 1969, § 18.06.014; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.06.015. - Planning commission action. 
(a)  Notice of public hearings. 
(1)  Upon receipt of a valid application, completion of the subdivision conference, and having received from the community development department their report and recommendations for the proposed tentative map, the city planner shall set the matter for public hearing. At least ten calendar days before the public hearing, a notice shall be given of the time, date, and place of said hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, and the street address, if any, of the property involved. 
(2)  The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the city. 
(3)  In addition to notice by publication, the community development department shall give notice of the hearing by mail or delivery to all persons, including businesses, corporations or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within 300 feet of the property which is the subject of the proposed application. 
(4)  In addition, in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative project, notice shall be given as required by section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(5)  In addition, notice shall be given by first class mail to any person who has filed a written request with the secretary of the planning commission. The request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall apply for the balance of the calendar year. The city may impose a reasonable fee on persons requesting the notice for the purpose of recovering the cost of the mailing. 
(6)  Substantial compliance with these provisions for notice shall be sufficient and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken pursuant to the procedures set forth in the article. 
(7)  The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative map within 50 days after the tentative map has been determined to be complete. If an environmental impact report is prepared, the decision shall be made within 45 days after certification of the environmental impact report. 
(b)  Approval. 
(1)  In approving or conditionally approving the tentative map, the planning commission, acting in the capacity of the advisory agency, shall find that the proposed subdivision, together with its provisions for its design and improvements, is consistent with applicable general or specific plans adopted by the city. 
(2)  The planning commission may modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in the community development department's report, except conditions required by city ordinance related to public health and safety or to public works standards adopted by the city council. The planning commission may add additional requirements as a condition of its approval. 
(3)  If no action is taken by the planning commission within the time limit as specified, the tentative map as filed shall be deemed to be approved, insofar as it complies with other applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter, or other city ordinances, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to certify the approval. 
(c)  Denial. 
(1)  The tentative map may be denied by the planning commission on any of the grounds provided by city ordinances or the Subdivision Map Act. 
(2)  The planning commission shall deny approval of the tentative map if it makes any of the following findings: 
a.  That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans. 
b.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans. 
c.  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development. 
d.  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development. 
e.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. 
f.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems. 
g.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the governing body may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is hereby granted to a legislative body to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. 
(d)  Extension of time for planning commission or city council action. The time limits set forth above for acting on the tentative map may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the planning commission. 
(Code 1969, § 18.06.015; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.06.016. - Appeals of planning commission action. 
(a)  By subdivider. If the subdivider or any owner of property within 300 feet of the exterior boundary of the land in question disagrees with any action by the planning commission with respect to the tentative subdivision map, they may, within ten days of the decision, file an appeal with the city clerk. The council shall consider the appeal within 30 days or at its first regular meeting subsequent to such appeal, unless the subdivider consents to a continuance. This appeal shall be a public hearing after notice has been given pursuant to section 18.06.015. In addition, notice shall be given to the subdivider and the planning commission and upon conclusion of the public hearing the council shall, within ten days, declare its findings. The council may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the planning commission and may make findings which are consistent with the provisions of this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act. 
(b)  By tenants. Any tenant of the property being subdivided in the course of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment property, or stock cooperative project may appeal any action of the planning commission pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act and subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  For general plan and specific plan conformity. Any interested person may appeal any decision of the planning commission relative to conformity to the general plan or any specific plan of the city to the city council. Such appeal and hearing thereon shall be in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, with additional notice to be given to the appellant. 
(Code 1969, § 18.06.016; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.06.017. - Expiration. 
(a)  The approval or conditional approval of a tentative subdivision map shall expire 36 months from the date of the approval by the planning commission review, if any, except as provided in section 66452.6 of the Subdivision Map Act. Any map approved after January 1, 2013, but prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be automatically extended by 12 months. An extension to the expiration date may be approved as provided in section 18.06.018. 
(b)  The period of time specified shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium is in effect according to section 66452.6 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(c)  Expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within the tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative map. 
(Code 1969, § 18.06.017; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986; Ord. No. 913-2013, § 1, 8-19-2013) 
Sec. 18.06.018. - Extensions. 
(a)  Request by subdivider. The subdivider or the engineer may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by written application to the community development department. The application shall be filed not less than 30 days before the map is to expire and shall state the reasons for requesting the extension. 
(b)  Planning commission action. The community development director shall review the request and submit the application for the extension, together with a report, to the planning commission for approval, conditional approval or denial at the next scheduled planning commission meeting. A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the subdivider prior to the planning commission meeting on the extension. The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the extension. 
(c)  Time limit of extension. The approved extensions shall not exceed three years. The approved new expiration date shall not extend more than five years beyond the original date of approval of the tentative map, except as provided in section 66452.6 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(d)  Conditions of approval. As a condition of the extension of a tentative map, the planning commission may impose new conditions or revise existing conditions on the approved tentative map. 
(e)  Appeal of conditions of extension. The subdivider may appeal any action of the planning commission on the extension to the city council within ten days of such action in conformance to section 18.06.016(a). 
(Code 1969, § 18.06.018; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986; Ord. No. 653, § 1, 1990) 
Sec. 18.06.019. - Amendments to approved tentative map. 
(a)  Minor changes in the tentative map may be approved by the community development department upon application by the subdivider or on its own initiative, provided: 
(1)  No lots, units or building sites are added. 
(2)  Such changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval. 
(3)  There are no resulting violations of the Barstow Municipal Code. 
(b)  Any revision shall be approved by the city planner and the city engineer. The amendment shall be indicated on the approved map and certified by the city planner and city engineer. 
(c)  Amendments of the tentative map other than minor shall be presented to the planning commission for approval. Processing shall be in accordance with sections 18.06.014 and 18.06.015. 
(d)  Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. 
(Code 1969, § 18.06.019) 
ARTICLE II. - FINAL MAP 

Sec. 18.06.020. - General. 
(a)  The form, contents, accompanying data and filing of the final map shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. 
(Code 1969, § 18.06.020; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.06.021. - Form and contents. 
    The form and contents of final maps shall be in accordance with the adopted city engineering standards. 
(Code 1969, § 18.06.021; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.06.022. - Review by city engineer. 
(a)  The city engineer shall review the final map for compliance with this Code, Subdivision Map Act, and conditions of approval. The subdivider's civil engineer or land surveyor shall prepare the final map so that it is in substantial compliance with the tentative map and all applicable code requirements. 
(b)  The subdivider's engineer or surveyor shall submit the original tracing of the map, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map, to the city engineer. 
(c)  The city engineer shall sign the appropriate certificates and transmit the original to the city clerk. 
(Code 1969, § 18.06.022; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.06.023. - Approval by city council. 
(a)  The city council shall consider the final map for approval within ten days after filing with the city clerk, or at its next regular meeting at which it receives the map, whichever is later. 
(b)  If the subdivision improvement agreement and final map are approved by the city council, it shall instruct the mayor to execute the agreement on behalf of the city. If the subdivision improvement agreement and/or final map is unacceptable, the council shall make their recommended corrections, instruct the city engineer to draft a new agreement and/or revise the final map and defer approval until an acceptable agreement and/or final map has been resubmitted. 
(Code 1969, § 18.06.023; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.06.024. - Filing with the county recorder. 
    Upon approval of the final map by the city council, the city clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and forward the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map, to the county recorder. 
(Code 1969, § 18.06.024; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
CHAPTER 18.08. - SUBDIVISIONS OF FOUR OR LESS PARCELS-TENTATIVE AND FINAL PARCEL MAPS 
ARTICLE I. - TENTATIVE MAP 

Sec. 18.08.010. - General. 
    The form and contents, submittal, and approval of tentative maps shall conform to the provisions of this section. The tentative map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. 
(Code 1969, § 18.08.010; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.08.011. - Form and contents. 
(a)  The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn. The final form shall be approved by the city engineer. The tentative map shall show the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of legal owner, subdivider, and the person preparing the map, including registration number or license number. 
(2)  Assessor's parcel number. 
(3)  Date prepared, north arrow, scale, contour interval and date and source of existing contours. 
(4)  Existing and proposed land use; existing zoning. 
(5)  A vicinity map, sufficient to show the relation to the local community. 
(6)  Existing topography of the site and at least 100 feet from its boundary, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Existing contours at two-foot intervals, if the existing ground slope is less than ten percent and not less than five-foot intervals for existing ground slopes of ten percent or more. Existing contours shall be represented by screened or dashed lines. 
b.  The approximate location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Structures to be removed shall be so marked. 
c.  The location, width and direction of flow of each watercourse. 
d.  The location, pavement, and right-of-way width, and grade and name of existing streets or highways. 
e.  The location, size and slope of existing storm drains; the location of existing overhead utility lines on peripheral streets. 
f.  The location, width and identity of existing easements. 
(7)  Any improvements proposed by the owner shall be shown. 
(8)  If the site is to be graded, proposed contours shall be shown or an approved grading plan shall be submitted. 
(9)  The proposed lot layout and lot areas. 
(10)  Proposed easements or rights-of-way. 
(11)  A preliminary report of title showing the current vested owner. 
(12)  A soils and/or engineering geology report may be required by the city engineer. 
(b)  The city engineer may waive any of the above requirements if the location or nature of the proposed subdivision does not require evaluation of these items, or may require additional information if it is necessary to review and evaluate the tentative map. Such additional information shall be specified within 15 days of the filing of the tentative map. 
(Code 1969, § 18.08.011; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.08.012. - Submittal of application. 
    The subdivider shall file the application, together with 12 copies of the tentative map, with the community development department. The application must be signed by the record owner, or be accompanied by a letter of consent from the record owner. 
(Code 1969, § 18.08.012; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.08.013. - Review and notice of public hearings. 
(a)  The tentative map shall be reviewed by the community development department for compliance to all applicable city ordinances and the Subdivision Map Act. Upon completion of the review and upon receipt of a valid application for the tentative map, the city planner shall set the matter for public hearing. At least ten calendar days before the public hearing, a notice shall be given of the time, date and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, and the street address, if any, of the property involved. 
(b)  The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the city. 
(c)  In addition to notice by publication, the city shall give notice of the hearing by mail or delivery to all persons, including businesses, corporations, or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within 300 feet of the property which is the subject of the proposed application. 
(d)  In addition, in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative project, notice shall be given as required by section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act. The city shall also give mailed notice to the owner of the property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
(e)  In addition, notice shall be given by first class mail to any person who has filed a written request with the city planner. A request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall apply for the balance of a calendar year. The city may impose a reasonable fee on persons requesting notice for the purpose of recovering the cost of mailing. 
(f)  Substantial compliance with these provisions for notice shall be sufficient, and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18.08.013; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.08.014. - Action by director of community development. 
    Upon completion of the public hearing, the director of community development shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative map. If the map is approved, it shall be signed and dated by the city engineer. A letter of the action taken, along with any conditions imposed, shall be sent to the subdivider and engineer. If the subdivision is denied, the subdivider or the engineer shall be so notified in writing with a statement for the reasons of denial. 
(Code 1969, § 18.08.014; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.08.015. - Approval and/or denial. 
    In approving or conditionally approving the tentative map, the director of community development or authorized representative shall find that the proposed subdivision, together with its provisions for its design and improvements, is consistent with applicable general or specific plans adopted by the city. 
(1)  A tentative map may be denied for any reason provided by city ordinances, resolutions, or the Subdivision Map Act. The director of community development shall deny approval of the tentative map if he makes any of the findings contained in section 18.06.015(c). 
(2)  The director of community development may modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in the community development department's report, except conditions required by city ordinance related to public health and safety or to public works standards adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 18.08.015; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.08.016. - Appeals. 
(a)  By subdivider or property owners. The subdivider or any owner of property within 300 feet of the exterior boundary of the land in question may appeal any action on the tentative map to the city council. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing, pursuant to section 18.06.016(a). 
(b)  By tenants. Any tenant of the property being subdivided in the course of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project may appeal from any action of the planning commission pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Code 1969, § 18.08.016; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.08.017. - Expiration. 
(a)  The approval or conditional approval of the tentative parcel map shall expire 36 months from the date of its approval, except as noted in section 66452.6 of the Subdivision Map Act. The period of time specified shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium is in effect according to section 66452.6 of the Subdivision Map Act. Any map approved after January 1, 2013, but prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, shall be automatically extended by 12 months. 
(b)  The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within the tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative map. 
(Code 1969, § 18.08.017; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986; Ord. No. 913-2013, § 1, 8-19-2013) 
Sec. 18.08.018. - Extensions. 
(a)  Request by subdivider. The subdivider or engineer may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by written application to the city engineer. The application shall be filed not less than 30 days prior to the expiration date and shall state the reasons for requesting the extension. 
(b)  City engineer action. 
(1)  The city engineer shall review the request for extension for approval, conditional approval, or denial. The extension of time shall commence with the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map. The approved new expiration date shall not extend more than five years beyond the date of initial approval by the planning commission, except as provided in section 66452.6 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(2)  If the city engineer denies a subdivider's application for extension, the subdivider may appeal to the city council within ten days after the city engineer has denied the extension. 
(Code 1969, § 18.08.018; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.08.019. - Amendment to the approved tentative map. 
(a)  Amendments to the tentative map or conditions of approval may be approved by the community development department upon application by the subdivider or on its own initiative, provided: 
(1)  No lots, units, or building sites are added. 
(2)  Such changes are consistent with the intent of the original tentative map approval. 
(3)  There are no resulting violations of this Code. 
(b)  Any revision shall be approved by the city engineer or authorized representative. The revision shall be denoted on the approved tentative map and/or in writing to the subdivider, whichever is appropriate. Any amendment shall not affect the expiration date of the approved tentative map. 
(c)  The city engineer may require a new tentative map application in lieu of the above procedure when, in his opinion, requested changes are substantial enough to warrant refiling and reprocessing. 
(Code 1969, § 18.08.019; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
ARTICLE II. - FINAL MAPS 

Sec. 18.08.020. - General. 
    The form and contents, submittal, approval and filing of parcels maps shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Code 1969, § 18.08.020; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.08.021. - Form and contents. 
    The form and contents of parcel maps shall be in accordance with the adopted city engineering standards. 
(Code 1969, § 18.08.021; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.08.022. - Review by city engineer. 
(a)  The city engineer shall review the parcel map for compliance with this Code, Subdivision Map Act and conditions of approval. The subdivider's civil engineer or land surveyor shall prepare the final map so that it is in substantial compliance with the tentative map and all applicable code requirements. 
(b)  The subdivider's engineer shall submit the original tracing of the map, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map, to the city engineer. The city engineer shall sign the appropriate certificates and transmit the original to the city clerk. 
(Code 1969, § 18.08.022; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.08.023. - Filing with the county recorder. 
    The city clerk or authorized agent shall transmit the approved parcel map directly to the county recorder. 
(Code 1969, § 18.08.023; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.08.024. - Waiver of parcel map requirements. 
(a)  The city engineer may waive the parcel map for the following: 
(1)  A division of real property or interests therein created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees; or 
(2)  A division of property resulting from the conveyance of land or interest to or from the city, public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites, or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc.; or 
(3)  A division of property which occurred prior to March 4, 1972. 
(b)  Upon waiving the parcel map requirement, the city engineer shall cause to be filed with the county recorder a certificate of compliance. 
(c)  A parcel map waived by the city engineer may be conditioned to provide for drainage, and other applicable fees. 
(Code 1969, § 18.08.024; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
CHAPTER 18.10. - VESTING MAPS 

Sec. 18.10.010. - Definitions. 
    The term "vesting tentative map" means a tentative map for a residential subdivision, as defined in this title, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "vesting tentative map" at the time it is filed, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1969, § 18.10.010; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.10.020. - Application. 
(a)  This chapter shall apply only to residential developments until December 31, 1987. After that time, it will apply to both residential and nonresidential developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this title, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(b)  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. 
(Code 1969, § 18.10.020; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.10.030. - Consistency. 
    No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by the zoning ordinance or other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1969, § 18.10.030; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.10.040. - Filing and processing. 
    A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports, and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this title for a tentative map, except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "vesting tentative map." 
(2)  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, a subdivider shall also supply the following information: 
a.  Height, size and location of buildings. 
b.  Sewer, water, stormdrain and road details. 
c.  Information on the uses to which buildings will be put. 
d.  Detailed grading plans. 
e.  Geotechnical studies per chapter 70, Uniform Building Code. 
f.  Flood control information. 
g.  Architectural plans. 
(Code 1969, § 18.10.040; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.10.050. - Fees. 
    Fees for filing and processing of a vesting tentative map shall be established by city council resolution. 
(Code 1969, § 18.10.050; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.10.060. - Expiration. 
    The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire 24 months from the date of approval by the planning commission or city council, as applicable. Vesting maps are subject to the same extensions of time as a regular tentative map. 
(Code 1969, § 18.10.060; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.10.070. - Vesting or approval of vesting tentative map. 
(a)  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Government Code § 66474.2; however, if Government Code § 66474.2 is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined: 
(1)  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both. 
(2)  The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law. 
(c)  The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in section 18.10.060. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
(1)  An initial time period of one year. Where several maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. 
(2)  The initial time period set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds 30 days from the date a complete application is filed. 
(3)  A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this section expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council within 15 days. 
(4)  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (c)(1) through (c)(3) of this section, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. 
(Code 1969, § 18.10.070; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
CHAPTER 18.12. - DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS 

Sec. 18.12.010. - Dedication of streets, alleys, and other public rights-of-way or easements. 
    As a condition of approval of a final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public greenways, scenic easements, public utility easements, and other public easements. In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public improvements. 
(Code 1969, § 18.12.010; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.12.020. - Waiver of direct street access. 
(a)  The city may require as a condition of approval of any subdivision the waiver of direct access rights to proposed or existing streets from any property within or abutting the subdivision. 
(b)  The waiver shall become effective in accordance with its provisions and shall be contained in the owner's certificate of the final map or parcel map. 
(Code 1969, § 18.12.020; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.12.030. - Reservations; general. 
    As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries, or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in this section. 
(Code 1969, § 18.12.030; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.12.031. - Standards for reservation of land. 
    Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library, or other public use is shown on an adopted specific plan or adopted general plan, the subdivider may be required by the city to reserve sites as so determined by the city in accordance with the definite principles and standards contained in the specific plan or general plan. The reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible. The reserved area shall conform to the adopted specific plan or general plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period. 
(Code 1969, § 18.12.031; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.12.032. - Procedure. 
    The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless the period of time is extended by mutual agreement. 
(Code 1969, § 18.12.032; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.12.033. - Payment to subdivider. 
    The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against the reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of the reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering the reserved area. 
(Code 1969, § 18.12.033; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.12.034. - Termination. 
    If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into a binding agreement, the reservation of the area shall automatically terminate. 
(Code 1969, § 18.12.034; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
CHAPTER 18.14. - SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS AND IMPROVEMENT SECURITY 

Sec. 18.14.010. - General. 
    The subdivider shall construct all required improvements both on site and off site according to approved standards. No final maps shall be presented to the council or parcel map to the city engineer for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements or enters into an agreement with the city agreeing to do such work and providing safeguards for the city in the completion and warranty of such work. 
(Code 1969, § 18.14.010; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.14.020. - Improvements required. 
    All improvements as may be required as conditions of approval of the tentative map or city ordinance, together with, but not limited to, the following, shall be required of all subdivisions: 
(1)  Requirements for construction of on-site and off-site improvements for subdivisions of four or less parcels shall be noted on the parcel map, or waiver of parcel map, or the subdivision improvement agreement recorded prior to or concurrent with the parcel map. Completion of the improvements shall be in accordance with section 18.14.071. 
(2)  Off-site utility extensions or oversizing beyond the normal requirements of the subdivision may be required for orderly development and long-range planning purposes of the city. This may include acquisition of right-of-way necessary for such improvements. Insofar as this may benefit other property owners, the city may enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse for that portion of the cost of these improvements in excess of that needed by the subdivision. 
(Code 1969, § 18.14.020; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.14.031. - Deferred improvement agreements; subdivisions of four parcels or less. 
(a)  For single-family residential subdivisions of up to four parcels plus a remainder parcel, the requirements as outlined in section 12.04.020 shall be enforced with regard to requirements related to the construction of public off-site street improvements. Alternatively, the property owner may, upon approval by the city engineer, pay a fee-in-lieu for public off-site improvements per section 12.04.021 of this Code. The city will hold these funds until sufficient monies are available to construct the required public improvements in the neighborhood surrounding the subject property. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be subject to section 12.04020(d)this Code. 
(Code 1969, § 18.14.031; Ord. No. 559, § l(part), 1986; Ord. No. 880-2011, § 2(exh. B), 6-6-2011; Ord. No. 910-2013, § 3, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 18.14.032. - Allowance of remainders and phasing. 
(a)  Where remainders are made part of a final or parcel map, the subdivider may enter into an agreement with the city at the option of the city to construct improvements within the remainder at some future date and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a remainder parcel. The improvements shall be at the subdivider's expense. In the absence of an agreement, the city engineer shall require fulfillment of the construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the map, upon a finding that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of: 
(1)  The public health and safety; or 
(2)  The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. 
(b)  A certificate of compliance may be required for remainder parcels. 
(c)  The intent of allowing remainder parcels is not to create abnormally shaped parcels which are undevelopable or to circumvent city regulations requiring public improvements. 
(Code 1969, § 18.14.032; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.14.041. - Design-General. 
    The design and layout of all required improvements both on-site and off-site, private and public, shall conform to generally acceptable engineering standards and to such standards as approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1969, § 18.14.041; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.14.042. - Same-Energy conservation. 
(a)  The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision. 
(b)  Examples of passive or natural heating opportunities in subdivision design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure in an east-west alignment for southern exposure. 
(c)  Examples of passive or natural cooling opportunities in subdivision design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes. 
(d)  In providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the design of a subdivision, consideration shall be given to local climate, to contour, to configuration of the parcel to be divided, and to other design and improvement requirements, and such provision shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time the tentative map is filed. 
(e)  The requirements of this section do not apply to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building when no new structures are added. 
(f)  For the purposes of this section, the term "feasible" means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors. 
(Code 1969, § 18.14.042; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.14.050. - Access. 
(a)  The subdivision shall abut upon or have an approved access to a public street. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall have an approved access to a public or private street. 
(b)  Street layout shall be designed to provide for future access to, and not impose undue hardship upon, property adjoining the subdivision. Reserve strips, or nonaccess at the end of streets or at the boundaries of subdivisions, shall be dedicated or deeded to the city as required by the city engineer. 
(Code 1969, § 18.14.050; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.14.060. - Construction. 
(a)  The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to the standard plans and specifications of the city. The general provisions of the city's standard specifications shall apply to the subdivider, where applicable. 
(b)  Construction shall not commence until required improvement plans have been approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1969, § 18.14.060; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.14.071. - Completion of improvements-Subdivisions of five or more parcels. 
(a)  The subdivision improvements shall be completed by the subdivider prior to approval of the final map, or as specified in the subdivision improvement agreement. 
(b)  Should the subdivider fail to complete the improvements and conditions within the specified time, the city may, by resolution of council and at its option, cause any or all uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing the sureties shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs. 
(Code 1969, § 18.14.071; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.14.072. - Same-Subdivisions of four or less parcels. 
    Completion of improvements may not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for the development of any parcel within the subdivision is applied for. The completion of the improvements may be required by a specified date by the city when the completion of such improvements are found to be necessary for public health or safety or for the orderly development of the surrounding area. This finding shall be made by the city engineer or authorized representative. The specified date, when required, shall be stated in the subdivision improvement agreement. Improvements shall be completed prior to final building inspection or occupancy of any unit within the subdivision. 
(Code 1969, § 18.14.072; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.14.073. - Same-Extensions. 
(a)  The completion date may be extended by the city council for subdivisions of five or more parcels and by the city engineer for subdivisions of four or less parcels upon written request by the developer and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request shall be made not less than 30 days prior to expiration of the subdivision improvement agreement. 
(b)  The subdivider shall enter into a subdivision improvement agreement extension with the city. For subdivisions of five or more parcels, the agreement shall be prepared and signed by the city engineer, approved as to form by the city attorney, executed by the subdivider and surety and transmitted to the city council for their consideration. If approved by the city council, the mayor shall execute the agreement on behalf of the city. 
(c)  In consideration of a subdivision improvement agreement extension, the following may be required: 
(1)  Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when required by the city engineer. 
(2)  Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current improvement costs as approved by the city engineer. 
(3)  Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised construction estimates. 
(4)  Inspection fees may be increased to reflect current construction costs but shall not be subject to any decrease or refund. 
(d)  The city council may impose additional requirements as recommended by the city engineer or as it deems necessary as a condition to approving any time extension for the completion of improvements. The costs incurred by the city in processing the agreement shall be borne by the subdivider. 
(Code 1969, § 18.14.073; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.14.081. - Acceptance of improvements-General. 
(a)  When all improvement deficiencies have been corrected and as-built improvement plans filed, the subdivision improvements shall be considered by the city for acceptance. The city engineer shall have the authority to review and inspect all improvements and, upon approval of all such improvements, a notice of completion shall be issued by the city engineer. 
(b)  Acceptance of the improvements shall imply only that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily and that public improvements have been accepted for public use. 
(Code 1969, § 18.14.081; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.14.082. - Same-Notice of completion. 
    If the subdivision improvements have been accepted by the city, the city clerk shall cause to be filed with the county recorder a notice of completion. 
(Code 1969, § 18.14.082; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.14.083. - Acceptance of portion of improvements. 
    When requested by the subdivider in writing, the city may consider acceptance of a portion of the improvements as recommended by the city engineer. All fees for inspection of the subdivision improvements shall be paid by the subdivider prior to recordation of the final map. 
(Code 1969, § 18.14.083; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.14.084. - Warranty. 
(a)  The subdivider shall warranty all public improvements against defects in materials or workmanship for a period of one year after acceptance by the city council. 
(b)  The improvements will be accepted by the city only if it finds that it is in the public interest and such improvements are for the use of the general public. 
(c)  Acceptance of a portion of the improvements shall not relieve the subdivider from any other requirements imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18.14.084; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
CHAPTER 18.16. - REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS 

Sec. 18.16.010. - Reversions to acreage. 
    When permitted by Government Code § 66499.201/2 and subject to the conditions thereof, reversions to acreage shall be accomplished by the filing of tentative and final maps/parcel maps in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
(Code 1969, § 18.16.010; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.16.020. - Lot line adjustments. 
    The city engineer shall approve lot line adjustments between two adjacent parcels under the following conditions: 
(1)  The land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel and a greater number of parcels than originally existed are not created. 
(2)  All parcels involved in the lot line adjustment be recognized parcels as defined by this title. 
(3)  Construction of any missing off-site improvements shall be required for parcels which have existing on-site structures. 
(4)  The parcels geometry is not substantially rearranged in shape, size, general layout or complexity so as to constitute a resubdivision of the property. 
(5)  All right-of-way as required by the circulation element or specific street plans have been dedicated on the parcels involved. 
(6)  After the lot line adjustment, none of the parcels involved will be substandard in either frontage or area (unless granted a variance by the planning commission). 
(7)  The city engineer may require a record of survey be recorded with the county for any or all newly adjusted lots. 
(Code 1969, § 18.16.020; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
CHAPTER 18.18. - CONDOMINIUMS, CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS, COMMUNITY APARTMENT PROJECTS AND STOCK COOPERATIVES 

Sec. 18.18.010. - General. 
    Tentative and final maps of condominiums, community apartment projects and stock cooperative projects, including the subdivision of airspace within existing structures, shall be subject to Government Code §§ 66427 through 66427.4. 
(Code 1969, § 18.18.010; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
CHAPTER 18.20. - CORRECTIONS-AMENDMENTS TO MAPS 

Sec. 18.20.010. - Requirements. 
    After a final or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map. 
(1)  To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon; 
(2)  To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom; 
(3)  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map; 
(4)  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments; 
(5)  To show the proper location of any monument which has been changed in location, or character, or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character; 
(6)  To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the city engineer, which does not affect any property right. Errors and omissions may include, but not be limited to, lots and numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent record maps. Error does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error is not discernable from the data shown on the final or parcel map; or 
(7)  To make modifications when there are changes which make any or all of the conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary and that the modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property, and if the modifications do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map. The modification shall be set for public hearing by the planning commission. The planning commission shall confine the hearing to consideration of, and action on, the proposed modification. 
(Code 1969, § 18.20.010; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.20.020. - Form and contents. 
    The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents of the amending map shall conform to the requirements of the city engineering standards. The certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction. 
(Code 1969, § 18.20.020; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.20.030. - Submittal and approval by city engineer. 
    The amending map or certificate of correction, complete as to final form, shall be submitted to the city engineer for his review and approval. The city engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction and if the only changes made are those set forth above, this fact shall be certified on the amending map or certificate of correction. 
(Code 1969, § 18.20.030; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.20.040. - Filing with county recorder. 
    The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the city engineer shall be filed in the office of the county recorder in which the original map was filed. Upon such filing, the county recorder shall index the names of the fee owners and the appropriate subdivision designation shown on the amending map or certificate of correction in the general index and map index respectively. The original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected and shall import constructive notice of all the corrections in the same manner as though upon the original map. 
(Code 1969, § 18.20.040; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.20.050. - Fee. 
    The fee for checking, processing and recording the amended map or certificate of correction shall be in accordance with the city's resolution establishing fees and charges. 
(Code 1969, § 18.20.050; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
CHAPTER 18.22. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 18.22.010. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Whenever the city engineer has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of this title and/or the Subdivision Map Act, the city engineer shall ask the city attorney to prepare a notice of intention to record a notice of violation. This notice shall be mailed to the current owner of record. This notice shall specify time, date and place for consideration by the city council. 
(b)  After reviewing the matter, the city council shall determine whether or not the property has been illegally divided and whether or not a notice of violation shall be recorded against the property. If the notice of violation is ordered to be recorded, no permit or approval will be issued to develop the property until the property has been brought into compliance with this subdivision ordinance and the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Code 1969, § 18.22.010; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
Sec. 18.22.020. - Certificate of compliance. 
(a)  Any person owning real property may request, and the city engineer shall determine, whether such real property complies with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. Upon making such a determination, the city engineer shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division of land complies with applicable provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. 
(b)  If the city engineer determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, the city engineer may, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose conditions which would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property. If the property has the same owner of record as at the time that the illegal subdivision occurred, the city may impose conditions that would be applicable to a current subdivision of the property. 
(Code 1969, § 18.22.020; Ord. No. 559, § 1(part), 1986) 
CHAPTER 18.24. - PARKS DEDICATION 

Sec. 18.24.010. - Short title, authority and applicability. 
(a)  This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Quimby Act Implementation Ordinance." 
(b)  The requirements of this chapter are imposed upon subdivisions pursuant to the authority granted by the Quimby Act (Government Code § 66477). 
(c)  This chapter shall apply to the extent permitted by the statutes and laws of the state. 
(Code 1969, § 18.24.010; Ord. No. 828, § 2(part), 2007) 
Sec. 18.24.020. - Requirements. 
(a)  As a condition of approval of a final subdivision map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate land for neighborhood and community park or recreational purposes, pay a fee for such purposes, or both, at the time and according to the standards and formulas contained in this chapter. 
(b)  At the time of approval of the tentative map or parcel map for the subdivision, the city council shall determine the amount of land that must be dedicated pursuant to section 18.24.040 and the amount of the fee required by section 18.24.050. 
(c)  The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any commercial or industrial subdivision. 
(Code 1969, § 18.24.020; Ord. No. 828, § 2(part), 2007) 
Sec. 18.24.030. - Parkland standard. 
(a)  It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that five acres of property for each 1,000 persons residing within this city be devoted to neighborhood and community park and recreational purposes. 
(b)  The following formula shall be used to determine the amount of parkland required to serve a subdivision: 
[required parkland (acres)] = [expected population] * .005 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, expected population shall be calculated based on the following standard, which is derived from the most recent federal census available at the time this section was adopted: 
Detached dwelling 2.905 persons per dwelling Attached dwellings 2.399 persons per dwelling Mobile home dwellings 2.217 persons per dwelling  
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (c) of this section, there shall be the following rebuttable presumptions: 
(1)  When all or part of a subdivision is located in an area zoned for one dwelling unit per parcel, the number of new dwelling units for that portion of the proposed subdivision will be the number of parcels indicated on the subdivision map. 
(2)  When all or part of the subdivision is located in an area zoned for more than one dwelling unit per parcel, the number of proposed dwelling units in that portion of the proposed subdivision shall equal the maximum allowed under that zone. 
(3)  In the case of a condominium project, the number of proposed dwelling units in the area so zoned shall equal the maximum allowed under that zone. In the case of a condominium project, the number of proposed dwelling units shall be the number of condominium units. 
(e)  For purposes of subsection (c) of this section, dwelling units lawfully in place prior to the date on which the parcel or final map is filed shall not be included in calculations. 
(Code 1969, § 18.24.030; Ord. No. 828, § 2(part), 2007) 
Sec. 18.24.040. - Required dedication. 
(a)  Where a park or recreation facility has been specifically designated in a parks master plan approved by the city council, or has otherwise been designated by the city council as a desired park site and included on a list maintained by the parks and recreation manager, and such facility is located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision and will serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for a local park sufficient in size and topography that bears a reasonable relationship to serve the present and future needs of the residents of the subdivision. 
(b)  The amount of land that must be dedicated in connection with a subdivision pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, shall not exceed the parkland requirement for that subdivision calculated pursuant to section 18.24.030(c). 
(c)  The subdivider shall, without credit, provide to any land dedicated pursuant to this section: 
(1)  Full street improvements and utility connections, including, but not limited to curbs, gutters, street paving, traffic control devices, street trees and sidewalks to land which is dedicated pursuant to this section; 
(2)  Fencing along the property line of that portion of the subdivision contiguous to the dedicated land; 
(3)  Improved drainage through the site; and 
(4)  Other minimal improvements which the city council determines to be essential to the acceptance of the land for recreation purposes. 
(d)  The land to be dedicated and the improvements to be made pursuant to this section shall be approved by the director of community development services, who shall not grant approval to any proposed improvement that does not meet the standards set forth in the approved action of the city council. 
(e)  No dedication of land shall be required by this section with respect to: 
(1)  Any condominium project, stock cooperative, or community apartment project (as those terms are defined in Civil Code § 1351) consisting of 50 dwelling units or less; 
(2)  Any subdivision (other than a condominium project, stock cooperative, or community apartment project) consisting of 50 parcels or less. 
However, the subdivider of any such subdivision may make a dedication of land which would otherwise be required by this section, in which event such dedication shall count as a credit against the fee required by section 18.24.050 as if such dedication were required. Any such dedication shall be subject to the requirements of this section, including the requirements of subsection (d) of this section. 
(Code 1969, § 18.24.040; Ord. No. 828, § 2(part), 2007) 
Sec. 18.24.050. - Fee requirement. 
(a)  The fee required with respect to a subdivision shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision, and shall be calculated by first subtracting the acreage required for dedication pursuant to section 18.24.040 (or voluntarily offered for dedication pursuant to section 18.24.040(e)) from the parkland requirement for that subdivision and then multiplying the result of that calculation by a per acre land and improvement cost calculated pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The cost per acre of land and improvements for purposes of subsection (a) of this section shall be the per acre fair market value of buildable land in the subdivision, plus 60 percent of such value for the costs of site improvements of the type described in section 18.24.040(c). 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, fair market value shall be determined by the city with a written appraisal report prepared and signed by an appraiser acceptable to the city. The appraisal shall be made no more than four months prior to the setting of the amount of the required fee. The city may choose to cause the preparation of the appraisal, in which case the subdivider will be liable to the city for the cost of the appraisal. For the purposes of this chapter, the determination of the fair market value shall exclude any land with a slope of ten percent or more, or on which building is excluded due to flood conditions, easements or other factors, and shall consider, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Approval of the conditions of the tentative subdivision map; 
(2)  The general plan; 
(3)  Zoning; 
(4)  Property location; 
(5)  Off-site improvements facilitating use of the property; and 
(6)  Site characteristics of the property. 
If the subdivider objects to the determined fair market value, he may appeal to the city council who shall hear the appeal under the same rules and obligations current for local board of equalization hearings, except that the burden of proof shall lie with the subdivider. 
(d)  A credit against the fee required by this section may be given for dedications of park improvements constructed or provided at private expense and for the value of land dedicated to the city that is necessary or useful to a park improvement. Such credit will be granted only if, prior to dedication, the city council determines: 
(1)  That the dedicated land or improvement is part of the "program" defined in section 120.40.020; 
(2)  That the grant of the credit, in lieu of the fee, will not cause the city to delay the implementation of park improvements that are of higher priority, in the judgment of the city council, than the land or eligible facility to be dedicated. At the time the city council makes these determinations, it must also make a determination of the maximum credit that will be allowed for the dedication, which maximum credit shall not exceed the city council's reasonable estimate of the fair market value of the park improvement and/or land; and 
(3)  The amount of any credit granted pursuant to this subsection (d) shall not exceed the lesser of: 
a.  The actual documented construction costs for the dedicated improvement plus the value of any dedicated land as supported by a professional appraisal; or 
b.  The maximum credit approved by the city council pursuant to this subsection. No credit shall be given pursuant to this subsection for any dedication required by section 18.24.040, as the value of such dedications is already reflected in the calculation made pursuant to subsection (d)(3)a of this section. 
(Code 1969, § 18.24.050; Ord. No. 828, § 2(part), 2007) 
Sec. 18.24.055. - Miscellaneous credits. 
(a)  If a subdivider is required by section 18.24.040 to dedicate land for park purposes then, in lieu of any credit available pursuant to section 18.24.050(d), and only to the extent required by Government Code § 66477, the subdivider may elect to have the value of park and recreational improvements provided by the subdivider to the dedicated land credited against the dedication requirement set forth in section 18.24.040(b). 
(b)  Common interest developments, as defined in Civil Code § 1351, shall be eligible to receive a credit against the amount of land required to be dedicated, or the amount of the fee imposed, pursuant to this section, for the value of private open space within the development which is usable for active recreational uses. For purposes of this subsection, open space shall be deemed useable for active recreational uses only if, in the judgment of the city council, that space meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  It is at least ten acres in size; 
(2)  It will be open to residents of the subdivision for recreational use for no less than 16 hours per day; and 
(3)  Either at least 70 percent of the area of the space is developed with basketball, soccer, baseball, volleyball, tennis, football or similar courts or fields or at least 80 percent of the area of the space consists of smooth grass spaces with a grade of not less than one percent and no more than 11/2 percent that can be divided into rectangles each of no less than 79,200 square feet, with the shorter side of each rectangle being no less than 240 feet wide. The value of such private open space shall be determined by the city council, based upon a professional appraisal produced by an independent consultant selected by the city and paid for by the subdivider. Such appraisal shall take into account only the value of such open space in the marketplace if it were restricted to use as open space usable for active recreational uses and sold separately from the remainder of the subdivision. The valuation shall not take into account the amount the city (or any other public entity) might pay for such open space, unless, in the opinion of the city council, the city or another public entity has an established history or policy of purchasing open space in the city of similar size, configuration and use. 
(c)  Where a credit granted pursuant to subsection (a) or (b) of this section is applied to a land dedication requirement, as opposed to a fee requirement, the dollar value of the park and recreational improvements (in the case of a credit pursuant to subsection (a) of this section) or private open space useable for active recreational uses (in the case of a credit pursuant to subsection (b) of this section) shall be converted to a number of acres of land (with site improvements) that need not be dedicated, using the same valuation methodology set forth in section 18.24.050(b). 
(Code 1969, § 18.24.055; Ord. No. 828, § 2(part), 2007) 
Sec. 18.24.060. - Use of fees and dedicated land. 
(a)  The city shall develop a schedule specifying how, when, and where it will use the land and fees accepted or collected pursuant to this chapter to develop park or recreational facilities to serve the residents of the subdivisions for which such dedications or payments have been made. Any fees collected shall be committed within five years after the payment of the fees or the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If the fees are not committed, they, without any deductions, shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots within the subdivision. 
(b)  All fees collected shall be deposited into a subdivision park trust fund. Money in that fund, including accrued interest, shall be used only for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing neighborhood or community park or recreational facilities that serve the subdivision for which the fees were paid. 
(c)  Land and improvements accepted by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be used only for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing neighborhood or community park or recreational facilities that serve the subdivisions for which the fees were paid. 
(d)  There is no requirement that any park or recreational facility fully or partially provided pursuant to this chapter be accessible only to the residents of a specific subdivision, and all such parks and recreational facilities shall be open to the public in the manner specified by the city council and by city policy. 
(e)  Collected fees shall be appropriated by the local agency to which the land or fees are conveyed, or paid for a specific project to serve residents of the subdivision in a budgetary year within five years after receipt of payment or within five years after the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. 
(Code 1969, § 18.24.060; Ord. No. 828, § 2(part), 2007) 
Sec. 18.24.070. - Timing of payment. 
(a)  The fee required by this chapter with respect to development on any parcel shown on a subdivision map shall be payable when an application is submitted for the building permit for construction on that parcel. The amount of the fee with respect to the construction authorized by a building permit shall be calculated at the lower of the rate in effect at the time such building permit issues, or the highest rate permissible under state law. 
(b)  A credit granted pursuant to section 18.24.050(d) shall be applied when the city accepts the land or improvement. If the city council has made the determinations required by section 18.24.050(d), payment of a portion of the required fee equal to the amount of an expected credit against the fee may be deferred to the date of approval of the final building inspection of the development, provided the owner of the real property for which the fee is required enters into a recordable agreement with the city prior to issuance of the building permit for the development, which shall constitute a lien on the property from the date of recordation and shall be enforceable against successors in interest to the property owner. The agreement shall provide that approval of the final building inspection shall not be granted until the fee is paid or the credit issued. The agreement shall also provide that, in any action to collect the fee or any portion thereof, the city shall be entitled to all of its costs of enforcement and collection, including reasonable attorney's fees. The city manager may execute the agreement on behalf of the city in a form acceptable to the city attorney. Any deferral granted pursuant to this subsection shall be consistent with the requirements of Government Code § 66007. 
(c)  During the initial period of implementation of the requirements of this chapter, each subdivider will be responsible for paying in-lieu fees in an amount that is less than the full amount that would otherwise be required by this section. Any fee levied pursuant to this chapter with respect to a building permit issued through July 31, 2008, shall be reduced (at the time it is paid or credited) to 33 percent of the amount that would otherwise be charged. Any payment or credit made with respect to a building permit issued from August 1, 2008, through July 31, 2009, shall be reduced to 66 percent of what would otherwise be charged. Beginning August 1, 2009, and thereafter, the fee shall be 100 percent. 
(Code 1969, § 18.24.070; Ord. No. 828, § 2(part), 2007) 
Sec. 18.24.080. - Violations; penalties. 
    Any person, corporation, or other business entity violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable in accordance with section 1.01.150. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this chapter may also be enforced by legal or equitable action, or both such actions, all such remedies being cumulative. 
(Code 1969, § 18.24.080; Ord. No. 828, § 2(part), 2007) 
Title 19 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Planning and Zoning Law, Government Code § 65000 et seq.; zoning generally, Government Code § 65800 et seq. 

CHAPTER 19.00. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 19.00.010. - Title. 
    This title shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Barstow." 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.00.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.00.020. - Purpose. 
    The intent and purpose of this title is to encourage, classify, designate, regulate, restrict, and segregate the highest and best location and use of buildings, structures, and land for residence, commerce, trade, industry, water conservation, recreation, or other purposes in appropriate places; to regulate and limit the height, number of stories, and size of buildings, and other structures hereafter erected or altered; to regulate and determine the size of yards and other open spaces; and to regulate and limit the density of population, and for this purpose to delineate the city into land use districts of such number, shape, and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations and provide for their enforcement. Further, such regulations are deemed necessary in order to encourage the most appropriate use of land; to conserve and stabilize the value of property; to provide adequate open spaces for light and air and to prevent and fight fires; to prevent undue concentration of population; to lessen congestion on streets; to facilitate adequate provisions for community utilities such as transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, flood control and other public requirements; and to promote the esthetic, public health, safety, and general welfare; all in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the orderly development of the city and its environs. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.00.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.00.030. - Interpretation. 
(a)  In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not intended by this title to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties. Where this title imposes a greater restriction upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this title shall control. 
(b)  If ambiguity exists with reference to requirements as set forth herein and as they may pertain to unforeseen circumstances, it shall be the duty of the commission and council to ascertain all pertinent facts concerning the ambiguity and by resolution set forth its findings and reasons thereof, and thereafter their interpretation shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.00.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.00.040. - Permit, license issuance. 
    All departments, officials or public employees vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses where required by law, shall conform to the provisions of this title. Licenses or permits for uses, buildings or purposes which would be in conflict with the provisions of this title shall not be issued. Any such license or permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions hereof, shall be null and void. Premises shall not be occupied or used and buildings hereafter erected or altered shall not be occupied or used until a certificate of compliance shall have been issued by the authorized planning personnel. This certificate of compliance shall be required when a building permit, or new business license use of land or buildings by this title or other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.00.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.00.050. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any building or structure erected or maintained, or any use of property contrary to the provisions of this title is unlawful, and the city attorney, shall, upon order of the planning commission, city council, or the city manager immediately commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoyment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take such other steps, and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant relief as will abate or remove the building, structure or use and restrain and enjoin any person from erecting or maintaining the building or structure or using any property contrary to the provisions of this title. It shall be the right and duty of every citizen to participate and assist the city officials in the enforcement of the provisions of this title. 
(1)  All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. The conviction and punishments of any person hereunder shall not relieve that person from the responsibility of correcting prohibited conditions or removing prohibited buildings, structures or improvements, nor prevent the enforced correction or removal thereof. 
(2)  Any person, firm or corporation whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing or permitting the violation of any of the provisions of this title, or of any permit or exception granted hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(3)  Each such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense upon each day during any part of which any violation of any of the provisions of this title is committed, continued, permitted or maintained by such person, firm or corporation and punishable as herein provided. 
(4)  In the event that any person, firm or corporation shall fail, neglect or refuse to demolish, remove, abate or correct a structure or condition existing in violation of this title, upon his or its property after a civil court order or criminal conviction obtained to this section, the city council by order or resolution may require the economic development and planning manager or city manager to demolish, remove, abate or correct the offending structure or condition. A statement of the cost of such work shall be transmitted to the city council who shall cause the same to be paid and levied as a special assessment against the property. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.00.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.00.060. - New construction. 
    All construction, building, improvement, alterations, or enlargement undertaken after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title within the city shall conform with the requirements, character, and conditions as to the use, height, and area laid down for each of these several land use districts as described in the following sections of this title. No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, establish, move into, alter, enlarge, or use, or to cause or permit to be erected, constructed, established, moved into, altered, enlarged, or used any building, structure, improvement, or use of premises located in any land use district described herein contrary to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.00.060, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.00.070. - Existing uses. 
    The existing use, or uses, of all buildings, improvements and premises not in conformity with the standards or requirements of the land use district in which they are located, in accordance with the provisions of this title, and which uses are legal, or for which variances, site approval, conditional use permits or exceptions were granted under previous ordinances may continue as hereinafter provided and subject to the provisions regulating permits and the nonconforming building or use provisions of this title. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.00.070, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.00.080. - Existing lots. 
    The area and dimension provisions of the sections dealing with the requirements shall apply to all lots; provided, however, that where a lot has a width, depth or area less than that required in the district classification of which it is a part and was conveyed by deed or contract prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, the lot may be occupied by the uses permitted in the district, subject to the area per dwelling unit and yard requirements and such other regulations as apply uniformly to all lots in the district. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.00.080, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.02. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 19.02.005. - Generally. 
(a)  For the purpose of this title, words, phrases, and terms shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them in the following sections. 
(b)  General terminology. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural; and those in the plural number include the singular. 
(1)  "Building" includes the word "structure." 
(2)  "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
(3)  "Council" means the city council of Barstow. 
(4)  "Commission" means the planning commission of Barstow. 
(5)  "City" means the City of Barstow. 
(c)  Specific definitions. 
    Abut means contiguous to; for example, two adjoining lots with a common property line are considered to be abutting. 
    Accessory building means a detached subordinate building located on the same lot with a main building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that permitted in the main building, or to the land upon which the main building is located. A garage attached to the main building shall be considered a part of the main building. 
    Accessory living quarters. See definition of "Guesthouse" in this section. 
    Accessory use means a use incidental or subordinate to and devoted exclusively to the main use of the land or building thereon. 
    Adjacent means near, close; for example, an industrial zone across a street from a residential district shall be considered as "adjacent." 
    Advisory agency. The planning commission is designated as the advisory agency to the mayor and city council on all matters related to planning as provided by Government Code. 
    Agriculture means the tilling of soil, the raising of crops, horticulture, small livestock farming, dairy or animal husbandry, including all uses customarily incidental thereto but not including slaughterhouses, feed yards, hog farms, fertilizer works, bone yards or plants for the reduction of animal matter or any other industrial or agricultural use which is determined by the planning commission to be similarly objectionable because of noise, odor, smoke, dust or fumes. 
    Airport means any area which is used or is intended to be used for the taking off and landing of aircraft, including helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used or are intended to be used for airport buildings or facilities, including open spaces, taxiways and tie-down areas. 
    Alley means a public way, at the rear or side of a lot which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property, provided, the alley shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. 
    Animal hospital means a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. The use of the premises as a kennel or a place where animals or pets are boarded for remuneration may be permitted only when incidental to the principal use. 
    Apartment hotel means a building or portion thereof used or containing three dwelling units and six guestrooms or suite of rooms or a multiple combination thereof. 
    Apartment house means a building, or portion thereof, designed or used for three or more dwelling units. 
    Approved, when used in connection with any material, appliance or construction, means meeting the requirements and approval of the department of housing and community development of the state. 
    Automobile and trailer sales lot means an open area used for the display, sale or rental of new or used automobiles, automobile trailers, house trailers or mobile homes, but where no repair, repainting or remodeling is done, except within an entirely enclosed building. 
    Automobile dismantling means the dismantling of used motor vehicles or trailers or the storage of, or dumping of dismantled, partly dismantled, or obsolete or wrecked motor vehicles, or their parts. 
    Automobile, inoperative, means any vehicle which is unable to be moved under its own power or has parts removed or damaged which would render it unmovable under its own power. 
    Automobile trailer or house trailer means any vehicle or structure used for living or sleeping purposes and equipped with wheels or other means to facilitate movement from place to place, and under 35 feet in length. 
    Bachelor unit means a dwelling unit with or without cooking facilities and used for combined living and sleeping purposes. 
    Basement means a space wholly or partly underground, and having more than one-half of its height, measuring from its floor to its ceiling, below average grade; or if the finished floor level directly above a basement is more than six feet above grade at any point, such basement shall be considered a story. 
    Billboard sign means any advertising display which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment not exclusively related to the premises where located or if the owner or occupant of the premises where sign is located is paid or receives any consideration from the erection, maintaining or displaying of the sign. 
    Block means all property fronting upon one side of a street between intersecting and intercepting streets, or between a street and rights-of-way, flood control channel, and of a dead-end street, or city boundary. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the block on the side of the street it intercepts. 
    Boardinghouse means a building within which lodging with meals is provided for compensation for five or more persons unrelated by blood or marriage to the owner or operator; not to include rest homes or homes for the aged. 
    Building means any structure having a roof and walls built and maintained for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the adjoining curb level to the highest point of the structure, exclusive of chimneys and ventilators; provided, however, that where buildings are set back from the street line, the height shall be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building. 
    Building, main, means a building within which is conducted the principal use permitted on the lot, as permitted by this title. 
    Business or commercial means the purchase, sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition, other than that included in the term "industry" as defined in this section, of any article, substance or commodity for profit or a livelihood, including automobile or trailer camps, tourist courts, and motels, public garages, office buildings, offices of doctors and other professionals, outdoor adverting signs and structures, public stables, recreation and amusement enterprises conducted for profit, shops for the sale of personal services, places where commodities or services are sold or are offered for sale, either by direct handling of merchandise or by agreements to furnish them, but not including dumps and junkyards. 
    Camp means land or premises used or intended to be used, let or rented for camping purposes by camping parties, trailers or tents in conjunction with public or private recreation facilities. 
    Camp car means a vehicle with or without motive power, which is designed or used for human habitation. 
    Carport means a permanent roofed structure with not more than two enclosed sides, used or intended to be used for automobile shelter. 
    Cemetery, human, means land used or intended to be used for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of the cemetery. 
    Cemetery, pet, means land used or intended to be used for cemetery purposes, including columbarium, crematoriums, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of the cemetery. 
    Clinic or medical center means a place for group medical services not involving overnight housing of patients. 
    Club means an association of persons incorporated for a common purpose, but not including groups which are organized primarily to render a service for profit. 
    Combination sign means a combination of either a roof, wall or projecting sign. 
    Commercial car wash means any automatic car wash, coin-operated, or two or more hand washing stalls having no fuel sales. 
    Commission is the planning commission of the city of Barstow. 
    Convalescent home. See definition of "Hospital" in this section. 
    Dairy means any premises where milk is produced for sale or distribution and where three or more cows or goats are in lactation. 
    Day nursery means any group of buildings, building or portion thereof used for the daytime care of children who are unrelated by blood or marriage to the person conducting the day nursery. 
    District means land area as shown or described on the land use district maps which are an integral part of this title, and to which the regulations of this title apply. The term "district" shall have the same meaning as the term "zone" or "zoning district." 
    Dormitory means a guestroom designed, intended or occupied as sleeping quarters by more than two persons, unrelated to each other. 
    Driveway means an access to a required off-street parking facility. Such driveway shall not be encumbered by any projection under eight feet above the ground, and having an unobstructed ten-foot minimum width. 
    Dump means a place used for the disposal, abandonment, discarding, dumping, reduction, burial, incineration or by any other means, of any garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, waste material, offal or dead animals; provided, that this definition does not include disposal of substances customarily incidental and accessory to industrial or agricultural uses, unless such disposal endangers the public health and safety. 
    Duplex means the same as two-family dwelling. The term "duplex dwelling" means a building, or portion thereof, designed and used exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family, multiple dwellings, bachelor or efficiency units but not to include hotels, boardinghouses or lodginghouses. 
    Dwelling, multiple, means a building designed and used for occupancy by three or more families, all living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling, one-family, means a detached building designed exclusively for the occupancy of one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building designed and/or used exclusively for the occupancy of two families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms, with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and eating designed for occupancy by one family and shall include bachelor or efficiency unit. 
    Easement, street, means a space on a lot or parcel of land, or so indicated on a subdivision map or in a deed reserved for and used for primary access, provided the street easement shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. No building may be built within the space designated. 
    Educational institution means a school, college or university other than trade schools which give general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the state board of education. 
    Efficiency living unit means a dwelling unit consisting of a room used for combined living, cooking and sleeping purposes. 
    Enforcement agency means the department of housing and community development, or any city, county or city and county which has assumed responsibility for the enforcement pursuant to section 18300 of title 25, California Administrative Code. 
    Family means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or group of persons, excluding servants, who are not so related, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling. 
    Fence means a physical barrier and includes wire mesh, steel mesh, chain link, louvered wood, stake and other similar materials. 
    Fin sign means a sign which is supported wholly by a one-story building of an open air business, or which is supported partly by a pole or poles in the ground and partly by a building. 
    Flashing sign means any directly or indirectly illuminated sign, whether stationary, revolving or rotating which exhibits changing light or color effects, varies in light intensity, creates an illusion of flashing or a sequence changing light or color, or beacons, excepting time and temperature signs. 
    Freeway is as defined by state law. 
    Front foot means the dimension of the front lot line. 
    Front foot, building, means the dimension across the front of a building, or in the case of multiple stores in a building, the distance of each individual store front of building where the main public entrance is located. 
    Frontage means all property fronting on a block. 
    Fueling station means a business which provides for fuel (inclusive of gasoline, diesel, as well as alternative fuels and commercial electric charging stations) for motor vehicles. The use may be synonymous with "service station" (see definition of "service station" in this section) provided no servicing of vehicles is conducted, but may include the sale of lubricants, cleaning and waxing of vehicles (within an enclosed building), and may include a mini-mart. This definition excludes electric vehicle charging stations as an ancillary use associated with a primary business (i.e., offices, retail and service establishments, industrial businesses). 
    Garage, private, means a detached accessory building or a portion of a main building on the same lot for the housing of vehicles for the occupants of the building. 
    Garage, public, means any building or premises primarily used for vehicle repair work. 
    Garage, storage, means any premises, used primarily for the storage of vehicles. 
    Grade means the average of the finished ground level at the exterior walls of a building. In case the front wall of a building is parallel to and within five feet of a side-walk, the grade shall be measured from the average grade of the sidewalk. 
    Ground sign means a sign which is supported or erected upon or in the ground and is not more than six feet above grade. 
    Guest means any person who occupies a room for sleeping purposes. 
    Guest ranch means a building or buildings used as a hotel or motel. 
    Guesthouse (accessory living quarters) means living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same premises with the main building, for use by temporary guests of the occupant of the premises, such quarters having no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit. 
    Guestroom means a room which is designed to be occupied by one or more guests for sleeping purposes. 
    Half story means a story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, plates of which are not more than three feet above the floor of such story. 
    Hedge means a plant or series of plants, shrubs or other landscape material, so arranged as to form a physical barrier or enclosure. 
    Hog ranch means any premises used for the raising or keeping of more than five weaned hogs. 
    Home occupation means any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for dwelling purposes and which use does not change the character thereof or does not adversely affect the uses permitted in the district of which it is a part, and wherein no products are sold on the premises other than those produced thereon, no signs are displayed except as permitted by this title, no persons are employed other than resident family members and no mechanical equipment is used other than that necessary or convenient for domestic purposes. 
    Hospital means any building or portion thereof used for the accommodation and medical care of sick, injured or infirmed persons and including sanitariums, rest homes, homes for the aged, alcoholic sanitariums, institutions for the cure of chronic drug addicts and mental patients. 
    Hotel means any building, or portion of a building containing six or more guestrooms, and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by six or more guests. 
    Industry means the manufacture, fabrication, processing, storage, reduction or destruction of any article, substance or commodity, or any other treatment thereof in such a manner as to change the form, character or appearance thereof. 
    Junkyard means any lot, or the use of any portion of any lot, for the dismantling or wrecking of machinery, or for the storage or keeping of parts and equipment resulting from such dismantling or wrecking, or for the storage or keeping of junk including scrap metal or other scrap materials. Includes any area of more than 200 square feet for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals, used lumber, paper or other scrap materials, dismantling or selling of cast-off or salvage material of any sort. 
    Kennel means any lot or premises on which five or more dogs or cats, or combination thereof, over four months of age are kept, boarded or trained. 
    Livestock means domesticated animals normally kept or reared on a farm or ranch for work, breeding, fattening, or other similar purposes and includes horses, bovines, sheep, swine, and goats. 
    Loading space means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a main building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading. It shall abut a street, alley, or have other appropriate means of ingress or egress. 
    Lodginghouse means the same as the term "boardinghouse" provided no meals are served or prepared on the premises for compensation or for sale. 
    Lot means an area of land which is identified as a lot or parcel on a recorded final map, parcel map, record of survey recorded pursuant to an approved division of land, certificate of compliance, or lot line adjustment. The terms "lot" and "parcel" are interchangeable for purposes of this Code. Types of lots and their definitions are as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot means a lot abutting two streets intersecting at an angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the angle of intersection is more than 135 degrees, the lot is an interior lot. 
(2)  Flag or panhandle lot means a lot connected to the street with a narrow access portion less than 40 feet wide and more than 20 feet long and situated so that another lot is located between the main portion of the flag lot and the street. 
(3)  Interior lot means a lot abutting only one street or abutting two streets which intersect at an angle greater than 135 degrees. 
(4)  Key lot means a lot with a side that abuts the rear lot line of one or more adjoining lots. 
(5)  Reverse corner lot means a corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another lot. 
(6)  Through lot means a lot with frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
    Lot area means the total of the lot area, measured in a horizontal plane, within the lot lines of a lot and expressed in square feet, acres or other area measurement. 
    Lot coverage or building site coverage means the cumulative ground floor area of the structures on a lot expressed as a percentage of the net lot area. For purposes of this definition the term "ground floor area" means all enclosed area within the ground floor of a structure, including exterior walls and mechanical spaces. Carports, garages, accessory buildings and parking structures are included in ground floor area but swimming pools and unenclosed post-supported roofs over patios and walkways are not included. 
    Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. 
    Lot line or property line means any boundary of a lot. The classification of lot lines and their definitions are as follow: 
(1)  Front lot line means the following: 
a.  On an interior lot, the line separating the lot from the street. 
b.  On a corner lot, the shorter line abutting a street (if the lot lines are equal or approximately equal, the director shall determine the front lot line. 
c.  On a through lot, the lot line abutting the street providing primary access to the lot. 
(2)  Interior lot line means any lot line not abutting a street. 
(3)  Rear lot line means a lot line which does not intersect the front lot line and which is most distant from the most parallel to the front lot line. In the case of an irregularly shaped lot or a lot bounded by only three lot lines, the rear lot line is a ten-foot long line parallel to and most distant from the front property line for the purposes of determining setbacks and other provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Side lot line means any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at the building setback line as established for each district in this title. 
    Main street means that portion of State Highway 66 and Interstate Highway 40 which is within the city limits and is a continuation of Main Street. 
    Marquee means a permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the building and projecting over public property street rights-of-way line or setback line. 
    Marquee sign means a sign attached to a marquee. 
    Massage therapy center means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, massage treatments (as defined in section 19.06.020) for any form of consideration, provided, however, that "massage therapy center" shall not include uses conducted by persons exempt from the provisions of section 19.06.020. 
    Mobile home accessory building or structure means any awning, portable, demountable or permanent cabana, ramada, storage cabinet, carport, fence, windbreak or porch established for the use of the occupant of the mobile home. 
    Mobile home park means an area or tract of land where one or more mobile home lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. The rental paid for any such mobile home shall be deemed to include rental for the lot it occupies. 
    Modular/factory-built housing means a residential building, dwelling unit, or an individual dwelling room or combination of rooms thereof, or building component, assembly, or system manufactured in such a manner that all concealed parts or processes of manufacture cannot be inspected before installation at the building site without disassembly, damage or destruction of the part, including units designed for use as part of an institution for resident or patient care, which is either wholly manufactured or is in substantial part manufactured at an off-site location to be wholly or partially assembled on site. 
    Motel means a group of guestrooms used for commercial purposes, such as a building or group of buildings containing guestrooms with automobile parking space provided in connection therewith, which building or group is designed, intended, or used primarily for the accommodation of persons or automobile travelers, including buildings designated as auto cabins, motor courts, motels, or similar designations. 
    Nonconforming building means a building or portion thereof which does not comply with the property regulations of the district classification in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use of a building or land which does not comply with the regulations of the district classification in which it is located. 
    Outdoor living area means the minimum area as required by this title of usable space open or enclosed for active or passive recreation. 
    Parking area, private, means an open area, carport or garage other than a street used for automobile parking and restricted from general public use. 
    Parking area, public, means an area, other than a private parking area or street used for automobile parking and available for public or quasi-public use, either free or for remuneration. 
    Parking space, automobile, means an accessible space exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, loading areas, office or work areas, for the parking of one automobile. Such space shall not be less than nine feet in width and nineteen feet in length. 
    Person means an individual, firm, copartnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, the federal or state government, city, county, district, or any other group or combination acting as an entity. 
    Pole sign means a sign supported wholly by a pole, post, uprights or braces placed upon or in the ground, not attached to any part of a building and which is six feet or more above grade. 
    Recreational trailer park means any area or tract of land, within an area zoned or leased or held out for rent or lease to owners or users of recreational vehicles or tents and which is occupied for temporary purposes. 
    Recreational vehicle means a camp car, motor home, travel trailer or tent trailer with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy, with a living area less than 220 square feet, excluding built-in equipment such as wardrobes, closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures, bath and toilet rooms, and is identified as a recreational vehicle by the manufacturer. 
    Roof sign means a sign which is erected upon or above a roof of a building. 
    Roominghouse. See definition of "Boardinghouse" in this section. 
    Rubbish means waste material consisting of lumber, tree or plant clippings, plaster, trash, concrete, paper, metal or similar material covering an area of ten square feet or more. 
    School. See definition of "Educational institution" in this section. 
    Service station means a business which provides for fuel servicing of motor vehicles, and includes tube and tire repairs, battery charging, storage of merchandise and supplies related to the servicing of motor vehicles, sale of lubricants, cleaning and waxing of vehicles (within an enclosed building), mini-marts, accessory grease racks, but excluding major motor vehicle repairs, body and fender work, engine overhauling and other similar activities. 
    Setback line means a line which defines the depth of the required yard or when no yard is required the street right-of-way line shall be the setback line. 
    Sign area means the net geometric area of a sign computed as including the entire area within one or more parallelograms, triangles, or circles or semicircles comprising the display, including borders and background of a sign structure or when painted on the wall of a structure. One face of a double-faced sign shall be considered in determining sign area, provided both faces are not separated more than 24 inches. 
    Sign grade means the finished ground level where the sign is located. 
    Sign projection means that portion of a sign which extends or projects over a street right-of-way, public property or setback line. 
    Site plan means a plan prepared to scale, showing all of the uses proposed for a specific property. The plan shall show all buildings, structures, signs, off-street parking layout, loading space, points of ingress and egress, walls, fences, landscaping and any additional information that may be necessary to clearly define the intended use of the property. 
    Stable, private, means a building or premises used for the keeping of horses owned by the occupants of the premises, and not kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
    Stable, public, means a building or premises used for the keeping of horses for remuneration. 
    Story means a space in a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there be no floor above, then the space between such floor and the ceiling or roof above. 
    Street means a thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property and meets the street standards of the city. 
    Street centerline means the centerline of a street as established by the city engineer or if no such centerline has been established, and in any case in which the foregoing is not applicable, the planning commission shall designate the centerline. 
    Street right-of-way line means the existing street right-of-way, or if the street rights-of-way as designated on the master plan of streets and highways or adopted specific street plan is greater, it shall be the street right-of-way line. Any yard abutting such street right-of-way line shall be measured from this line. 
    Structure means anything constructed or built, any edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground. 
    Structural alterations means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as in a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling joists, roof rafters, foundations, piles or similar components. 
    Total sign area means the area of all signs on a lot visible from a street. 
    Trailer coach is a vehicle other than a motor vehicle, designed or used for human habitation, or human occupancy for industrial, professional, or commercial purposes, for carrying persons and property on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    Trailer park means any area or tract of land where space is rented or held for rent to owners or users of house trailers or mobile homes. 
    Transportation container means any container which was designed and used or intended to be used as a transportation device for goods and materials, e.g., railroad cars, sea cargo containers, semi-trailers, etc. 
    Travel trailer is a vehicle other than a motor vehicle, which is designed or used for human habitation and which may be moved upon a public highways without a special permit or chauffeurs license, or both, without violating any provisions of the vehicle code. 
    Truck and trailer sales lot means an open area where trucks or trailers are sold, leased or rented. 
    Use means the purpose for which land or buildings are erected, arranged, designed, or intended; or for which land or buildings are or may be occupied or maintained. 
    Wall sign means a sign anchored to and wholly supported by the wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign in a plane. 
    Wall sign, projecting, means a sign attached to and wholly separated by the wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign, perpendicular to the wall of the building. 
    Yard means an open space on a lot, which space is open from the ground to the sky, except for the projections or accessory buildings permitted by this title. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum distance between the street rights-of-way line and the setback line as required by this title. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot to the side yard setback lines, the depth of which is the minimum distance from the rear lot line and the setback line as required by this title. 
    Yard, side, means a yard extending from the front setback line to the rear lot line, the width of which is the minimum distance between the side lot line and setback line for interior lots and the street rights-of-way line and setback line for a side yard abutting a street parallel to the wall of the building. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.02.005, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.04. - DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED 

Sec. 19.04.010. - Established. 
    In order to implement the provisions of this title, land use districts are established to be known as follows: 
ES Estate residential zoned district LDR Low density residential zoned district SFR Single-family residential zoned district MDR Medium density residential zoned district DU Diverse use zoned district HS Human services zoned district C Commercial zoned district I Industrial zoned district O Open space zoned district MZ Military zoned district PF Public facilities zoned district SP Specific plan zoned district  
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.04.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.04.020. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of those districts established shall be known on the zoning ordinance maps. Changes, additions, and amendments to the official zoning plan shall be determined and defined from time to time by ordinance adopting zoning ordinance maps covering such additions and amendments, each of which shall become, upon adoption, a part of the official zoning plan for the city. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.04.020, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.05. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Sec. 19.05.010. - Purpose of provisions. 
    The purpose of the site plan review process is to assist the property owner in obtaining the best utilization of their property in accordance with sound land use planning and design criteria, and to enable the planning agency to ensure that the proposed development is in conformance with the intent and provisions of all applicable city regulations and policies. 
( Ord. No. 954-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 19.05.020. - Approval required. 
(a)  No person shall undertake, conduct or use, or cause to be undertaken, conducted or used, any development projects which require site plan review, without having first complied with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The following uses have been determined to be exempt from site plan review requirements: 
(1)  Interior remodels that do not result in substantial changes in the character of the occupancy or use, or cause greater impact on traffic or waste disposal, as determined by the building official with concurrence from other affected city departments; 
(2)  Alterations to building facades not resulting in significant changes of use, drainage patterns, parking, traffic, easements, or greater impacts on infrastructure and public services, as determined by the building official and city planner with concurrence from other city departments; 
(3)  Repair and maintenance of structures or parking areas, unless constrained by existing waste disposal systems and existing drainage patterns and/or easements; 
(4)  Replacement and/or repair of a structure partially destroyed by fire, flood or other natural occurrence, when the repair of such structure is determined by the building official to be consistent with the design, use and intensity of the original structure, and consistent with the zoning and general plan designations; 
(5)  Single-family residential development (one residence per parcel), on previously subdivided parcels. 
(6)  Duplex, attached or detached (two residences per parcel), on previously subdivided parcels. 
When an application is filed for a use that is no more intensive than the original use, but progresses into a more intense use than originally proposed (i.e., subsections 1 through 5 above), the applicant shall cease the improvements until advising the city of the change of use for determination of whether a Site Plan Review is required. Failure to do so may be subject to section 19.05.110 below. 
(c)  Where permitted by the zone and unless otherwise specified, site plan review and approval for the following development application proposals will be through the administrative review with notice procedure, pursuant to section 19.05.060. Examples shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Residential development of two, three or four dwelling units; 
(2)  Additions to existing multiple residential, commercial or industrial structures which will result in an increase in total floor area; 
(3)  Revisions to previously approved site plans; 
(4)  Projects involving a change or intensification of land use, such as the conversion of an existing building to a restaurant, or the conversion of a residential structure to an office or commercial use, unless such conversion is determined by the city planner to be inconsistent with the zoning and general plan, and may result in additional impacts on existing infrastructure and public services; 
(5)  Projects which have been recommended for administrative approval by the development review committee, based upon the following criteria: 
a.  The project will not have significant or long-range impacts on surrounding properties, city services, or the environment, 
b.  The project will not establish a new or different pattern of land uses or intensities in the area, 
c.  The project has not generated controversy or opposition, and 
d.  The project is consistent with the city's general plan goals, policies and maps. 
(d)  Where permitted by the zone and unless otherwise specified, site plan review for the following development application proposals will be through a planning commission public hearing, pursuant to section 19.05.060. 
1.  Residential development of more than four dwelling units; 
2.  Retail commercial uses; 
3.  Office or administrative/professional uses; 
4.  Industrial uses; 
5.  Wholesale and service commercial uses; 
6.  Public or quasi-public uses which are subject to review by the city; 
7.  Projects which have been recommended by the planning director or the development review committee to the planning commission for a decision; 
8.  Any project which requires preparation of a negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, or an environmental impact report. 
( Ord. No. 954-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 19.05.030. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Preapplication conference. A conference between appropriate city staff, any referral agencies deemed necessary by the city, and the applicant may be requested by any applicant or may be required by the planning director. The conference shall take place prior to submission of the application, pursuant to section 19.05.070. 
(b)  Application submission. 
1.  The project applicant must be the property owner or an authorized agent of the property owner. 
2.  After a preapplication conference has been held, when required, the applicant shall prepare a comprehensive site plan and complete the required application forms supplied by the city. The applicant shall file said plans and application with the planning department, along with the required fee as adopted by the city council. Information requested on the application form and other processing requirements, including but not limited to number of copies requested, maps, graphics or informational reports and studies, shall be determined by the planning department. 
3.  The applicant may be required to clarify, correct or supply additional information before the application is determined by the department to be complete. The department shall not accept a site plan for filing if the application does not conform to the standards as prescribed in this section. Upon making the determination that the application conforms to these standards, the department will notify the applicant in writing that the application has been accepted pursuant to section 19.05.080 of this chapter. 
(c)  Site plan. The application shall be accompanied by the required number of site plan maps, drawn at a minimum scale of one inch equals 20 feet, or other scale approved by the planning department, on standard sheets of 24 inches by 36 inches. The site plans shall indicate the location of all known and proposed easements and improvements; structures and improvements proposed to be demolished, relocated, or constructed; and all other pertinent information (including but not limited to parking, retaining walls, fences, signs, setbacks, driveways, street improvements, drainage improvements and utilities) which can be graphically depicted on the plan, as specified in the checklist provided by the planning department. 
(d)  Drawings and elevations. Elevations showing the general appearance and features of proposed structures shall be submitted, as required on the application checklist. 
When required by the planning department, drawings and elevations shall be submitted in addition to those accompanying the site plan, which shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Roof overhangs and any other parts of the structures that protrude from the building surfaces; 
2.  Uses of each room, or floor plans if required. 
( Ord. No. 954-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 19.05.040. - Approval requirements. 
(a)  Site plan approval shall apply only to the property for which the application was made, and shall apply to that property as long as the use for which approval was granted is in effect, regardless of changes in ownership. 
(b)  Site plan approval shall be granted for a period not to exceed thirty-six (36) months from the effective date of the decision; extensions of time to complete compliance with conditions of approval may be granted where warranted, pursuant to section 19.05.090. 
(c)  The following requirements may be placed upon the development project by the reviewing authority as conditions of approval: 
1.  Dedications and/or easements for streets, alleys, drainage, public utilities, recreational trails, flood control, and such other rights-of-way as may be determined essential to the orderly development of the site and abutting properties; 
2.  On and off-site improvements, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Grading, drainage and drainage structures necessary to protect the public safety, 
b.  Curbs and gutters, street pavement, sidewalks, and traffic control devices; all road improvements are to be constructed pursuant to plans and specifications of the public works department of the city, 
c.  Adequate water system and fire protection equipment, pursuant to plans and specifications of the public works department and fire department of the city, 
d.  Sanitary sewer facilities and connections, 
e.  Services from public utilities where provided, 
f.  Street trees, 
g.  Landscaping, walls and/or fences, trash enclosures, and lighting fixtures, 
h.  Street lights and street name signs, 
i.  In addition to the above requirements, the reviewing authority shall require such additional improvements and facilities as determined necessary for the proper development of the site and area. 
( Ord. No. 954-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 19.05.050. - Determination by the approval authority. 
    The approval authority will determine the merits of the proposed site plan, and its compliance with the principles, standards, policies and goals of the general plan, development code and other applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the city and its subsidiary districts, in order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. Approval shall be based upon the following minimum criteria, which shall also constitute the findings to be made by the approval authority in approving or denying a site plan: 
(a)  The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate all yards, open spaces, setbacks, walls and fences, parking areas, fire and building code considerations, and other features pertaining to the application; 
(b)  The proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on abutting property or the permitted use thereof, and will not generate excessive noise, vibration, traffic, or other disturbances, nuisances or hazards; 
(c)  The proposed use is consistent with the goals, policies, standards and maps of the development code, general plan, and other applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the city; 
(d)  The site for the proposed use has adequate access, meaning that the site design incorporates street and highway limitations. 
( Ord. No. 954-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 19.05.060. - Development review procedures. 
(a)  Land use applications will be reviewed and approved in accordance with four basic procedures: 
1.  Noticed public hearing by the planning commission (any discretionary permit), in which the reviewing authority hears public testimony for and against the land use proposal, reviews evidence and renders its decision; 
2.  Administrative review with notice, in which a posted and/or published notice is given to affected and interested parties, followed by a decision by the reviewing authority. The notice shall be designed to ensure that all interested parties are aware of the pending decision and are given a chance to comment before the reviewing authority renders its decision. The reviewing authority shall be the development review committee; 
3.  Administrative review without notice, used when land use decisions made by the reviewing authority are based upon standards that have been adopted by the city as law or policy, and the reviewing authority is allowed to render a decision without giving notice to surrounding property owners and other parties. The reviewing authority shall be the development review committee; 
4.  Tenant improvement review, used when a proposed land use is to be located within a facility that meets the city's development standards, or when the existing facility has been previously approved for the same or similar use. The reviewing authority is not required to give notice prior to rendering a decision. The reviewing authority shall be the building official, or his or her designee, with concurrence with other city departments. 
( Ord. No. 954-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 19.05.070. - Preapplication conference. 
(a)  The planning department may require that the applicant submit materials for and attend a preapplication conference to review the development proposal prior to acceptance of the application. The purpose of this conference is to acquaint the city with the intentions of the applicant, to acquaint the applicant with any applicable policies and procedures, to identify city ordinances and improvement standards applicable to the proposal, and to identify any significant development opportunities and/or constraints on the site. 
(b)  The preapplication conference shall include an exchange of information concerning the whole of the area intended by the applicant to be developed, even if such development is intended to proceed by stages, whether or not applications for review of the entire project area are made at the time of the initial application. 
(c)  Application for a preapplication conference shall be made at the planning department, and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as adopted by the city council. The applicant shall submit the required number of copies of a conceptual plan, showing proposed land use types, areas and locations. The conceptual plan shall include sufficient information about the proposal to permit evaluation of the development issues identified in this section. 
(d)  The preapplication conference shall address, but not be limited to, the following subject matter: 
1.  Subject parcel. Its size, location, dimensions and area; any existing improvements or developments on-site; existing general plan land use designations; 
2.  Proposed development project. Uses proposed for the site; type and placement of buildings and other improvements; 
3.  Characteristics of the project site and vicinity. Existing and proposed land use designations and development on adjacent parcels; any identified natural or man-made hazards on-site or in vicinity; 
4.  Proposed circulation improvements, both on and off-site. Access points and vehicular access ways, parking, loading, and pedestrian circulation; 
5.  Public improvements. Type, location and sizes of public facilities likely to be required to support the proposal, including utilities, sewer, water and drainage, along with a plan for providing and maintaining improvements; 
6.  Location, amount, type and method of maintenance for proposed open space and landscaped areas; 
7.  Community service impacts. Estimated impacts on public services, including schools, parks, fire and police protection, and solid waste disposal. 
( Ord. No. 954-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 19.05.080. - Time limitations for application acceptance. 
    The following time limits are established for reviewing land use applications as complete. 
(a)  Pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, not later than 30 days after the city has received an application for a development project, it shall determine whether the submitted application materials are complete, and shall transmit such determination to the applicant. Upon receipt of any resubmittal, a new 30-day time period shall begin during which the city shall determine the completeness of the application. If the application together with submitted materials are determined not to be complete, the applicant may appeal the decision to require additional information to the planning commission, as provided for in chapter 19.44 of this title. If the final written determination on the appeal is not made within the time periods within section 19.44.050, the application as well as the submitted materials shall be deemed complete. 
(b)  The reviewing authority and the applicant may mutually agree to a reasonable extension of these time limits. 
( Ord. No. 954-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 19.05.090. - Decisions by the reviewing authority. 
(a)  A reviewing authority may refer a request for a land use decision to the reviewing authority designated as the appeal body for that type of land use application. In such cases, a statement containing the reasons for referring the land use decision shall be prepared by the referring authority. 
(b)  All land use decisions which require a legislative act prior to their approval or denial shall be referred to the city council for final action. 
(c)  Prior to rendering a land use decision; the reviewing authority shall address each of the findings that apply to the application type as described in chapter 19.30 of this title. Evidence or testimony shall be given to substantiate each of the required findings for the decision, and shall be specifically cited in the action taken by the reviewing authority. 
(d)  A land use application which has been denied by the development review committee (DRC), planning commission and/or city council cannot be resubmitted to the city within one year from the decision date. 
(e)  The DRC, planning commission and/or city council may take an action of denial without prejudice on a land use application. Such action allows the applicant to reapply for the same permit within one year of the decision date. The city council shall have the authority to waive reapplication fees when such action is taken; however, if reapplication is not accomplished within one year of the decision date, the application will be subject to full application fees. 
( Ord. No. 954-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 19.05.100. - Approval period for land use decisions. 
(a)  Any land use decision made in accordance with the provisions of this title shall be subject to the following time limitations: 
(b)  Unless substantial construction in reliance upon building permits has occurred or division of land authorized by the land use decision has taken place or been recorded within the time specified for each land use application type within this title, the land use decision shall become null and void. 
(c)  Where circumstances warrant, the development review committee may grant extensions of time for a period of time not to exceed twelve (12) months each. The development review committee shall consider each extension of time on its own merits and may amend the conditions as necessary to bring the project into compliance with the development standards in effect at the time of review of the extension. The development review committee may refer such request for extension to the planning commission for action. 
(d)  Public projects shall not be subject to a time limitation unless specific time limits are included within conditions placed upon the project's approval. When time limits are placed within the conditional approval of a public project, extensions of time may be granted whenever warranted; provided, no single action is taken to grant an extension greater than 12 months. 
(e)  All entitlements subject to this section effective between January 1, 2007 and the effective date of approval of this amendment shall be granted one automatic twelve-month extension of time. 
( Ord. No. 954-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 19.05.110. - Revocation of site plan approval. 
    A site plan approval may be scheduled for revocation if it is found that the site plan approval as operated or maintained: 
(a)  Jeopardizes or adversely affects the public health, peace, or safety of persons residing or working on the premises or surrounding area; or 
(b)  Constitutes a public nuisance; or 
(c)  Has resulted in repeated nuisance activities, including but not limited to, disturbances of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, loitering, excessive littering, illegal parking, excessive loud noises (especially after 11:00 pm or before 8:00 am), traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, or police detentions and arrests; or 
(d)  Adversely impacts nearby uses; or 
(e)  Violates any provisions of this chapter, or any other city, state, or federal regulation, ordinance, or statute; or 
(f)  Violates any condition imposed by a prior discretionary land use approval including approvals granted pursuant to this chapter or this title; or an approval initiated by applicants of a property owner or owner's representative related to the use of land including, but not limited to, parcel map, tentative tract map, development agreement, etc. pursuant to a moratorium or an interim control ordinance; or 
(g)  Information contained on the application is false or incorrect at the time of the submittal. 
The revocation of a site plan approval will effectively cause the project to cease until compliance is achieved. 
( Ord. No. 954-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-17-2017) 
Sec. 19.05.120. - Appeals. 
    Decisions of the Development Review Committee are appealable to the Planning Commission subject to chapter 19.44 (Appeals and Calls for Review) of this title. 
( Ord. No. 954-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-17-2017) 
CHAPTER 19.06. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 19.06.010. - Outdoor lighting. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  Good outdoor lighting at night benefits everyone. It increases safety, enhances the city's night time character, and helps provide security. New lighting technologies have produced lights that are extremely powerful, and these types of lights may be improperly installed so that they create problems of excessive glare, light trespass, and higher energy use. Excessive glare can be annoying and may cause safety problems. Light trespass reduces everyone's privacy, and higher energy use results in increased costs for everyone. There is a need for a lighting ordinance that recognizes the benefits of outdoor lighting and provides clear guidelines for its installation so as to help maintain and complement the city's character. Appropriately regulated, and properly installed, outdoor lighting will contribute to the safety and welfare of the residents of Barstow. 
(2)  This section is intended to reduce the problems created by improperly designed and installed outdoor lighting. It is intended to eliminate problems of glare, minimize light trespass, and help reduce the energy and financial costs of outdoor lighting by establishing regulations which limit the area that certain kinds of outdoor-lighting fixtures can illuminate and by limiting the total allowable illumination of lots located in the city. All businesses, residential, and community driveways, sidewalk and property luminaires should be installed with the idea of being a "good neighbor," with attempts to keep unnecessary direct light from shining onto abutting properties, structures or streets. 
(3)  It is also the purpose of this section to provide energy-efficient lighting that will allow for the safe maneuvering of vehicles and pedestrians within parking areas and walkways for multiple-family residential, office, commercial and industrial developments without adversely impacting adjacent properties. This section is not intended to restrict the type of lighting in single-family dwellings that may be provided for security purposes provided it does not cause a nuisance for the adjacent properties. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, terms used shall be defined as follows: 
    Direct light means light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminaire. 
    Fixture means the assembly that houses the lamp or lamps and can include all or some of the following parts: a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor or lens. 
    Floodlight or spotlight means any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a particular direction. 
    Fully shielded lights means outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that no light rays are emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane as certified by a photometric test report. 
    Glare means light emitting from a luminaire with intensity great enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see, and in extreme cases causing momentary blindness. 
    Grandfathered luminaires means luminaires not conforming to this Code that were in place at the time this Code was voted into effect. When an ordinance grandfathers a luminaire, it means that such already existing outdoor lighting does not need to be changed unless a specified period of time is identified for adherence to the Code, or as identified in subsection (n) of this section. 
    Height of luminaire means the vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of the luminaire to the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire. 
    Indirect light means direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off of other surfaces. 
    Lamp means the component of a luminaire that produces the actual light. 
    Light trespass means the shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. 
    Lumen means a unit of luminous flux. One footcandle is one lumen per square foot. For the purposes of this title 19, the lumen-output values shall be the initial lumen output ratings of a lamp. 
    Luminaire means a complete lighting system, and includes a lamp or lamps and a fixture. 
    Outdoor lighting means the nighttime illumination of an outside area or object by any manmade device located outdoors that produces light by any means. 
    Temporary outdoor lighting means the specific illumination of an outside area of object by any manmade device located outdoors that produces light by any means for a period of less than seven days, with at least 180 days passing before being used again. 
(c)  General requirements. It shall be the responsibility of city staff to review outside lighting plans for all development affected by this section in accordance with the attached guidelines. This shall be completed through the design review process. 
(d)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all new or additions to existing single-family residential, multiple-family residential, office, commercial and industrial structures in excess of $5,000.00 in valuation. Existing developments noted above currently not utilizing energy efficient lamps shall be subject to the requirements listed under subsection (n) of this section. 
(e)  Light trespass and control of glare. 
(1)  All outdoor lighting shall be designed to minimize the trespass of light onto adjacent properties, walkways, residential buildings, hospitals and other uses that may be sensitive to light. In addition, all lighting shall not emit any direct light above a horizontal plane through the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire. 
(2)  No lighting shall be aimed, directed, or focused such as to cause direct light from the luminaire to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways. 
(f)  Parking areas. 
(1)  All lighting allowed by this section must be fully shielded and focused to minimize spillover onto adjacent properties. 
(2)  All lighting shall be designed to minimize light pollution into the night sky as identified in subsection (d) of this section. 
(3)  All lighting shall be arranged so there will be no more than two footcandles per square foot. 
(4)  Height of light standards shall be determined by utilizing the information identified within the zoning designation, specific plan guidelines of the affected area. 
(g)  Pedestrian walkways/business entrance/teller machines. Pedestrian walkways shall be illuminated to no less than 0.5 and no more than one footcandle for safety purposes. Business entrances shall be illuminated to no less than one-half and no more than two footcandle. Illumination of teller machines shall be no less than ten footcandles and the light must be able to extend outward by five feet to provide for pedestrian security. 
(h)  Recreational facilities. Any light source permitted by this Code may be used for lighting of outdoor recreational facilities (public or private), such as, but not limited to, football fields, soccer fields, baseball fields, softball fields, tennis courts, or show areas, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  All fixtures used for event lighting shall be fully shielded as defined in subsection (d) of this section, or be designed or provided with sharp cut-off capability, so as to minimize up-light, spill-light, and glare. 
(2)  All events shall be scheduled so as to complete all activity before or as near to 10:30 p.m. as practical, but under no circumstance shall any illumination of the playing field, court, or track be permitted after 11:00 p.m. except to conclude a scheduled event that was in progress before 11:00 p.m. and circumstances prevented concluding before 11:00 p.m. This exemption is a 24-hour event raising donations for a nonprofit organization, including but not limited to the American Cancer Society. In such event, lighting shall be reduced after 11:00 p.m. to minimize glare onto adjacent properties. 
(i)  Luminaries. Luminaries shall include adequate shielding as determined by subsections (e) and (m) of this section, or as approved by the building official. 
(j)  Prohibitions. The following light sources are not permitted to illuminate parking areas: 
(1)  Flashing. 
(2)  Floodlights. 
(3)  Fluorescent. 
(4)  Incandescent. 
(5)  Lights utilizing fossil fuels (kerosene, gas, etc.). 
(6)  Low pressure sodium. 
(7)  Metal halide. 
(8)  Quartz. 
(9)  Spotlights. 
(10)  Search lights. 
(11)  Temporary outdoor lighting except as follows: 
a.  Temporary outdoor lighting may be permitted in conjunction with a temporary use permit provided that the temporary lighting is approved by the building official and the lighting is consistent with subsection (e) of this section. 
b.  Temporary lighting for the emergency repair of any utility, structure, facility, infrastructure, etc., that is necessary for the safety of the public. Said lighting shall, whenever possible, be directed in such a manner as to minimize the direct beam into traffic or residences. 
c.  As required or necessary for any local, state or federally declared emergency. 
d.  Any exceptions shall be subject to review and approval by the Barstow planning commission. 
(k)  Lamp type. 
(1)  All lamp types proposed shall be energy efficient or as approved by the Barstow planning commission. Lamps shall provide sufficient illumination that is no less than one-half footcandles, and no more than two footcandles, throughout the entire parking lot. The business entrance and pedestrian access shall be illuminated as identified under subsection (g) of this section, unless specified differently elsewhere in this Code. 
(2)  Lamps used for the purpose of illuminating the exterior of a building shall be subdued to minimize any reflectivity (from windows, other hard, shiny surfaces) and glare. Lighting shall not include any color filter or lens, or other coating to color the light other than that of the type of lamp used (i.e., high-pressure sodium is typically yellow-white, low-pressure sodium is yellow, LED is typically white, etc.) except as approved by the planning commission with the application of a development permit. 
(l)  Photosensors. All parking areas shall be illuminated during normal business hours. Businesses shall provide no less than one-half and no more than one footcandle of illumination within the parking areas for safety and security purposes after their normal business hours. The use of photosensors, timers, etc., is encouraged to automatically turn off all exterior lighting during the day. 
(m)  Photometrics required. A photometric plan may be required at the discretion of the building official for any project meeting the criteria identified under subsection (d) of this section, except single-family residential. Said plans shall be submitted to and approved by city staff. 
(n)  Retrofitting/maintenance. Lamps shall be replaced and cleaned as necessary. Any project identified under subsection (d) of this section currently not utilizing energy efficient lamps shall replace exhausted lamps with energy efficient lamps provided no change in ballasts is required. Should the ballast require replacing, retrofitting to energy efficient lighting shall be required. All new lamps shall provide uniform color and intensity. All outdoor lighting shall be maintained in an operational condition. Failure to maintain said lights will result in enforcement actions identified under subsection (q) of this section. 
(o)  Exempt lighting. The following light sources shall be exempt when located within parking areas: 
(1)  Holiday decorations. 
(2)  Landscape lighting. 
(3)  Walkway lighting. 
(p)  Light protection. All permitted light fixtures shall include a cover and gasket to prevent the entrance of dirt. In extremely dirty environments, filtered fixtures should be considered. 
(q)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Compliance with this section shall be subject to review and approval by the city prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Any violation or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall constitute sufficient grounds for refusal of a permit and/or license. 
(3)  Failure to maintain the lighting consistent with this Code may result in administrative citations and enforcement actions pursuant to chapter 6.30 of the Barstow Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.06.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.06.020. - Massage therapy. 
(a)  Declaration of purpose and intent. 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to establish comprehensive regulations for massage therapy centers and massage practitioners to protect public health, safety, and welfare by: 
a.  Requiring a clean and safe environment for massage treatments; and 
b.  Providing minimum standards for the conduct of massage practitioners. 
(2)  This section shall establish new permitting standards intended to comply with California law. 
(3)  This section is not intended to be exclusive and compliance will not excuse noncompliance with any state or local laws or regulations that are uniformly applied to other professional or personal services businesses, including but not limited to, all zoning applications, business license provisions, building code, and fire, electrical, plumbing, and health and safety code laws and regulations applicable to professional or personal services businesses. 
(4)  Upon its date of effect, this section establishes a local regulatory system that allows only state certified massage therapists and massage practitioners to operate within the city. Massage practitioners or therapists and massage therapy centers already in possession of certificates, permits and business licenses shall be entitled to operate according to the terms and conditions of said certificates, permits or licenses. 
(b)  Definitions. Unless the context or subject matter clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended, the words set forth below shall have the following meaning when used in this section: 
    California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) means the California Massage Therapy Council created pursuant to Business and Professions Code § 4602(a). 
    Certified massage practitioner means a massage practitioner, as defined in this subsection, who is certified by the CAMTC under Business and Professions Code § 604.2. 
    Certified massage therapist means a massage therapist, as defined in this subsection, who is certified by the CAMTC under Business and Professions Code § 4604. 
    Certified massage therapy center means a massage therapy center, as defined in this subsection, in which only CAMTC certified massage practitioners or therapists are employed to perform massage treatment and services. 
    Manager means the planning and economic development manager or such other manager or director designated by the city manager. 
    Massage practitioner or massage therapist means any person, male or female, who administers massage or massage treatments for any form of consideration. For the purpose of this section, the following shall be considered synonymous: massage practitioner, massage technician, massage therapist, holistic health practitioner, massage instructor, masseuse, and muscle therapy practitioner. 
    Massage therapy center means any establishment having a fixed place of business where one or more persons engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, massage treatment for any form of consideration, except those establishments who are exempted under subsection (m) of this section. 
    Massage or massage treatment means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external parts of the human body with the hands or any apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations. The term "massage" or "massage treatment" includes, but is not limited to, the following: facial massage; fomentations massage; electric or magnetic treatment; shiatsu; alcohol rubs; Turkish baths; and related actions or services. 
    Off-premises massage service means a business which provides or coordinates massage or massage treatments in any location within the city, but not at any fixed location on an "outcall" basis. This definition may include businesses which are also operating at a fixed location if they also provide or offer "outcall" massage services. 
    Person means and includes person(s), firms, corporations, partnerships, associations or other forms of business organization or group. 
    Person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct means a person who has done any of the following within five years of the date of the subject's application for business license: 
(1)  Has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following: 
a.  Any misdemeanor or felony that relates directly to the operation of a massage therapy center or any crime involving moral turpitude. 
b.  A misdemeanor or felony offense whose commission occurred on the premises of a massage therapy center. 
c.  A violation of California Penal Code §§ 266h, 266i, 315, 316, 318, or 647(b). 
d.  A felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code §§ 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058. 
e.  Conspiracy or attempt to commit any of the aforesaid offenses. 
f.  An offense in a jurisdiction outside the State of California that is substantially the equivalent of any of the aforesaid offenses. 
(2)  Has been found guilty of, or has pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to, any lesser-included offense of any of the aforesaid offenses. 
(3)  Has been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to California Penal Code §§ 11225 through 11235 or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state. 
(4)  Has had revoked any massage-related permit or license issued by any other public agency that regulates massage therapy centers or massage practitioners. 
(5)  Is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to California Penal Code § 290. 
    Specified anatomical areas means and includes any of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, anuses, and female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes all of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of specified anatomical areas; 
(2)  Sex acts including, without limitation, intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any specified sexual activity listed in this definition. 
(c)  Administration. The manager is authorized to administer this section and to adopt administrative policies and procedures required to implement the regulations set forth in this section. 
(d)  Use permit required. 
(1)  Massage therapy centers established after the enactment of this section shall require a conditional use permit and be required to be certified by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC). This shall include the opening of a certified massage therapy center as a new business or the conversion from another business to a certified massage therapy center. No person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct shall be eligible for a conditional use permit to operate a massage therapy center. All massage therapy centers will be required to employ only massage practitioners or therapists who have been certified by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC), unless exempted under subsection (f) of this section. 
(2)  Lawfully established massage therapy centers existing at the time of enactment of this section may continue in operation at their present location, but shall comply with all other sections of this chapter. Lawfully established massage therapy centers may also be allowed to relocate one time from their current location to a new location without gaining approval of a conditional use permit, provided: 
a.  The new location is within a zone district that allows massage therapy centers; 
b.  There has been no change in ownership of the relocating massage therapy center; and 
c.  There has been full compliance with the approved conditional use permit which established the massage therapy center and there has been no expiration of the massage therapy center's business license. 
(e)  California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) Certification required. 
(1)  Massage therapy center. Except as provided under subsection (f) of this section, it is unlawful for any person to own, operate or maintain a massage therapy center unless all massage technicians employed by the massage establishment hold a current, valid certification from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist. 
(2)  Massage practitioner or massage therapist. Except as provided under subsection (f) of this section, it is unlawful for any person to engage in, or carry on the business or activities of a massage practitioner or massage therapist without a certification from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist. 
(3)  Off-premises massage service. Except as provided under subsection (f) of this section, it is unlawful for any person to own, operate, or maintain an off-premises massage service in the city unless all massage practitioners or therapists who are employed by the off-premises massage service hold a current, valid certification from the CAMTC as a certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist. 
(f)  California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) Certification exemption. 
(1)  Massage practitioners or massage therapists in the possession of a current, valid massage practitioner permit issued by the city's planning department and a business license issued by the city prior to January 15, 2015, shall be entitled to operate according to the terms and conditions of said city massage practitioner permit. 
(2)  Should any term or condition of the massage practitioner permit or the conditional use permit which establishes the massage therapy center be violated, or if the related business license expires or is revoked, any exemption under this section shall be considered null and void and all subsections of this section will apply to re-issuance of a conditional use permit or business license. 
(g)  Business license and home occupation permit required. 
(1)  A city business license shall be required pursuant to title 5 of this Code for each massage therapy center or off-premises massage service operating within the city. Massage practitioners or massage therapists who work as hourly, commissioned or salaried employees of one or more massage therapy centers or off-premises massage services need not obtain a separate business license. Massage practitioners or massage therapists who work as independent contractors or sole practitioners at a massage therapy center or off-premises massage service are required to have their own individual business license. A business license issued for massage therapy services shall only be valid when issued in combination with any applicable conditional use permit, massage practitioner permit, CAMTC certification and/or home occupation permit required under this section and that has not expired or been revoked or suspended. 
(2)  A massage therapy center or off-premises massage service operated by a sole individual out of a residentially zoned district, who has no employees and does not contract with any other massage therapists, must apply for and obtain a home occupation permit pursuant to section 19.10.080 prior to operating the business. A home occupation permit issued for massage service shall be limited to one permit per person and limited to one permit per physical address located within the incorporated city limits. 
(h)  Posting or presentation of permits, certificates and other information. 
(1)  All massage therapy centers shall post the following documents and information in a conspicuous public location: 
a.  A valid city business license; 
b.  A copy of a valid CAMTC certificate or massage practitioner permit (if applicable) for each and every massage practitioner or therapist performing massage treatments on the premises including a photograph of the certificate holder or permittee two inches by two inches or larger in size affixed to each respective certificate or permit that is on display; 
c.  The conditional use permit issued for the business; 
d.  A schedule of services which indicates each massage treatment offered, the price of each massage treatment, and the minimum length of time such massage treatment shall be performed. All text on such schedule shall be at least one inch in height, and all letters shall be capitalized. 
(2)  Massage practitioners or massage therapists who conduct off-premises massage treatment shall carry a copy of their CAMTC or massage practitioner permit and a copy of their city business license to every location where massage is performed and shall present them to customers or city representatives when requested. 
(i)  Facilities and operations. It is unlawful for any massage establishment to operate unless the massage establishment premises and operation comply with the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Signs. A readable sign must be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, provided, however, that all such signs must otherwise comply with the sign requirements of this Code. 
(2)  Lighting. Minimum lighting must be provided in accordance with the California Building Code, as adopted by this Code, and, in addition, at least one unobstructed artificial light of not less than 900 lumens must be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage services are being performed on a patron. 
(3)  Ventilation. Minimum ventilation must be provided in accordance with the California Building Code, as adopted by this Code. 
(4)  Disinfection of instruments. Instruments used for massage must be disinfected before each use. Where instruments for massage are employed, adequate quantities of supplies for disinfection must be available during all hours of operation. 
(5)  Water. Hot and cold running water must be provided at all times. 
(6)  Dressing and toilet facilities. Separate dressing and separate toilet facilities must be provided for male and female patrons. This condition does not apply to massage establishments that offer foot massage services (reflexology) and provide no other form of massage services or other type of activity regulated by this section. 
(7)  Sanitary conditions. All walls, ceilings, floors, steam, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, vapor rooms, appliances, apparatuses, and all other physical facilities for the massage establishment must be kept in good repair and be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam and vapor rooms, steam and vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and bathrooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use. 
(8)  Clean linen. Clean and sanitary towels and linens must be provided in sufficient quantity for patrons receiving massage services. Towels, sheets, and linens shall not be used by more than one person without having first been laundered. 
(9)  Linen storage. Closed cabinets must be utilized for the storage of clean towels and linen. After use, towels and linen must be removed and stored in a separate container until laundered. 
(10)  Sanitary coverings. A clean sheet or other effective sanitary covering shall be placed over any surface upon which a patron lies during the administration of massage treatments. Such sheet or covering shall be deposited in the "soiled linen," cabinet at the conclusion of any treatment. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets provided that such paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle. 
(11)  Employee and client attire. Employees and massage practitioners or therapists shall be dressed appropriately in clothing that is not transparent, see-through or which substantially exposes undergarments, breasts, buttocks or genitals or any manner that constitutes a violation of Penal Code § 314. Swim attire is not permitted unless providing a water-based massage modality approved by Business and Professions Code § 10.5. Massage practitioners or therapists, employees, and patrons shall not expose specified anatomical areas while providing or receiving massage treatments. 
(12)  Compliance with laws. The premises to be used must at all times comply with all applicable state and local laws and regulations. 
(13)  Use of massage rooms. Any room in which a massage establishment provides massage services may not be used for residential sleeping purposes. 
(14)  Records and inspection. A register of all individuals employed as massage technicians, and copies of their current CAMTC certifications or city massage practitioner permit, pursuant to subsection (f) of this section, and massage technician business licenses, must be maintained and available for inspection at all times during regular business hours. 
(15)  Minors accompanied by parent. Minors (children under the age of 18) who receive massage treatment must be accompanied by an parent or legal guardian or provide written authorization by a parent or legal guardian. 
(16)  Presence of noncertified personnel. Each person, other than the client (and his parent or legal guardian if a minor), present in any area of the massage establishment other than the waiting area or other areas open to any member of the public must be a certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist, or the massage establishment owner. 
(17)  Hours of operation. Business shall not be conducted between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(18)  Alcohol prohibited. Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold, served, furnished, kept, or possessed in any location which offers massage therapy. This does not apply to the occupant/owner of a residence to whom off-premises massage therapy services are provided. 
(19)  Responsible person. At least one responsible person acting as manager shall be on the premises at all times the establishment is open for business. Such manager shall be familiar with the requirements of this section and shall be capable of communicating the provisions of this chapter to employees and patrons. 
(j)  Compliance with all laws. Before operating a massage therapy center in the city, massage therapy center owners must comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, including, but without limitation to, the building, electrical and plumbing codes. 
(k)  Arrangements for services. All massage therapy centers and sole practitioners shall comply with the following standards in the negotiation and performance of services: 
(1)  Arrangements for massage treatments to be administered shall be made within the room containing the posted schedule of services. 
(2)  No sums shall be charged other than those listed on the posted schedule of services. 
(3)  Employees and massage practitioners and therapists shall not advise, suggest, or otherwise indicate to a patron the availability of any service that is not listed on the posted schedule of services. 
(4)  Massage practitioners shall not perform any service for a patron that such patron did not request within the room containing the posted schedule of services in relation to massage treatment. 
(l)  Prohibited conduct. It is unlawful for owners or employees of massage establishments or off-premises massage services, or massage technicians, to conduct or allow any of the following activities: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any massage practitioner or technician or any other employee working in a massage establishment or for an off-premises massage service, or customers, patrons, or guests of the establishment or service, to engage in any specified sexual activities upon the premises of the massage establishment or the off-premises massage location. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any massage technician or other employee of a massage establishment to expose specified anatomical areas in the presence of any client, patron, customer, or guest. 
(3)  In the course of administering the massage, it is unlawful for any massage practitioner or technician or other massage establishment employee to make intentional physical contact with the specified anatomical areas of any customer, patron or guest. 
(m)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following classes of individuals, and they shall be exempt therefrom, while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, or osteopaths who are duly permitted to practice their respective professions in the state of California under the provisions of the Business and Professions Code, while performing activities encompassed by such professional permits; 
(2)  Nurses or physical therapists who are duly permitted to practice their professions in the state of California under the provisions of Business and Professions Code, while performing activities encompassed by such professional permits; 
(3)  Other health care personnel engaged in the healing arts that are regulated and permitted by the state of California pursuant to Business and Professions Code div. 2, including acupuncturists; 
(4)  Athletic trainers certified by the state of California performing training services at bona fide professional, amateur or school athletic events or practices; 
(5)  Massage practitioners conducting physical therapy treatment under the direct supervision of professionals listed in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section, pursuant to the Business and Professions Code or California Code of Regulations and who work as a W-2 employee under the licensed professional; 
(6)  Other persons otherwise exempt by state or federal law; 
(7)  Reflexologists who provide alternative medicine in which massage is limited strictly to the soles of the feet, ears and hands; 
(8)  Estheticians who provide massage limited of the face and shoulders as part of a facial service and who are duly licensed to provide such service; 
(9)  Nail salons whose nail technicians provide massage services limited to the hands and feet and which are associated with manicures and pedicures so long as the nail technicians are duly licensed to provide such service. 
(n)  Public nuisance abatement. Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this section is unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney is authorized, in addition to, or in lieu of, any other legal or criminal proceedings, to commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment of such massage establishment in the manner provided by law. The city attorney may seek a court order to grant such relief to abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining such an establishment contrary to the provisions of this section. 
(o)  Grounds for suspension or revocation. The manager may suspend or revoke a massage practitioner permit, business license issued to a massage therapy center, massage practitioner or massage therapist, or any other approval under this section, for one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Fraud or deceit. That the licensee practiced fraud or deceit in obtaining an approval under this section; 
(2)  Violation of section. That the massage establishment owner, operator, massage technician, or its employee violated a provision or provisions of this section; 
(3)  Criminal conviction. That the licensee has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any offense described in this section; 
(4)  Improperly maintained facilities. That the facilities and operations of the massage establishment are not kept in compliance with this section, and that the holder has failed to promptly remedy any deficiency of which the holder has been notified. For purposes of this subsection, notice shall mean notice given personally or by leaving notice at the massage establishment premises, or by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address designated by the massage practitioner or therapist or facility on his application for a business license. 
(5)  Employment of uncertified massage practitioner or therapist. That the massage therapy center has employed, allowed or permitted an uncertified person to perform massage in the massage establishment; 
(6)  Error. That the approval was issued in error; 
(7)  Civil penalties. Assessment of three or more civil penalties as provided by this section during any six-month period; or 
(8)  Prohibited conduct. A massage establishment owner, operator, massage technician, or its employee or agent has been found to have engaged in prohibited conduct, as defined in subsection (l) of this section, shall be in violation of this section. 
(p)  Notice of suspension or revocation. 
(1)  Upon the manager's determination that there are grounds to revoke a massage practitioner permit for a violation of this section, the manager shall cause a notice of revocation to be mailed by first class, postage prepaid mail, to the address designated by the massage practitioner technician or massage establishment on his application for the permit or license. Revocations of business licenses shall be subject to section 5.04.060. 
(2)  Prior to any suspension or revocation of a massage practitioner permit, the manager shall, by his order, give the licensee 15 days' notice of intent to suspend or revoke such license or approvals. Within 15 days after any such order the licensee may appear and show cause before the manager why such license should not be revoked. Upon the failure of licensee to appear within said time, or, if after appearance and hearing before the manager, he finds good and sufficient cause for revocation under this section, the massage practitioner permit shall be suspended or revoked, as determined appropriate by the Manager. 
(3)  Upon any suspension or revocation of a massage practitioner's permit, no refund of any permit fee shall be made and the fee shall be forfeited to the city. 
(4)  During the period any required permit or license which is required to operate as a massage practitioner or therapist has been suspended or revoked, the permittee may not conduct any business or operations related to the permit or license in any manner. No person whose license has been revoked shall thereafter conduct such business in the city for a period of 24 months, and no person whose license has been suspended shall conduct business in the city for the duration of the suspension. 
(q)  Civil liability and penalties. 
(1)  Any person violating any provision of this section is liable in a civil action brought by the city attorney for an amount up to $500.00 per violation. Such person is also liable for reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred by the city in any civil proceeding filed to enforce this section. 
(2)  Enforcing this section through civil action may be filed as an alternative to criminal enforcement. Civil enforcement does not require the violation to be knowing or willful. A civil action cannot be filed if the person is being criminally prosecuted. 
(3)  Each violation of this section is a separate offense subject to the civil penalty. 
(4)  A violation of this section may also subject the violator to an administrative penalty pursuant to the procedures set forth in chapter 6.30. All civil fines must be deposited into the general fund. 
(r)  Appeal. 
(1)  An individual named on a revoked or suspended massage practitioner permit may appeal the suspension or revocation of a massage practitioner permit to the city council in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  A written appeal petition must be filed with the city clerk within five working days after the decision of the manager, accompanied by a fee as adopted by the city council on its fee schedule. If the five days expires on a date that city hall is not open for business, then the appeal period shall be extended to the next city business day. Failure to file a timely appeal petition shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal. 
(3)  The appeal petition must indicate in what way the appellant contends the manager's decision was incorrect or must provide new information or extenuating circumstances which the appellant contends would justify reversal or modification of the manager's decision. 
(4)  The effectiveness of any decision of the manager to suspend or revoke a massage practitioner permit shall be stayed during: 
a.  The appeal period set forth in subsection (r)(2) of this section; and 
b.  The pendency of any appeal. 
(5)  The city clerk shall set the appeal for hearing and give notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. The hearing shall be held within 30 days of the filing of the appeal request. The city clerk shall provide the appellant with written notification of the appeal hearing date, time and place no later than ten days prior to the hearing. 
(6)  The city council shall render a decision on the appeal following the hearing by resolution. Notice of the decision and a copy of the adopted resolution shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the appellant within three business days after the city council's decision. Such notice shall contain the substance of the following statement: "You are hereby notified that the time within which judicial review of this decision may be sought is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6." 
(7)  Judicial review. The appellant may seek judicial review of the city council's decision in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.5 et seq. or as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.06.020, 7-20-2015) 
State Law reference- Massage therapy and massage therapists generally, Business and Professions Code § 4600 et seq.; authority of municipality to charge a massage establishment a business licensing fee, and to adopt and/or enforce local ordinance that provides for reasonable health and safety requirements for massage establishments, Business and Professions Code § 4612. 
Sec. 19.06.030. - Fences, hedges, walls. 
(a)  Fences, hedges and walls generally. 
(1)  Fences, hedges, and walls not to exceed six feet in height shall be permitted except as may be required by this title, on or within all rear yards and side property lines on interior lots and on or to the rear of all front yard setback lines. 
(2)  No fence, wall or hedge over 31/2 feet shall be permitted in any required front yard or side yard adjacent to a street excepting that an open chain link fence to a height of not more than four feet may be permitted. 
(3)  A six-foot-high fence, hedge, or wall may be located in the side yard adjacent to a street on corner lots provided that the fence, hedge, or wall is at least 40 feet from the front property line. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to set aside or reduce the requirements established for security fencing for public utilities or fencing required by local, state or federal law. 
(5)  Fence height shall be measured from the highest adjacent surfaces. Street corners are subject to section 19.06.040. 
(b)  Walls required for public parking areas. 
(1)  When adjoining any lot in an SFR, MDR, OP or DU district, a parking area shall have a six-foot-high masonry or block wall erected and maintained along the property line, excepting that the wall shall not be greater than 42 inches high from the front setback line to the front property line. 
(2)  When abutting any street adjacent to any SFR, MDR, OP or DU district, there shall be provided a 42-inch-high masonry or block wall erected and maintained along the property line facing the street, except that vehicle sales and service stations are not required to provide the wall. 
(3)  Where this title requires a six-foot wall separating a parking area from any adjoining use or district, and where the topography on such lots differ, a minimum 42-inch wall may be allowed if the grade of the parking lot plus 42-inch wall is a minimum of six feet above the grade of the lower adjoining property. No wall need be provided if the grade of the parking area is a minimum of four feet below the adjacent higher property. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.06.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.06.040. - Clear-sight/sight-distance triangle. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that there is an unobstructed view at intersections and driveways where vehicles are backing or pulling out onto a public street, or at intersections to minimize the potential of vehicular accidents due to an obstructed view. A clear sight triangle is described as: "the area within the triangle formed by connecting the points 30 feet (ten feet at driveways) from the intersection of the two right-of-way lines." 
(1)  Trees within the clear sight triangle shall be trimmed (to the trunk) to a line at least six feet above the nearest street elevation. Shrubs or groundcover shall be maintained to a height of not more than three feet. 
(2)  Any signs that are proposed within this clear sight triangle shall be limited to pole signs where the pole and any appurtenant feature (such as a pole cover) is no more than 12 inches and the sign cabinet is a minimum of eight feet above the adjacent surface or street elevation, whichever is higher. Decorative bases for pole signs larger than 12 inches shall be no more than three feet in height above the street level. 
(b)  Existing conditions. When a developed site has an existing condition as a result of development prior to the ordinance from which this title 19 is derived, the potential obstruction shall be resolved upon the significant redevelopment, significant site modification or demolition, providing that the cost of correcting the obstruction is not more than 30 percent of the cost of the proposed modifications. Demolition of the existing structure shall result in the removal of this potential obstruction provided that no other retention is necessary, and if sloping or terracing cannot be feasibly accomplished. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.06.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.06.050. - Off-street parking. 
(a)  Purpose. Requirements and standards for off-street parking and loading facilities are established by the ordinance codified in this section in order to achieve the following purposes: 
(1)  To alleviate or to prevent traffic congestion caused by a shortage of parking spaces in addition to the loading and unloading of trucks on public streets; 
(2)  To ensure that off-street parking and loading facilities are provided incidental to new land uses and alterations/enlargements of existing land uses in proportion to the need for such facilities created by the particular type of land use; 
(3)  To ensure that off-street parking and loading facilities are designed in a manner that will result in maximum efficiency, protect the public safety, provide for the special needs of the physically handicapped, and where appropriate, insulate surrounding land uses from their impact. 
(b)  Generally. Where required, the number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided at the time of initial occupancy of a site or construction of a structure, or at the time that the use of a site or a structure is altered, enlarged, converted, or increased in capacity by adding uses, floor area, dwelling units, guestrooms, beds, or seats. All off-street parking and loading facilities required by the provisions of this section, or as otherwise provided, shall comply with all of the standards prescribed in this section and shall be maintained thereafter in good condition for the duration of the use or uses served by the facilities. 
(1)  Reductions. No existing use of a site or structure shall be deemed to be nonconforming solely because of the lack of off-street parking and/or loading spaces as required by this section. Any new use of an existing vacant building shall not be deemed nonconforming solely because of the lack of off-street parking and/or loading spaces as required by this section. Any change of use which results in a more intensive occupancy classification under title 19 shall be considered individually and any additional parking spaces that may be added shall be added prior to occupancy of the building. 
(2)  Alterations and enlargements. The number of parking and loading spaces required for an enlargement or alteration of an existing use or structure or for a change in occupancy shall be in addition to the number of spaces existing prior to the alteration, enlargement, or change of occupancy unless the pre-existing number is greater than the number prescribed in this section, in which case the number of spaces in excess of the prescribed minimum shall be counted in determining the number of spaces. 
(3)  Fractional number. If in the application of the requirements of this section a fractional number is obtained on parking, loading, compact, R.V./semi or visitor space shall be required for a fraction of more than one-half but shall not be required for a fraction of one-half or less. 
(4)  Outdoor storage. Areas designated for off-street parking and/or loading, required access drives, and maneuvering areas shall not be used for outdoor storage of materials or displays. Off-street parking may be used for outdoor displays in association with an approved temporary use permit. 
(5)  Multiple/shared uses. If more than one use is located on a site, the number of off-street parking and loading spaces to be provided shall be equal to the sum of the requirements prescribed for each use. If individual uses on the same site have a floor area less than that for which parking or loading spaces would be required, the total gross floor area for all uses on the site shall be used in determining the number of parking and loading spaces. However, where adjoining uses on the same site have different hours of operation or different peak-demands, shared parking shall be permitted subject to subsection (j) of this section. All parking in the classification shall be subject to approval of a conditional use permit and the following conditions for joint use: 
a.  Building locations. The building or use for which application is being made to utilize the existing off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use, shall be located within 100 feet of such parking facility; 
b.  No conflict. The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours for the building or uses for which the joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed. 
c.  Agreement by parties. Parties concerned in the joint use of off-street parking facilities shall evidence agreement for such joint use by license, lease, easement or similar legal instrument approved by the city attorney as to form and content. 
(c)  Parking spaces required. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for each use utilizing the following schedule: 
Use Requirement (1) Residential uses As prescribed below  a. Desert ranchette, desert living, single-family residential (includes manufactured housing on individual lots) Each dwelling unit permitted in this district shall have on the same lot two enclosed parking spaces  b. Multiple-family residential Each studio unit permitted in this district shall have on the same lot one parking space. Each dwelling unit permitted with one or more bedrooms in this district shall have on the same lot two parking spaces. At least 50 percent of the required parking shall be enclosed. Carports in lieu of enclosed parking may be approved under a conditional use permit, or as an incentive for deed-restricted affordable housing, subject to placement and design approval by planning staff. An additional ten percent of the required parking shall be set aside for visitor parking  c. Senior citizen housing designed exclusively for occupancy by persons 55 years of age or older 0.75 spaces per unit. A minimum of fifty percent of the total number of spaces provided shall be in a garage or carport. An additional ten percent of the required parking shall be set aside for visitor parking. A deed restriction shall be recorded on the property specifying that the project may only be used for senior citizen housing, and any change in use will require additional parking for the new use or occupancy  d. Boardinghouses, fraternities, sororities, roominghouses, dormitories, and similar establishments providing sleeping accommodations One space for each guestroom, suite, or other accommodation, or for each two beds, whichever is greater, plus one space for each dwelling unit  e. Caretakers quarters associated with a commercial or industrial land use Two hard-surfaced (i.e., asphaltic concrete or concrete) spaces shall be provided  f. Mobile home parks Two covered parking spaces shall be provided for each trailer space. An additional ten percent of the parking spaces required shall be set aside for visitor parking. Tandem parking is acceptable  g. Accessory dwelling units One covered parking space per unit (2) Office professional As prescribed below  a. Architects, engineers, draftsmen, attorneys-at-law, and incidental uses to professional building and occupying no more than 1,000 square feet of floor space; provided, that no stock be visible from, the street, insurance agencies, public accountants, bookkeepers, realtors, brokers, phone answering services, private security, investigative firms, data retrieval firms, prescription pharmacy/drugstore, professional offices, banks, financial institutions, general offices At least one parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area  b. Medical offices (including physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors, biological and medical labs) At least one parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area  c. Government offices (including judicial) At least one parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area (3) Commercial As prescribed below  a. Shopping center, single-use commercial sites    1. Retail and commercial services not identified below Commercial development up to 50,000 square feet in total building area shall provide five automobile parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area Commercial development over 50,000 square feet up to 100,000 square feet of total building area shall provide 41/2 automobile parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area Commercial development over 100,00 square feet of total building area shall provide four automobile parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of building area Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicles Parking incentives may be provided for pursuant to subsection (d)(16) of this section    2. Drive-in/through businesses    (i) Bank At least one parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicles    (ii) Fast food restaurant, coffee shop There shall be a minimum of ten spaces or ten spaces for each 1,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area in the structure, whichever is greater. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicle spaces    (iii) Bread/donut/bagel shop There shall be a minimum of 41/2 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, or fraction thereof. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicles    3. Dry cleaners At least one parking space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area    4. Restaurants (no drive-through), cafe, bar or tavern One parking space for each three seats in the building, plus one space for each employee on the maximum shift. In the case of no seating, there shall be provided one space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicle spaces    5. Building materials, paint and hardware/lumber stores, copy, print and express ship store, superstores (including but not limited to electronic, toy/children's, pet supply, office supply and sporting goods) At least three parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicles  b. Nursery sales, display yards, building material and lumber sale yards and similar yards and uses At least three parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, or fraction thereof, and one parking space for each 1,000 square feet devoted to sales, display and yard storage. In addition there shall be one space for each employee on the maximum shift. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicle spaces  c. New and used autos, farm machinery, truck or semitrailer, house trailer, camper, boats, mobile or manufactured homes One space for each 2,500 square feet of display area, plus one space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area for offices. Any associated vehicle repair shall be considered separately  d. Hotels and motels, auto courts, motor lodges and tourist courts One space for each guestroom, plus two spaces for the manager's unit. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicle spaces  e. Shared parking For shared parking, see subsection (j) of this section (4) Manufacturing As prescribed below  a. Automobile dismantling and junk, rag, metal processing and recycling operations One space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area and one space for each 7,000 square feet of gross yard area up to 42,000 square feet plus one space for each 20,000 square feet of gross yard area in excess of 42,000 square feet, but not less than six spaces. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicle spaces  b. Blueprint and photocopy services, heating and ventilating shops, plumbing shops, wholesale business establishments, and similar establishments One space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area, excluding floor area used exclusively for truck loading. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicle spaces  c. Miniwarehouses and enclosed commercial storage facilities One space for each 10,000 square feet of storage area, plus two covered spaces for on-site caretaker's unit. Refer to subsection (c)(7) for truck and recreational vehicle spaces  d. Warehouses or other storage buildings One space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area up to 20,000 square feet; plus one space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area over 20,000 square feet. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicle spaces  e. Automated warehouses, automated distribution facilities, cold storage warehouses One space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, or one space for each employee on the maximum shift, whichever is less, but not less than six spaces. Any change in occupancy which results in a more intensive occupancy classification under the building code will require additional parking. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicle spaces  f. Manufacturing plants; assembly plants, and other industrial establishments One space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area, excluding floor area used exclusively for truck loading, or one space for each employee on the maximum shift, whichever is greater but not less than six spaces. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicle spaces  g. Light industrial uses not identified above 0.75 space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 0.64 space per employee on the maximum shift. In no case shall less than six parking spaces be provided. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicle spaces  h. Industrial park 1.27 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area and 0.89 space for each employee on the maximum shift. In no case shall less than six parking spaces be provided. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicle spaces (5) Commercial recreation As prescribed below  a. Bowling alleys Four spaces per alley, plus spaces for additional use per this section  b. Billiard and pool halls Two spaces per table, plus one parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area, or fraction thereof, for ancillary lounge, video arcade, food services, etc.  c. Commercial stables and riding clubs, dude or guest ranch Not less than two spaces for every five horses kept on premises or if no horses are kept there shall be one space for each guestroom. Plus spaces for additional uses which may be located on the same premises  d. Golf driving ranges One space per 40 lineal feet of golf driving area, plus spaces for additional uses per this section  e. Golf courses Eight spaces per hole, plus spaces for additional uses per this section  f. Miniature golf Two spaces per hole, plus spaces for additional uses per this section  g. Skating rinks/ice or roller One space for each 170 square feet of gross floor area, or one space per 100 square feet of gross floor area, plus spaces for additional uses per this section  h. Swimming pool (Commercial/public) One space per 500 square feet of enclosed area, plus spaces for additional uses per this section  i. Parks, playgrounds, amusement parks One space per 500 square feet of park area, plus spaces for additional uses per this section. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicle spaces  j. Handball/racquetball facility 11/2 spaces for each court, plus spaces required for additional uses per this section  k. Tennis facility Three spaces per court, plus spaces for additional uses per this section  l. Theaters (live or movie) One space for every three seats (6) Institutional and Public Uses As prescribed below  a. Hospitals, nursing homes, rest homes, orphanages, sanitariums, group care facilities, convalescent homes One space for each two beds, plus one for each employee on the maximum shift  b. Veterinary hospitals and clinics At least three spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, or fraction thereof  c. Health studios and spas One space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area  d. Places of public assembly such as churches and other religious institutions (including but not limited to synagogues, mosques, etc.), community centers, auditoriums, arenas, gymnasiums, public dancehalls or ballrooms, amphitheaters, cultural facilities, lodgehalls, clubs, labor camps, fraternal organizations, union headquarters, rescue missions, temporary revivals, grange halls One space for each three fixed seats or one space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. Plus one space for each employee on the maximum shift. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicle spaces  e. Commercial/private nursery schools, preschools, day care centers, child care facilities One space for each employee on the maximum shift with a designated on-site loading/unloading area for students. An additional ten percent of the parking spaces required shall be set aside for visitor parking  f. Public and private schools, elementary, middle and junior high One space for each employee on the maximum shift, and an additional ten percent of the parking spaces required shall be set aside for visitor parking and shall be marked accordingly. Plus a designated on-site loading-unloading area for students  g. Public and private schools, high school level One space for each employee on the maximum shift, one space for each four students based on maximum enrollment capacity, and an additional ten percent of the parking spaces required shall be set aside for visitor parking. Plus a designated on-site loading/unloading area for students  h. Colleges, junior colleges and universities One space for each employee on the maximum shift, one space for each two students based on maximum enrollment capacity, and an additional ten percent of the parking spaces required shall be set aside for visitor parking. Additional parking may be required for ancillary uses such as auditoriums, theaters, etc., that may be open to the public while classes are in session  i. Arts and crafts schools, music and dancing schools, professional and trade schools and all other school providing instruction, other than public education One space for each employee on the maximum shift, one space for each two students based on maximum enrollment capacity, and an additional ten percent of the parking spaces required shall be set aside for visitor parking  j. Nonprofit social service organizations involving office activities only, eleemosynary, philanthropic institutions One space for each staff member on the maximum shift, but not less than ten spaces, plus one space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area  k. Public and private libraries, museums and art galleries, exhibit halls At least three spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, or fraction thereof  l. Public building or public facility, fire, police, ambulance, electrical distribution substation One space for each employee on the maximum shift, and an additional ten percent of the parking spaces required shall be set aside for visitor parking. An additional space shall be provided for each vehicle in the company's fleet. When fleet expands, so shall the parking  m. Public utility structure or installation, transportation terminal, transit station, truck stop, bus facilities, public transportation facilities One space for each employee on the maximum shift, and an additional ten percent of the parking spaces required shall be set aside for visitor parking. An additional space shall be provided for each vehicle in the company's fleet. When fleet expands, so shall the parking. Refer to subsection (c)(7) of this section for truck and recreational vehicle spaces  
(7)  Facilities which cater to truck and R.V. parking. 
a.  Trucks only (i.e., repair facility, truck stop only). A minimum of eight, and a maximum of 15 spaces for each truck-oriented fuel pump provided for fueling facilities, and ten spaces for each service bay for repair facilities plus one automobile parking space for each employee on the maximum shift. 
b.  Combination auto/truck facility (i.e., service stations which cater to cars and trucks includes all uses developed as part of the overall truck stop). One space per 250 square feet gross floor area for autos. 
Plus eight spaces for each truck-oriented fuel pump for trucks and recreational vehicles. 
c.  Restaurants within transportation oriented commercial areas. One space per three seats plus one per employee on maximum shift for autos. 
Plus one space per 400 square feet gross floor area for trucks and recreational vehicles. 
d.  Hotels/motels with more than 20 units within transportation-oriented commercial areas. One space for each guestroom, two spaces for managers unit for autos. 
Plus one space per ten units for trucks and recreational vehicles. 
or 
Motel facility as part of a truck stop. Two spaces for managers unit for autos. 
Plus one space for each guestroom for trucks and recreational vehicles. 
e.  Grocery stores/supermarkets in excess of 10,000 square feet. One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area for autos. 
Plus one space per 6,000 square feet for trucks and recreational vehicles. 
f.  Any variation from the above truck and recreational vehicle parking requirements may be considered under a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 19.30 of this title. A parking demand study may be necessary in order to determine the parking needs of the proposed project. 
(8)  Special provisions. 
a.  For a use not specified in this section, the same number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided as are required for the most similar specified use, or as approved by the planning commission. Additional off-street parking spaces may be required by the planning commission for any use upon a finding that the additional spaces are needed relative to a critical shortage of curb spaces, to facilitate the free flow of traffic on a street, or to reduce a hazard to public safety. 
b.  Exceptions or modifications to the above requirements may be allowed on an individual project basis, upon approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission. Criteria for approval of such a conditional use permit would be special circumstances (such as number of employees) that would not necessitate the number of parking stalls normally required for the use category. Any subsequent change in occupancy which results in a more intensive occupancy classification under the building code would invalidate the conditional use permit and require additional parking spaces in accordance with the applicable use category. 
(d)  Improvements and maintenance. Every parcel of land hereafter used for parking, sales or display purposes for two or more automobiles or trailers shall be improved and maintained as follows: 
(1)  All areas shall be surfaced or paved with a minimum of 21/2 inches of asphalt concrete or three inches of concrete surfacing acceptable to the city engineer and shall thereafter be maintained in good condition. Areas that receive tractor-trailer (i.e., semi-trucks) or other heavy equipment activities (including, but not limited to deliveries) shall include heavy duty paving as acceptable by the city engineer based upon anticipated weights of the vehicles and soil type. 
(2)  The maximum a vehicle may overhang into a planter area shall be two feet, provided this does not damage the landscaping or interfere with the irrigation system. In such cases, the planter width shall be a minimum of seven feet (retaining a five-foot clear landscape area). Vehicles may also overhang onto an on-site sidewalk provided the sidewalk is a minimum of seven feet in width. 
(3)  Each automobile parking area shall be provided with marked entrances, exits and aisles and other safety devices to ensure safe movement of vehicles. 
(4)  More than 50 spaces. Parking areas serving 50 cars or more shall not have parking located within 50 feet of the nearest curb cut, unless it is separated by a landscaped median. 
(5)  Required landscape setback areas adjoining streets may be used only for landscaping, access drives, walkways, on-site retention basins, lighting standards and signs. Any areas behind the required landscape setback may be used for off-street parking. 
(6)  No parking spaces or maneuvering areas for commercial or industrial uses shall occupy any part of the required landscape setback adjacent to a street right-of-way. Any areas behind the required landscape setback may be used for off-street parking. No parking spaces for residential uses shall occupy any part of a required front yard or any part of a required street side yard of a corner lot. No maneuvering areas for residential uses, excluding single-family residences, shall occupy any part of any setback requirements of a corner lot. The term "maneuvering area" does not include necessary access drives. 
(7)  Ingress and egress for any automobile parking space or area shall be with the vehicle entering in a forward motion, maneuvering and exiting in a forward motion. 
(8)  Any parking area providing automobile parking spaces for more than two vehicles shall have each parking space delineated by striping with paint to the standards as provided in the standard specifications for the city and shall thereafter be maintained so that the painted markings are clearly visible. 
(9)  Parking areas shall have any lights arranged so that the lights shall be directed into the parking area and away from any adjacent property so as not to cause a public nuisance. All parking lot lighting shall comply with section 19.06.010. 
(10)  All parking areas providing more than two parking spaces shall be subject to the requirements as listed in the landscape manual. 
(11)  Vehicle storage areas (such as impound yards) may use a minimum of six inches of base material as approved by the city engineer or asphalt grindings provided that the grindings are a maximum of three-quarters-inch in size. Grindings shall be rolled or compacted in lieu of asphaltic concrete or concrete paving. Gravel, base material or grindings shall not be used for parking areas. 
(12)  Parking space sizes shall be measured as a rectangle, and sized as follows: 
a.  Automobile parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet in width and 19 feet in depth. 
b.  Compact automobile/motorcycle parking spaces shall be a minimum of 8.5 feet in width and 15 feet in depth. All compact/motorcycle parking spaces shall be marked accordingly. 
c.  Dedicated motorcycle parking spaces shall be a minimum of five feet in width by ten feet in depth and shall be marked accordingly. One dedicated motorcycle parking space shall be considered the equivalent to one automobile space, but shall not exceed one motorcycle space for each 25 automobile spaces. Motorcycle parking provided above this ratio will not be considered as part of the required parking. 
d.  Recreational vehicle and bus parking spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width and 50 feet in depth and shall be marked accordingly. 
e.  Semi-truck tractor-trailers parking spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width and 70 feet in depth and shall be marked accordingly. 
(13)  Drive aisle widths shall be as follows: 
a.  Ninety-degree automobile parking or two-way drive aisle shall be a minimum of 26 feet. 
b.  Thirty-degree automobile parking drive aisle width shall be a minimum of 15 feet (one-way drive aisles only). 
c.  Forty-five-degree automobile parking drive aisle width shall be a minimum of 11 feet (one-way drive aisles only). 
d.  Sixty-degree automobile parking drive aisle width shall be a minimum of 14 feet (one-way drive aisles only). 
e.  Drive aisle widths for recreational vehicles, bus and semi-truck parking shall be designed by a traffic engineer or based upon turning radius templates to reflect the turning radius necessary for entering and exiting the parking spaces, and turning movements on-site. 
f.  Drive aisles that are designed to be one-way shall be marked accordingly. Drive aisles that have required directional movements (i.e., right turn only, left turn only) shall also be marked. 
(14)  Striping and identification. Parking spaces shall be clearly outlined with four-inch wide lines painted on the surface of the parking facility. Circulation aisles, approach lanes, and turning areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines to ensure safe traffic movement. Striping and markings shall be painted with either alkyd (oil-based) or latex paint, or thermoplastic. 
(15)  Lighting. Parking areas within nonresidential areas shall have lighting that provides adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be consistent with section 19.06.010. Lighting location shall take into account the location and expected mature characteristics of on-site landscape materials. 
(16)  Parking incentives. Incentives for reduced parking may be provided for the placement of bicycle storage and electric vehicle charging stations in multiple-family, commercial and industrial sites, as approved by the city planner. The maximum allowable reduction is one space per 1,000 square feet. 
(e)  On separate lot. Required off-street parking spaces may be provided on a separate lot not more than 300 feet from the main building if approved by the planning commission. When parking is proposed on a separate lot that is on the opposite side of the street, the distance shall apply to the length of legal pedestrian travel (i.e., crosswalks). In no case shall the parking be located on the opposite side of the street if the street is a collector or arterial street. There shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and the department of community services a covenant by the owner of the lot for the benefit of the city to the effect that the owner will continue to maintain the parking space so long as the building is maintained. 
(f)  Areas annexed to the city. All public, semipublic, or private parking areas shall be required to comply with the parking regulations upon any increase in the size of the structure(s) by 25 percent or more, any increase in intensity of use, or any reconstruction of any structures that are over 1,000 square feet in area. 
(g)  Compact/motorcycle parking. Up to 20 percent of the required parking may be utilized for compact parking spaces. All compact/motorcycle parking spaces shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and as approved by the city planner or economic development and planning manager. The city planner or economic development and planning manager may also approve, depending on the site configuration, the clustering of compact/motorcycle parking. Each parking space shall be designated "COMPACT/MOTORCYCLE." (See standard drawings for details: S-16A.) 
(h)  Recreational vehicle/semi parking . All recreational vehicle parking spaces shall be designed with drive-through capabilities (to avoid backup difficulties) and shall be situated to allow easy ingress and egress. Truck and recreational vehicle spaces shall be designed separately and designated accordingly. Said spaces shall be divided evenly between the two where appropriate. (See standard drawings for details: S-16B and S-16C.) 
(i)  Visitor parking. All visitor parking shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking area and as approved by the city planner or economic development and planning manager. Each space shall be designated "VISITOR PARKING." Each space shall meet the requirements of a standard size parking space. (See standard drawings for details: 516-D.) 
(j)  Shared parking. 
(1)  Shared parking shall be described as a collective of parcels, with or without common ownership, with structures (businesses, residences, etc.) either existing or proposed as part of an overall mixed-use development (including mixed commercial uses), that share parking across the common property lines in order to achieve the parking demand of the project, recognizing that various uses have different peak operating hours. Shared parking is appropriate where: 
a.  A specific problem exists; 
b.  Land values and parking facility costs are high; 
c.  Clustered development is desired; 
d.  Traffic congestion or vehicle pollution are significant problems; and 
e.  Adding pavement is undesirable. 
(2)  Shared parking shall be subject to a conditional use permit and shall be evaluated based upon reference parking materials provided by the Urban Land Institute (ULI), Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), or other equivalent reference such as a parking analysis as provided by a parking consultant/engineer. 
a.  A parking analysis may be required to justify any reduction in the quantity of parking. Should a parking analysis be required, the applicant shall be responsible for the full cost of said analysis. 
b.  Reductions in shared parking shall be based upon the demands during operating hours of the various businesses within the center, in not less than one-hour increments. When considering reductions in parking, said parking shall not be less than 100 percent of the highest demand-hour for the entire center. 
c.  In the case of multiple property ownership, all property owners shall submit acknowledgement and agreement to the submittal of a conditional use permit for the shared parking. Said acknowledgement shall be notarized. In the case of corporations or similar ownerships, notarized articles of incorporation or other documents indicating the signer has the authority to sign on behalf of the corporation/similar ownership shall be submitted. Upon approval of the conditional use permit, a deed shall be recorded against all properties involved, for a reciprocal access and parking agreement subject to the criteria identified under subsection (j)(3) of this section. 
(3)  Prior to issuance of any business license (for an existing site) or construction permits, the applicant shall submit a reciprocal access and parking agreement for review and recordation in perpetuity against all affected properties. Said agreement shall include the following, or similar language: 
"It is specifically understood that the covenants contained in this easement shall not be revoked or amended in any respect whatsoever without the written consent of the City of Barstow, duly recorded, and any attempt to revoke or amend, or actual revocation or amendment, not approved in writing by the City of Barstow shall be void and without force or effect." 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.06.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.06.060. - Signs. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. This chapter shall be known as the Sign Ordinance of the City of Barstow. The purpose is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of persons living, working, walking, driving, or otherwise conducting activities within the city by regulating the use of on-premise and off-premise signs, whether temporary or permanent in nature. This chapter is intended to provide adequate visual identification of activities through commercial and non-commercial speech display while regulating the design, quality of materials, location, number, size, and maintenance of all signs and sign structures. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the display and/or posting of a sign that is required by some other provision of state or federal law, including but not limited to, public notices, health warnings, etc. 
(b)  Definitions. Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    Animated or changeable copy sign means a sign with action or motion, color changes requiring electrical energy, electronic or manufactured sources of supply which the copy changes automatically or on which copy is changed manually (e.g., readerboards with changeable letters), but not including wind actuated elements such as flags, banners, or specialty items. 
    Architectural projection means any projection which is not intended for occupancy and which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building, but shall not include signs. 
    Area of sign means the entire area within any type of perimeter or border, which encloses the outer limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure or character. The area of a sign having no such perimeter or border shall be computed by enclosing the entire area utilized by any writing, representation, emblem, figure or character within a single continuous rectilinear perimeter of the smallest size and computing the area. 
    Billboard or outdoor advertising structure means a sign which has a flat surface sign space upon which advertising may be posted, painted, or affixed, and which is designed for the rental or lease of such sign space for advertising not relating to the use of the property upon which the sign exists. 
    Building facade means that portion of an exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation. 
    Building facade facing means a resurfacing of an existing facade with approved material (illuminated or non-illuminated). 
    Civic event sign means a sign, other than a commercial sign, posted to advertise a civic event sponsored by a public, religious, charitable, educational, or cultural agency. 
    Electrical service means the electrical wires or cables which provide direct service to any sign, from the serving utilities facilities. 
    Electronic reader board means a sign with a fixed or changing display/message composed of a series of lights that may be changed through electronic means. 
    Free standing sign means a sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces in or upon the ground and is not dependent on any part of a building. 
    Freeway oriented sign means a sign that is intended to be visible from a right-of-way constructed and maintained by the California Department of Transportation that is designated for speeds of 60 miles per hour or more. 
    Incidental informational sign is a sign, emblem or decal conveying information to the general public of goods, facilities or services available on the premises including, but not limited to the following: restrooms, hours of operation, acceptable credit cards, property ownership or management, phone booths and recycling containers. 
    Gateway signs are city sponsored signs typically placed along the freeway to the city. 
    Illuminated sign means a sign in which a source of light is used in order to make readable the message. This definition includes internally and externally lighted, and reflectorized, glowing, or radiating signs. 
    Marquee is a permanent roofed structure attached to, and supported by the building and projecting over public property. "Marquee sign" means any sign attached to or constructed in a marquee. 
    Monument or ground sign means a low-profile, freestanding structure not more than six feet in height from finished grade nor more than ten feet in length containing a sign area of no more than 50 square feet per sign face and no more than 100 square feet per sign and with no open space below the sign panel. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign that does not meet current standards, but met the standards at the time of its lawful construction. 
    Off-premise promotional sign means a sign that has been determined by the planning commission to be an architecturally distinct edifice designed for the rental or lease of space for advertising not related to the use of the property upon which the sign exists, but for the promotion of one or more activities, events or land uses within the City of Barstow. Promotion of local activities, events and land uses is a compelling governmental interest in that such uses generate revenue for the general fund to help provide police, fire and road infrastructure. 
    On-site sign means a sign which carries only advertisements strictly incidental to a lawful use of the premises on which it is located. Shopping centers subdivided for financial or ownership purposes shall be considered one site for the purposes of on-site signs. All other signs that do not qualify as an on-site sign shall be classified as an off-site sign. 
    Permanent directional sign means a sign intended to direct pedestrian and/or vehicle traffic to a land use or event on a permanent basis. 
    Point of sales sign means a temporary poster type on-site sign typically located: at the ends of fuel pump islands mounted on or between the pipe bollards protecting the pump islands; on fuel pumps; on light standards or; on the building. 
    Projecting double faced building sign means a double faced sign which projects more than 12 inches over public property, and which uses a building wall as its main source of support. 
    Revolving sign means a sign or sign structure which revolves 360 degrees. 
    Roof sign means a sign erected upon or extending above a roof or parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partially supported by the building. 
    Shopping center sign means a sign for a group of three or more commercial uses designed to function as an integral unit on a single parcel or contiguous parcels and which utilize common off-street parking and access. 
    Sign means any material, structure or device and all parts thereof in view of the general public that displays either commercial or noncommercial messages by means of graphic presentation of alphabetic or pictorial symbols and/or representations. Examples include, but are not limited to a billboard, ground mounted, free standing, wall, roof, illuminated, projecting, and monument devices, street clock, and/or flag and includes any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display illustration or insignia. 
    Sign structure means any structure which supports or is capable of supporting any sign as defined in this code. A sign structure may be a single or multiple pole, ground mounted, and may be a part of a building to which it is attached. 
    Special event sign means a temporary sign or banner that is intended to inform the public of a unique happening, action, purpose, or occasion, such as a grand opening or community event. 
    Temporary sign means a sign that is intended to advertise any use on a temporary basis. 
    Under marquee sign means a lighted or unlighted display attached to the underside of a marquee protruding over public or private sidewalks or right-of-way. 
    California Building Code means the current edition of the California Building Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Volume 2 of 2 as published by the California Building Standards Commission as has been officially adopted by the city. 
    Uniform Sign Code means the current edition of the Uniform Building Code as published by the International Conference of Building Officials. 
    Wall sign means a sign which is in any manner affixed to any exterior wall or a building or structure and which projects not more than 18 inches from the building or structure wall. 
    Window sign means a sign whether temporary or permanent, placed on or parallel to the window of a building, and visible from the outside of the building. 
    Zoning or land use means the land use district established by the city and contained within this Title 19. 
(c)  General provisions. 
(1)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to construct, erect, repair, alter the structure of, or otherwise relocate any sign without first obtaining a sign permit, and building/electrical permit(s) if required. Repainting a legally existing sign, or changing the advertising copy thereon shall not require a sign permit unless a structural change is made and/or the sign area is increased. 
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, a permit is a sign or construction permit for the modification, repair or construction of a sign. Said permit may also include an electrical permit for signs that are illuminated. Application for permits shall be submitted to the building department accompanied by no less than three sets of plans. Said application and plans shall be reviewed by staff for compliance with this Code and any applicable sign program. 
Where specified in this code, certain signs (including but not limited to, off-premise promotional signs, as required by an adopted sign program, adoption of a sign program, or other signs subject to the requirements of chapter 19.30 of the municipal code) shall require the approval of a conditional use permit prior to the issuance of a sign or construction permit. 
(2)  Maintenance. 
a.  Every sign and sign structure allowed by this chapter shall be continuously maintained. This shall include, but is not limited to, painting, cleaning, replacement of lighting (for illuminated signs) or missing letters, keeping structural elements and bracing in a safe condition, and internal structural elements screened from view. 
b.  In addition to subsection (1), every sign and/or sign structure advertising a use no longer being conducted on the property for a continuous period of 90 days or more shall also be subject to the following: 
i.  The sign copy and/or panel of a wall and/or freestanding sign shall be removed and replaced with an opaque panel. 
ii.  Freestanding sign structures shall be allowed to remain unused for a period not to exceed one year, after which such sign structure shall be removed. 
(3)  Signs on municipal properties and public right-of-way. It is unlawful to erect or maintain any sign on city-owned property without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the city engineer. For banners within the public right-of-way, see chapter 12.16. Any permanent sign shall be through a development agreement, or other agreement, approved by the city council. 
(4)  Signs on nonconforming sites. Notwithstanding section 19.06.060(g) for nonconforming signs, new signs proposed on property classified as nonconforming shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 19.38. 
(5)  Design standards. Signs allowed under this chapter shall be designed to conform to the following criteria: 
a.  Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be constructed of a single pole (located in the center of the sign cabinet) or multiple poles (poles located equidistant from the outer edges of the sign cabinet). Said sign pole or poles shall include pole covers unless the pole is designed from square or rectangular tubing. Sign shall include architectural integration to tie the sign to the main structure which it serves. 
b.  Freeway oriented signs. Freeway oriented signs shall be of a single pole (located in the center of the sign cabinet) or multiple poles (poles located equidistant from the outer edges of the sign cabinet). Said sign pole or poles shall include pole covers unless the pole is designed from square or rectangular tubing. Sign shall include architectural integration to tie the sign to the main structure which it serves. 
c.  Monument signs. Monument signs shall include a base of at least 12 inches in height and continuous along the bottom of the sign cabinet with no open space between the finished grade and base or base and bottom of sign cabinet. The materials of the base shall be masonry, concrete, rock, or of a material consistent with the main building which it serves. 
d.  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be cabinet type, individual can letters, UV rated high-quality plastic letters, or sheet (1/2 inch or 3/4 inch, exterior grade medium density overlay (MDO) or high density overlay (HDO) plywood or 0.080 inch aluminum) mounted. Any plywood or aluminum sheet mounted signs shall include some form of trim pieces around the perimeter of the sign such as a 2 × 4 frame notched (centrally located) to accept the plywood, or square or rectangular tubing welded, screwed or bolted to the aluminum panel (no screws or bolts shall protrude from the face of the trim pieces). Trim shall be provided for all visible faces of the sign. See construction standards in Exhibit A1. Any plywood sign shall have the edges sealed to increase the longevity of the sign. Any cabinet or can sign that is illuminated shall be UL approved. Signs painted directly on buildings shall feature an integrated design theme, consistent with any approved specific plans or area plans. Any identifying information on a wall sign shall be subordinate to the theme of the sign. Any existing signs painted on the building shall be maintained in good quality (i.e., no fading, peeling, etc.). Signs that become faded, peeling, etc. shall be repainted or painted over to match the color of the building. When the tenant of a property with a wall sign vacates the premises, any wall signs pertaining to that tenant shall be painted over to match the color of the building in accordance with section 19.06.060(c)b. 
(6)  Sign programs. The purpose of a sign program is to provide comprehensive review, address specific signing needs and the establishment of sign details and locations for multiple businesses in a single project, which: 1) may develop separately; 2) the strict application of this sign ordinance will not result in an integrated project; 3) signing required for a specific project may not be adequately addressed within this sign ordinance, and/or 4) may warrant a deviation from the standard provisions in this sign chapter. 
a.  Eligibility. A project shall be a minimum of three acres or more in area, must include commercial or industrial uses, and shall be designed to utilize common parking and driveways. If more than one parcel is involved, reciprocal access and parking easement provisions shall be recorded against the properties. However, a sign program application for a single business, or multiple businesses, on a parcel less than three acres may be allowed if directed by the planning commission as a result of a condition of approval from some other discretionary review. 
b.  Process. Sign programs shall be processed in a manner consistent with the review and approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 19.30. The application shall be accompanied by the following information and drawings: 
i.  Number of signs. 
ii.  Size of signs. 
iii.  Location of signs. 
iv.  Height, if free standing. 
v.  Method of illumination. 
vi.  Architectural composition and materials. 
vii.  Reader board signs (must adhere to Caltrans regulations). 
viii.  Electronic signs (including LED displays) provided no movement (including scrolling or flashing) is depicted or simulated (must adhere to Caltrans regulations). 
The area of a reader board signs or electronic sign shall be considered part of the overall area allowed for the type of sign to which it is attached (i.e., reader board attached to wall sign must total no more in area than the maximum allowable for a wall sign). 
c.  The location and maximum area of all signs submitted under a sign program shall be subject to the determination of the planning commission. Height of signs is subject to section 19.06.060(d) and section 19.06.060(f)(5). 
d.  Specific signing needs may include, but are not limited to, the installation of multiple freeway signs for any applicable project, including, if determined necessary by the planning commission and/or the city council, additional signage and signage types that would otherwise not be allowed under this chapter, the applicable base zoning district, specific plan, or other development plan. Signs associated within a sign program shall not be utilized for off-site advertising, but shall be limited to those land uses or activities within the center. Electronic signs may also be used for emergency announcements, including Amber Alerts. Should sign spaces be available, a business may advertise on up to two freeway signs upon approval, or conditional approval, of the planning commission as part of the sign program adoption or amendment. The provisions of this section 19.06.060(c)(6) related to sign programs shall govern over any conflicting provisions in this chapter. 
e.  Requests to modify an approved sign program shall be through a conditional use permit modification. 
(d)  Signs in specific zone districts. 
(1)  Signs shall be allowed within each zoning district subject to the following provisions: The following signs are allowed within a single-family district: 
a.  Personal identification nameplate and address for each residence, not exceeding two square feet in area; 
b.  One sign shall be allowed at each major entrance into a housing tract or mobile home park, either in the form of a masonry screen wall sign or retaining wall sign, or in the form of a monument sign. Said sign shall be as follows: 
i.  Wall-mounted signs shall not alter the integrity of the screen or retaining wall to which applied, and shall not exceed five feet in height and 20 square feet in area. Said sign shall be a minimum of six inches below the top of a screen or retaining wall. (See location standards in Exhibit A3.) 
ii.  Monument signs shall not exceed five feet in overall height from adjacent surface and sign area shall not exceed four feet in height and 20 square feet in area. (See construction standards in Exhibit A2.) 
iii.  There shall be a minimum of 300 feet separation along any given street for any single tract or mobile home park, including any applicable phases. A maximum of two signs shall be allowed along any given street frontage. 
iv.  For purposes of emergency services and neighborhood identification, signs shall include only the name of the housing tract or mobile home park. Mobile home park signs may include the address of the park. 
v.  Subdued illumination of signs shall be allowed. 
vi.  Signs shall not be located within any public right-of-way or cause a sight-visibility problem. (See location criteria in Exhibits A2 and A4.) 
c.  Any signs associated with a use approved pursuant to chapter 19.30 (Conditional uses). 
(2)  Multiple-family residential district. The following signs are allowed within a multiple-family residential district: 
a.  One wall or monument sign shall be allowed for each street frontage. 
i.  Area of sign shall not exceed one square foot per lineal foot of street frontage with a maximum of 25 square feet. No sign shall exceed ten feet in width. 
ii.  Wall signs shall be located below the roof edge, or shall be a minimum of six inches below the top of a screen or retaining wall for wall signs, or shall not be more than four feet in height for a monument sign. (See location standards in Exhibit A3 and construction standards in Exhibit A2 of this chapter.) 
iii.  Internal or external illumination is allowed provided that illumination is subdued and that there is no glare onto adjacent properties or within any public right-of-way. 
iv.  Signs shall not be located within any public right-of-way or cause a sight-visibility problem. (See location criteria in Exhibits A2 and Exhibit A4.) 
b.  Signs that include the name of the apartment and/or occupant name and address for the purpose of neighborhood identification. When there are fewer than four units per complex, signs shall be limited to those allowed in section 19.06.060(d)(1) 
c.  Signs associated with a use approved pursuant to section 19.30 (Conditional uses). Such signs shall be limited to the following: 
i.  One freestanding sign (regardless of street frontages) not to exceed 15 feet in height and an area not to exceed 25 square feet in area, or one monument sign not to exceed four feet in overall height and not exceeding 30 square feet in area. (See construction standards in Exhibit A2 and Exhibit A4.) 
ii.  Wall sign located below the edge of the roof and not exceeding one square foot per linear foot of street frontage, with a maximum of 25 square feet in area and shall not exceed ten feet in width. Wall signs shall be limited to one per street frontage with a maximum of two provided both signs are not on the same building elevation. (See location standards in Exhibit A3.) 
iii.  Internal or external illumination is allowed provided that illumination is subdued and that there is no glare onto adjacent properties or within any public right-of-way. 
iv.  Signs shall not be located within any public right-of-way or cause a sight-visibility problem. (See location criteria in Exhibit A2 and Exhibit A4.) 
d.  Other signs as approved by the planning commission under a conditional use permit. 
(3)  Diverse use (DU) and human services (HS) districts. The DU and HS districts are intended for a mixture of uses ranging from a variety of residential uses through commercial. Residential uses shall be subject to section 19.06.060(d)(1) for single family residential (ER, LDR and SFR districts) and section 19.06.060(d)(2) for multiple family residential (MDR district). Signs that are professional office and commercially oriented shall be subject to section 19.06.060(d)(4). 
(4)  Commercial district. The following signs are allowed on each parcel within the commercial district, and may be internally or externally illuminated: 
a.  One freeway oriented sign as contained within section 19.06.060 (c)(5)b. 
b.  One freestanding pylon sign up to 25 feet in height and with an area not to exceed three square feet per linear foot of business frontage up to a maximum of 100 square feet, except a commercial shopping center (containing three or more businesses) shall be allowed a maximum of 150 square feet; or one monument sign up to five feet in overall height and 40 square feet in area, except commercial shopping center shall be allowed a multi-tenant monument sign up to six feet in overall height and up to 50 square feet in area. Centers with secondary street frontage shall be allowed an additional freestanding sign for that frontage up to a maximum of 100 square feet, provided such sign does not exceed the primary frontage freestanding sign area. Any additional freestanding signs, or a multi-tenant sign, shall be subject to a sign program as approved by the planning commission. (See construction standards in Exhibit A2 and Exhibit A4.) 
c.  Wall signs shall be allowed as identified below: 
i.  One wall sign for each street frontage with up to three square feet of area per lineal foot of business frontage. Said signs shall not exceed in length 75 percent of the business frontage. For the purpose of this chapter a freeway or highway frontage shall be considered a street frontage. 
ii.  Additional wall signs may be allowed subject to review by the planning department for visibility from other commercial or industrial properties and/or nearby roadways (including freeways and highways) and access easements. Wall signs shall not exceed the size of the primary street frontage signs. No business shall be allowed more than four wall signs. No business shall have more than one wall sign per building elevation except as allowed under a sign program. 
iii.  Wall signs shall be located below the edge of the roof or on a parapet, but the sign cannot extend above the parapet. (See location standards in Exhibit A3.) 
d.  Electronic reader board signs may be used as part of any wall or freestanding sign. However, the area of said reader board shall be considered part of the overall area allowed for the type of sign to which attached (i.e., reader board attached to wall sign must total no more in area than the maximum allowable for a wall sign). Electronic reader board signs shall meet Caltrans regulations and shall not scroll, flash, or depict any motion. 
Signs shall not be located within any public right-of-way or cause a sight-visibility problem. (See location criteria in Exhibit A2 and Exhibit A4.) 
e.  Temporary signs as contained within section 19.06.060(e). 
f.  Off-premise promotional signs. Off-premise promotional signs shall be allowed subject to the following standards: 
i.  A conditional use permit shall be required. 
ii.  Signs shall be architecturally distinct and shall be approved by the planning commission with a specific finding that the proposed sign is architecturally distinct. 
Factors to be considered by the planning commission in determining whether the sign is architecturally distinct may include: 
  Fully-integrated design with an overarching theme (eg. Route 66 Business Corridor, Heart of the Mojave, etc.) 
  Design features that differentiate the structure from conventional highway-oriented advertising signs (placement of a conventional sign atop a distinctive base would not meet the criterion). 
  Cladding of pole covers that is cohesive with the overall design of the sign. 
  Advertising panels shall be integrated with base and other sign components. 
iii.  The overall height of the sign shall be no more than 75 feet above the nearest freeway travel lane or adjacent grade. The planning commission may establish a lower maximum sign height on a case-by-case basis. 
iv.  The area of the sign shall be approved by the planning commission based upon the number of individual sign panels and distance from the interstate. Individual businesses shall be limited to one sign panel per sign face. Individual advertising panels shall be limited in size to 350 square feet. 
v.  The sign shall be located within 3,500 feet of a freeway interchange. 
vi.  Signs shall be separated by a distance of no less than 2,500 feet of any other off-premise promotional sign on the same side of the freeway. 
vii.  Light-emitting diode (LED) or similar electronic signs shall incorporate Amber Alert warnings. An automatic dimmer shall also be included to dim the sign during the evening hours to avoid glare. The Electronic/LED sign shall not depict any movement and shall be consistent with Caltrans Standards. 
viii.  The sign panels shall be limited to the business name and logo, but may include information such as "next exit" or similar directional information. 
ix.  All sign cabinets shall be enclosed on the sides, top and bottom. Single-faced signs shall have an enclosed back. 
(5)  Industrial district. The following signs are allowed on each parcel within the industrial district, and may be internally or externally illuminated: 
a.  One freeway oriented sign as contained within section 19.06.060(c)(5)b. 
b.  One freestanding sign up to 25 feet in height and with an area not to exceed two square feet per linear foot of business frontage up to a maximum of 100 square feet in area, or one monument sign up to six feet in overall height and 50 square feet in area. (See construction standards in Exhibit A2 and Exhibit A4.) 
c.  Wall signs shall be allowed as identified below: 
i.  One wall sign for each street frontage with up to two square feet of area per lineal foot of business frontage. Said signs shall not exceed in length 30 percent of the business frontage. 
ii.  Additional wall signs may be allowed subject to review by the planning department for visibility from other commercial or industrial properties and/or nearby roadways (including freeways and highways) and access easements. Wall signs shall not exceed the size of the street frontage signs. No business shall be allowed more than four wall signs. No business shall have more than one wall sign per building elevation except as allowed under a sign program. 
iii.  Wall signs shall be located below the edge of the roof or on a parapet, but the sign cannot extend above the parapet. 
iv.  Electronic reader board signs may be used as part of any wall or freestanding sign. However, the area of said reader board shall be considered part of the overall area allowed for the type of sign to which attached (i.e., reader board attached to wall sign must total no more in area than the maximum allowable for a wall sign). Electronic reader board signs shall meet Caltrans regulations for scrolling, flashing, etc. 
v.  Signs shall not be located within any public right-of-way or cause a sight-visibility problem. (See location criteria in Exhibit A2 and Exhibit A4.) 
d.  Temporary signs as contained within section 19.06.060(e). 
(6)  O Open space and PF public facilities districts. The following signs are allowed on each parcel within the open space and public facilities districts: 
a.  One freestanding sign up to 20 feet in height and 50 square feet in area, or one monument sign up to five feet in overall height and 40 square feet in area shall be allowed per site. (See construction standards in Exhibit A2 and Exhibit A4.) 
b.  One wall sign per business per street frontage (a maximum of two per business) subject to the following: 
i.  One wall sign for each street frontage with up to two square foot of area per lineal foot of business frontage. Said sign shall not exceed in length 75 percent of the business frontage. 
ii.  Additional wall signs may be allowed subject to review by the planning department for visibility from non-residential properties and/or nearby roadways (including freeways and highways), access easements and on-site pedestrian areas. Wall signs shall not exceed the size of the street frontage signs. Wall signs directed towards on-site pedestrian areas shall not exceed one square foot of area per lineal foot of business frontage. No business shall be allowed more than four wall signs and shall not have more than one wall sign per building elevation, except as allowed under a sign program. 
iii.  Wall signs shall be located below the edge of the roof or on a parapet, but the sign cannot extend above the parapet. (See location standards in Exhibit A3.) Wall signs shall not exceed ten feet in width. 
iv.  Signs may be internally or externally illuminated. 
v.  Signs shall not be located within any public right-of-way or cause a sight visibility problem. (See location criteria in Exhibit A2 and Exhibit A4.) 
(7)  SP specific plan district. Signs allowed within an adopted specific plan district shall be those contained within the adopted specific plan pertaining to the site. 
a.  When the specific plan refers back to the sign ordinance, the sign standards of the closest comparable zoning district shall be used to determine allowed signs. 
b.  Should no specific plan be required signs shall be limited to those allowed in the single-family residential zoning district. 
(8)  PUD planned unit development. Signs allowed within the base zoning district to which a planned unit development is applied as an overlay district, or any standards/restrictions established as part of an adopted planned unit development shall be allowed. 
(9)  MZ military zone. The military zone is under federal authority and is not subject to this chapter. 
(e)  Temporary signs. 
(1)  General requirements for temporary signs. 
a.  Temporary signs shall be allowed for use in the city subject to the following regulations. Every request for temporary signs listed under subsections (1), (4), (5), (6) and (7) of this section shall be made on a temporary sign permit application available from the city and shall require a $25.00 permit fee. 
b.  Temporary sign permits shall be valid for the length of the promotion or up to 90 days, whichever is less, no more than four times per year, unless otherwise specifically stated. All temporary signage must be kept in good repair. Temporary signage that has been damaged by weather, is ripped, torn, faded or no longer able to be read must either be repaired, replaced or removed. 
c.  Any temporary sign shall be removed by the owner of the property on which the sign is located within ten days after completion of the event or use it advertises. 
(2)  Types of temporary signs. 
a.  Banners, flags, streamers/pennants, inflatable advertising devices, hand held signs. 
i.  Banner, flags, streamers/pennants (for uses other than automobile sales facilities), and inflatable advertising devices, including nonmetallic balloons, shall be allowed as a means of advertising and promoting businesses subject to the following regulations: 
ii.  Only in conjunction with special promotions (i.e., grand openings, sales, new ownership/management or other event approved by the planning department). 
iii.  Issuance of a temporary sign permit shall allow for the use of either one banner, two flags, one inflatable device, one handheld sign, pennants or streamers, or a combination of the aforementioned, upon approval of the planning department. 
iv.  Placement of all temporary signs, including banners, streamers, pennants, inflatable devices and handheld signs shall be subject to the approval of the planning department. 
v.  Method of attachment of banners, flags, inflatable devices and/or pennants/streamers must be approved by the city's building department. 
vi.  Banners shall not exceed the total square footage of permanent on-site signage allowed under this chapter for the subject business. 
vii.  Streamers, pennants and balloons may be detached from the building, but may not be on or attached to public property, and not attached to utility poles or light standards within the public right-of-way. 
viii.  Only one inflatable device, including a balloon larger than 12 inches in diameter, or an inflatable statuary is allowed. 
ix.  Banners proposed within the public right-of-way shall be subject to chapter 12.16 (Banners). 
b.  Hand-held signs. 
i.  Hand-held signs shall not be constructed of paper and/or cardboard. 
ii.  Handheld signs shall not constitute a hazard to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
iii.  Hand held sign applicants shall not be required to pay the $25.00 temporary sign permit fee. 
c.  Temporary signs posted prior to an election shall be allowed subject to the following regulations: 
i.  Temporary signs shall be allowed on private property three months prior to an election and for ten days following the election. When located on developed property, such signs may not exceed 16 square feet; and when located on vacant property, such signs may not exceed 32 square feet. No such sign may exceed ten feet in overall height. 
ii.  Signs posted pursuant to this section that are located at the intersection of two streets shall not cause a sight-distance obstruction for vehicles on the street pursuant to section 19.06.040 of this chapter. Such signs are prohibited within any public right-of-way, and/or public-owned property, including but not limited to curb, sidewalk, parkway, median, and utility poles. 
iii.  Signs installed in noncompliance with any of these regulations shall be removed immediately, after the property owner has been given prior notice of the removal. If the city incurs any expense in removing noncompliant signs, the person responsible for such posting may be billed, and if such bill is not paid, will be subject to payment of a civil penalty. The applicant or property owner shall cause the removal of all temporary signs located on his or her property within ten days following the election. 
d.  On property for sale, lease, or rent, temporary signs shall be allowed with the following regulations: 
i.  Such signs shall not exceed one per street frontage. 
ii.  Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
iii.  Such signs shall not exceed eight square feet in area in single-family residential districts, and 32 square feet in area in all other districts. For properties in any zone district that abut and are visible from a freeway, such signs shall not exceed 64 square feet in area. 
iv.  Such signs shall not exceed ten feet in overall height, except when more than 32 square feet in area. In this case, such signs shall not exceed 16 feet in height. 
v.  Such signs shall be removed within 30 days following the sale, lease and/or rental of the property. 
vi.  Nothing in the above regulations shall prevent the use of existing on-site sign structures (i.e., wall sign cabinets and/or free standing signs) in place of the signs allowed in this subsection. 
e.  Window signs. 
1.  Types of window signs. Window signs shall be categorized by the type of sign and allowed in the commercial and industrial districts: 
i.  Paper, plastic, painted or other sign material posted in a window that is more than 80 percent opaque, shall be limited to no more than 30 percent of the total window area. This window area may be configured as one or more window panes that make up the storefront of the business to which it applies, or up to 25 percent of each window pane. All signs shall be professionally printed and shall not be hand-written. Painted signs shall be installed by a licensed sign painter and shall require a sign permit. 
ii.  Perforated vinyl graphics that are professionally printed and installed by a licensed contractor. Said sign may encompass the entire window or storefront area, and shall be installed as follows: 
1.  A sign permit for any perforated vinyl signs shall be required prior to installation. 
2.  Perforated signs shall be comprised of a maximum of 50 percent opacity and a minimum of 50 percent, 1.5 millimeter open perforation. 
3.  Perforated signs shall have a single, unifying theme and are not intended to be comprised of several different themes or contrasting images or colors. 
4.  Due to the climate, any such signs to remain more than one year shall be laminated to prevent dust and water from obscuring the visibility due to collection of dust and water in the perforations. 
2.  Window sign standards. 
i.  A combination of perforated and other window signs is prohibited except as allowed by state and/or federal law. 
ii.  All window signs shall be well maintained. Any fading, peeling, tearing, discoloring of any window sign shall be removed or replaced. 
iii.  On a multi-story building, window signage shall be limited to the first floor, or ground level floor. 
iv.  Window signs shall be reviewed for form and content prior to installation. 
v.  When the tenant of a property with window signs vacates the premises, all signs pertaining to that tenant shall be removed from all windows, including but not limited to perforated vinyl, vinyl, paper, plastic, and/or painted signs. 
f.  Signs on a construction site. Signs on a construction site shall be allowed in all zone districts provided such signs do not exceed one per street frontage, nor 48 square feet in area nor ten feet in height. All such signs shall be removed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy from the building official. 
g.  Signs on a subdivision or model home site. Signs on the site of a subdivision under development or at a model home shall be allowed subject to the following regulations: 
i.  Such signs shall be allowed on private property only in the subdivision; 
ii.  Such signs shall not exceed ten feet in overall height; 
iii.  Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. 
iv.  Such signs may be installed at each street entrance into the subdivision along the perimeter of the subdivision, provided signs are no closer to each other than 300 feet. 
v.  Additional signs on model home sites, including off-site subdivision signs, may be allowed if approved as part of a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 19.30 (Conditional uses). 
h.  Other temporary signs. Temporary signs which are deemed non-commercial shall be limited to placement on private property with consent of the property owner. 
i.  Non-commercial temporary signs placed on residentially zoned properties shall not exceed four square feet. 
ii.  Non-commercial temporary signs placed on non-residentially zoned properties shall not exceed 25 square feet. 
iii.  Non-commercial temporary signs are not allowed within the public right-of-way. 
iv.  Non-commercial temporary signs can be displayed for a period of no longer than 45 days, up to four times per year. 
(f)  Additional signs and sign standards. 
(1)  Fueling station signs. The following signs are allowed for fueling stations: 
a.  One freeway oriented sign if the service station qualifies under section 19.06.060(f)(5). 
b.  One freestanding pylon sign up to 25 feet in height and 45 square feet in area, or one monument sign up to six feet in overall height and 50 square feet in area. (See construction standards in Exhibit A2 and Exhibit A4.) 
c.  Wall signs shall be allowed as identified below: 
i.  One wall sign for each street frontage with up to one square foot per lineal foot of property frontage up to 35 square feet in area. For the purpose of this chapter a freeway or highway frontage shall be considered a street frontage. 
ii.  Additional wall signs may be allowed subject to review by the planning department for visibility from other commercial or industrial properties and/or nearby roadways (including freeways and highways) and access easements. Wall signs shall not exceed the size of the street frontage signs. No business shall be allowed more than four wall signs. No business shall have more than one wall sign per building elevation except as allowed under a sign program. 
iii.  Wall signs shall be located below the edge of the roof or on a parapet, but the sign cannot extend above the parapet. (See location standards in Exhibit A3.) 
d.  Fueling pumps shall be limited to a cumulative maximum sign area of six square feet per side and shall be consistent with Sections 13470-13490 of the California Business and Professions Code. This shall include any visual information that is placed within the pump base, upon the spandrel, or on a placard (point of sale) or television monitor placed on top of the fuel pump cabinet. Signage located on the spandrel shall be limited to that area directly above the fuel pump. Any variation from this subsection shall require the approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 19.30 of this Code. Any fuel pump signs in place prior to the adoption of this chapter may remain until such time that the pumps are replaced or re-faced. 
e.  Changeable copy sign: 
i.  One monument sign (meeting the standards of the applicable zone district) for each street frontage, or one "L" shaped sign located near the property corner if on a corner lot, consistent with Sections 13530-13540 of the California Business and Professions Code; or 
ii.  One changeable copy sign as part of the 25 foot high identification sign. Said changeable copy sign shall be located no more than ten feet above the adjacent surface to the top of the sign cabinet and architecturally integrated with the identification sign. Said changeable copy sign shall be visible from all public streets as required by the Department of Weights and Measures, consistent with Sections 13530-13540 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
iii.  Two pump island canopy signs shall be allowed. Additional canopy signs may be allowed subject to review by the planning department for visibility from other commercial or industrial properties and/or nearby roadways (including freeways and highways) and access easements. No fueling station shall be allowed more than four signs for each canopy except as allowed under a sign program. 
f.  Point of sale signs shall not be allowed. 
g.  Signs may be internally or externally illuminated. 
h.  Signs shall not be located within, or extend into, any public right-of-way or cause a sight-visibility problem. (See location criteria in Exhibits A2 and A4). 
(2)  Automobile sales facility streamers/pennants. Streamers/pennants within vehicle display areas of new and/or used automobile vehicle dealers are allowed provided such signs are kept in good repair and do not extend within public right-of-way. Any weathered, torn or faded streamers and/or pennants shall be repaired, replaced or removed immediately. 
(3)  Permanent directional signs. Permanent ancillary signs shall be allowed in all zone districts, except single-family residential, provided the following standards are met: 
a.  Directional signs shall be limited to: 
i.  Those land uses or events located on the same parcel or center as the sign. May be used to direct vehicles to recreational vehicle and/or commercial truck parking spaces. 
ii.  May be used to direct vehicles/pedestrians to shipping/receiving areas for commercial and industrial uses. 
iii.  May be used to direct vehicles/pedestrians to manager's unit/office. 
iv.  May be used to direct vehicles to drive-through aisle. 
b.  Said signs are intended to direct pedestrian and/or vehicle traffic to a land use or event. 
c.  Sign cabinets shall be a standard square or rectangular shape, not representing an "identifiable" business shape (i.e., shape of the corporate logo). 
d.  Signs shall be mounted on supports that match other signs on-site (i.e., pole covers, masonry, etc.). 
e.  Area of signs shall be limited to four square feet per face. Uses that cater to trucks shall be limited to six square feet per face. 
f.  Height of signs shall not exceed 42 inches in height. Uses that cater to trucks shall be limited to eight feet in height for directional signs. 
g.  Colors shall be integrated with the base colors of the building to which the signs pertain (i.e., building base color shall be used for pole and cabinet, corporate colors may be used for sign faces). 
(4)  City-sponsored signs. City-sponsored signs are allowed on city-owned property (including right-of-way) subject to approval of the city council. 
(5)  Freeway oriented sign. Freeway oriented signs are allowable for commercial or industrial uses that are oriented towards, or rely on access from the freeway (Interstate 15, 40, and Highway 58) subject to the following standards: 
a.  One freeway oriented sign shall be allowed for each parcel or commercial/industrial center. 
b.  The maximum height is 50 feet above the nearest travel lane, or (in the case where property is above the freeway) from the finished grade of the property. This does not include the freeway on- or off-ramps. 
c.  There shall be a minimum separation of 100 feet from any other freeway oriented sign. 
d.  There shall be a maximum sign area of 300 square feet for each single use sign. An additional 125 square feet shall be allowed for each multiple use sign. An additional 50 square feet shall be allowed for each 50 lineal feet over 300 feet from the freeway travel lane for each single use sign, and if the sign is multiple use an additional 25 square feet for each additional use advertised on the sign. In any event, no freeway oriented sign shall have an area larger than 500 square feet. 
e.  Signs may be internally or externally illuminated. 
f.  Multiple businesses shall, whenever feasibly possible, co-locate on the same sign subject to the following provisions: 
i.  A reciprocal maintenance agreement and access easement shall be recorded against the property and with all parties and parcels involved. 
ii.  The total sign area for multiple-business signs may be increased up to 25 percent above the overall sign for a single-tenant sign for each additional tenant. 
g.  For signs located within the Interstate 15/40 and Highway 58 commercial and industrial areas, the following shall apply: 
i.  Freeway oriented signs within 1,000 feet of the nearest freeway travel lane shall be allowed with an overall height of 70 feet from the adjacent grade, or for locations below the freeway, 70 feet above the nearest freeway travel lane. For signs greater than 1,000 feet from the nearest freeway travel lane, but not more than 2,500 feet from the nearest freeway travel lane, the sign height may be increased ten feet for each additional 500 feet distance up to a maximum of 100 feet in overall height. Sign height shall be based upon the average adjacent grade. 
ii.  The co-location of multiple business signs on a single sign structure shall be allowed subject to the provisions of 19.06.060(f)(5)f above. 
iii.  Signs more than 50 feet in overall height shall utilized two poles. 
iv.  The area for a single-tenant sign shall be limited to 300 square feet if within 1,000 feet of the nearest freeway travel lane. For signs between 1,000 and 2,500 feet from the nearest freeway travel lane, the area of the sign shall be considered so the size of the cabinet is proportional to the height of the sign, but must be approved by the community development director or appointed designee up to a maximum of 500 square feet. A flag test may be required to warrant signs above 300 square feet in area. 
(6)  Billboards. Billboards shall not be allowed in any zoning district. 
(7)  Flags and flagpoles. Flags of a permanent nature and flagpoles shall be allowed subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Flagpoles. 
i.  For residential districts, flagpoles shall be limited in height to the building height allowed in the respective district. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the display of flags of the military branches, and those honoring military veterans and prisoners of war. 
ii.  For nonresidential districts, flagpoles shall be limited to 50 feet in height, measured from the grade which the flagpole located. 
b.  Flags. Flags shall be counted as part of the total sign area allowable for a site. Nothing in this regulation shall prohibit the display of flags of the United States, state, county and/or city, provided no portion of the flag shall interfere with any use within the public right-of-way. Federal, state, county and city flags shall not be counted as part of the total sign area. 
(8)  Gateway signs. 
a.  Pylon signs. Pylon gateway signs shall be located within 500 feet of Interstates 15, 40 and Highway 58. Gateway signs shall be a maximum of 80 feet above the nearest freeway travel lane. 
b.  Monument signs. Monument gateway signs shall be located at or near the terminus of a freeway off-ramp, or entry point into the city. Monument gateway signs shall also be used for the entry into the city from State Route 247. 
(9)  Exempt signs. The following non-illuminated signs and advertising displays shall be allowed in all districts with no permit required, subject to the limitations provided in this chapter, or as otherwise provided by state law: 
a.  Signs within a structure and not visible from outside. 
b.  Non-advertising warning signs or trespassing signs on private property posted no closer than 100 feet apart not exceeding three square feet in area. 
c.  Signs, flags, emblems, notices erected, or issued, by a constituted governmental body, public agency, court, person, or officer in performance of a public duty, including traffic or highway signs, railroad crossing signs, or similar regulatory or warning devices, and legal notices. 
d.  Utility company signs not exceeding six square feet identifying conduits, cables, danger, or providing other such similar notice. 
e.  Non-advertising displays, signs, and decorations commemorating municipal, state or nationally designated holidays; providing, however, that said displays are not detrimental to public health, safety, and general welfare and are not otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
f.  Property identification in compliance with section 12.20.060. 
g.  One single-faced identification nameplate or sign on an apartment house, boarding or rooming house, or similar use, not exceeding six square feet in area; provided that said sign is attached to or mounted parallel to the face of the building and not exceeding one foot from the wall. 
h.  One nameplate or occupational sign denoting the name, occupation, address and telephone number of an occupant in a commercial building or public institutional building, provided that said sign does not exceed two square feet in area and is attached and mounted parallel to the face of the building, not exceeding four inches from the wall. 
i.  Civic event signs are allowed on private property in all districts subject to the following: 
i.  Event and other non-commercial signs shall not be displayed more than 50 days prior to an event. 
ii.  Each business or use may display one such sign in its window containing a maximum of four square feet in area. 
iii.  In residential districts, signs shall have maximum area of six square feet, with a maximum height of four feet for free-standing signs, except as specified below. 
iv.  In nonresidential districts, and on vacant property in residential districts that are located on major divided, major or secondary roads, as indicated in the general plan, signs may have a maximum area of 24 square feet with a maximum height of eight feet for free-standing signs. 
v.  Signs may only be placed or erected upon property with the written permission of the property owner or tenant. 
vi.  Signs shall not be located in the clear sight triangle. 
vii.  Signs shall be removed within ten days after the scheduled event to which it pertains. 
viii.  Each special event sign shall include, in legible 12-point type, the name, address and phone number of the responsible party on the back of the sign. 
j.  Signs on a coin operated vending machine, telephone booth, news rack, or other such incidental signs provided all of the following conditions exist: 
i.  Signs identify only the product contained therein, display operating instructions, or show notices required by law. 
ii.  No such signs shall exceed an area of three square feet. 
k.  Incidental informational signs provided all of the following conditions exist: 
i.  Signs shall be attached to the building or are within a window; 
ii.  Sign area of any sign shall be reasonable for the type of sign proposed. 
iii.  Signs shall be for the safety of the general population, customers, and/or clients of a land use or event. 
l.  Temporary signs posted prior to an election, subject to the regulations in section 19.06.060(e)(2)c of this chapter. 
m.  Protected, non-commercial messages are expressly allowed wherever commercial messages are allowed. 
n.  Shingle (projecting/under canopy) signs are allowed subject to the following: 
i.  Signs shall be suspended from a canopy or shall project no more than three feet from the building face. 
ii.  The sign shall be a minimum of eight feet clear of the walkway or ground directly below the sign. 
iii.  The maximum allowed size of a sign is 3.5 square feet. 
iv.  The maximum number of allowed signs is one per building entrance. 
o.  Signs located on the site of a public school for grades K through 12 that is not regulated by the City of Barstow. 
p.  Special event window signs not exceeding 25 percent of any window area. 
q.  All signage located within any public park or public facility, including bus stop shelters. 
(g)  Nonconforming signs. 
(1)  Generally. Every nonconforming sign and sign structure shall be subject to the following regulations: 
a.  No increase in area nor enlargement is allowed. 
b.  The sign may not be relocated nor altered, unless said moving or alteration reduces the degree of nonconformity. Nothing in this regulation shall prevent customary repair and/or maintenance, so long as such repair and/or maintenance shall not extend its useful life. 
If a nonconforming sign or sign structure is abandoned or unused for a continuous period of 90 days or more, the nonconforming status shall terminate, and it shall become illegal. If a nonconforming sign or sign structure advertises a use no longer being conducted on the property for a continuous period of 90 days or more, it shall be subject to the provisions of section 19.06.060(c)(2). 
(2)  Abatement. 
a.  Every nonconforming sign or sign structure shall be removed or made conforming without compensation if all of the following conditions are met: 
i.  The nonconforming sign or sign structure is located in an area that, as of the effective date of this sign ordinance, is either designated for residential or agricultural use on the general plan or zoning map; 
ii.  The nonconforming sign or sign structure is more than 660 feet from the edge of the right-of-way of an interstate or highway maintained by the state or federal government, or if placed or maintained more than 660 feet from said edge of the right-of-way of a state or federally maintained interstate or primary highway, the purpose of its message is to be read from the main traveled way; 
iii.  The nonconforming sign is not required to be removed because the sign is a well maintained and structurally sound vintage sign where the preservation of the sign is desirable for the community; and 
iv.  The nonconforming sign or sign structure is allowed to remain in existence for a period of time set forth in the abatement schedule in subsection (3), and after giving notice of the requirement of removal or alteration. 
b.  Every nonconforming sign or sign structure, to which all of the provisions of subsection (a) are not met, may be removed, altered or made conforming only upon payment of compensation as defined in, and commencing with, Section 1230.010 of Part Three of the Code of Civil Procedure (Eminent Domain Law). Commencement of abatement shall be in conformance with Business and Professions Code Section 5491.1. 
c.  Value of signs and sign structures shall be determined by the building official in the absence of an original contract price less proof of depreciation. Value shall be fair market as defined by the Business and Professions Code Sections 5412.1 and 5412.2. 
(3)  Abatement schedule. 
Abatement Schedule 
Fair Market Value on Date of Notice of Removal ($) Years Allowed For No Compensation Paid Under $2,000.00 2 2,000.00 to 3,999.00 3 4,000.00 to 5,999.00 4 6,000.00 to 7,999.00 5 8,000.00 to 9,999.00 6 $10,000.00 and above 7  
Values under this schedule are as of 1/1/1983, and must be adjusted in accordance with the annual changes in building costs as indicated in the U.S. Dept. of Commerce Composite Cost Index for Construction Costs. 
(h)  Prohibited signs . The following signs are prohibited by the city: 
(1)  Off-site signs unless allowed in section 19.06.060(d)(f). 
(2)  Portable signs, such as "A-Frame" or "sandwich board" type sign structures; 
(3)  Signs that create a safety hazard by obstructing clear view of pedestrians and/or vehicular traffic; 
(4)  Roof signs are prohibited except when other signing alternatives are considered impractical or unreasonable by the director. Roof signs may then be allowed if architecturally designed into the roof system. Whenever possible, new buildings shall be designed with integral roof signs to preclude the necessity for roof signs; 
(5)  Pennants and flags except as allowed for special events, promotional events and automobile dealers; 
(6)  Inflatable signs and tethered balloons except as allowed for special events; 
(7)  Animated or revolving signs where the physical structures or extensions of the sign structure are in motion. This does not include reader boards, barber poles or similar signs where motion may be depicted but where the sign structure itself is not in motion; 
(8)  Signs or sign structures which, by color, text, location and/or shape conflict with a traffic control sign or device; 
(9)  Signs that depict specific sexual activities or specified anatomical parts as defined under chapter 19.24; 
(10)  Vehicle signs, unless the vehicle is used for transporting goods or for services for business purposes; provided, that the sign is affixed so as to not project from the usual profile of the vehicle and not stored/parked in a manner for advertising purposes on private or public property, or within any public right-of-way; 
(11)  Signs in the public right-of-way, except as approved by the city; 
(12)  Signs that make sounds, emit odors, produce smoke or beacons. 
(13)  Signs that contain fighting words or obscene language, or create a clear and present danger to the general public. 
(14)  Billboard signs. 
(i)  Preservation of vintage signs. Vintage signs located along the Historic Route 66 corridor shall, whenever possible or feasible, be preserved. When the preservation of a vintage sign is not possible on-site, the property owner or developer shall seek to donate or sell the sign to the Route 66 Museum or other business or collector. 
(Ord. No. 944-2015 , § 1, 1-19-2016; Ord. No. 948-2016, § 1(sub. 19.06.061-19.06.069), 3-21-2016 ) 




Sec. 19.06.070. - Service station standards. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  It is recognized that service stations warrant special consideration because they constitute a use attracting vehicular patronage exclusively, and therefore tend to create additional traffic. Noise and traffic hazards arising from the conduct of such businesses require the regulation of service station locations to promote reasonably the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(2)  These standards are also intended to encourage better land planning techniques by use of aesthetically pleasing architecture, landscaping, site layout and design. As a result, it is intended that the service station operator will keep the service station in a neat, clean and orderly fashion. 
(3)  For the purpose of this section, a service station (includes the repair of vehicles) and fueling station (does not include the repair of vehicles) shall be considered the same type of land use. 
(b)  Service station. Service stations shall require a conditional use permit. 
(c)  Location. Service stations may locate only within the commercial, industrial human services and diverse use zoning districts. When granting a conditional use permit, the planning commission shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  Proximity to other service stations or businesses distributing or handling flammable liquid or materials. 
(2)  Proximity to residences, schools, hospitals, churches, theaters, parks and other places of public assembly. 
(3)  Any adverse effect that the proposed use will have on traffic on the abutting streets and highways including, but not limited to, congestion, turning movements, and dangers to pedestrians. 
(d)  Building site and frontage. The minimum building site shall be 20,000 square feet with a minimum frontage of 150 feet. The architect and/or engineer shall consider the following when designing the building site: 
(1)  On-site circulation, to allow the effective, safe flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Off-site circulation, with an emphasis on the safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic. 
(3)  Vehicles at the fueling pumps shall not impede the free flow of traffic for vehicles entering and exiting the site, whether to fuel or utilize any other services provided on the station site or adjacent uses. 
(4)  Driveway locations shall require the approval of the city engineer and shall not be located within 50 feet of a street intersection. 
(e)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted subject to approval by the planning commission and shall meet the requirements of chapter 19.30: 
(1)  Service stations engaged in the retail business of selling motor fuels and supplying goods and services, as defined in chapter 19.02. 
(2)  Fueling stations engaged in the retail business of selling motor fuels, as defined in chapter 19.02. 
(f)  Additional uses permitted. 
(1)  The following additional uses are permitted when approved by a conditional use permit: 
a.  Washing, cleaning and waxing of vehicles. Such activity shall be conducted within the main structure of the service station except when approved outside drainage is supplied. Any vehicle washing facility must include a water recycling system pursuant to chapter 13.40. 
b.  Storage of rental and utility trailers. Such trailers shall not exceed 17 feet in total length or, eight feet in total height. Storage area shall be in addition to that area required for off-street parking, driveway or landscaping. One trailer, four feet by eight feet, will be allowed in front of the building for displays; all other trailers will be stored behind the front building setback line within an enclosed area and screened to a minimum of 80 percent opaque. The placement of said display trailer shall not impact any required parking nor block any pedestrian or vehicular access. 
c.  Automobile and truck rentals. Such vehicles shall be stored behind the front line of the building, except one rental automobile will be allowed in front of the building for display. Storage area shall be in addition to that required for off-street parking, driveways, and landscaping and shall be striped per city standards. The placement of said display automobile or truck shall not impact any required parking nor block any pedestrian or vehicular access. 
d.  Storage of other vehicles. Five such vehicles may be stored behind the front building setback line of the main building. If more than five such vehicles are stored on-site, they shall be within an enclosed area and screened to a minimum of 80 percent opaque. The overnight storage of vehicles shall be screened from public view either by storing the vehicles in the service bays or within a fenced and screened enclosure. 
e.  Mini-marts. Mini-marts shall be permitted to be constructed in association with service stations subject to the review of a conditional use permit. Existing service stations requesting a modification to include a mini-mart shall be permitted as a retail use administratively provided no building expansion is required and that required parking can be met on-site. If a building expansion is necessary, the expansion shall be subject to a conditional use permit. 
(2)  All uses shall be specifically identified in the additional application. Any additional uses added after the initial approval shall require submittal of a new conditional use permit application or a revision to the approved conditional use permit application. 
(3)  Per the general plan, maximum building coverage shall be limited to 50 percent of the lot area. 
(g)  Outside activities. Activities conducted outside the main building shall be limited to the dispensing of electricity (for electric vehicle charging station), fuel, oil, and water. 
(h)  Design. Emphasis shall be on quality of design and proper balance between building materials of structures and landscaping elements. All service stations (including main buildings, canopies, accessory structures, etc.) shall include a tile mansard roof or equivalent parapet. Roof tile shall consist of a range of earthtone colors (i.e., browns, tans reds). All pump island canopy supports shall be enclosed with decorative masonry block integrated with the design materials of the main building. All buildings shall include wood siding, decorative masonry or equivalent material. Corporate colors are permitted in limited quantities and must be approved by the planning commission. Mini-marts are considered an ancillary use of the service station. Because of this, all mini-marts shall be incorporated into the design of the service station. 
(i)  Restrooms. The number of restrooms shall be determined by the California Plumbing Code based upon the occupant load of the building. The restrooms shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(j)  Landscaping and screening. All landscaping and screening shall be provided for each service station site consistent with sections 19.06.080 and 19.06.030. 
(k)  Trash enclosures. All trash enclosures shall be subject to the Refuse and Recycling Enclosure Ordinance. Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be located in an area that is easily accessible for the refuse and recycling collection trucks. 
(l)  Lights. All exterior lighting shall comply with section 19.06.010. Light standards shall be a maximum of 30 feet in height and shall be anodized. All lights shall be designed to confine the rays to the premises. Any deviation shall require planning commission approval. 
(m)  Parking. Parking shall be provided in the amounts prescribed under section 19.06.050. Parking requirements for ancillary operations (i.e., mini-marts) shall be determined by the planning commission. Disabled parking spaces shall be provided in the amounts and sizes as described in the Uniform Building Code and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Any deviation of non-ADA required parking spaces shall require planning commission approval. 
(n)  Vending machines. Not more than two vending machines will be allowed outside of the main building. 
(o)  Tire storage. Outside display/storage of tires is prohibited. All display/storage of tires shall be located within the main building. 
(p)  Signs. All signs shall be provided in the amounts and sizes as prescribed within the Service Station Sign Ordinance No. 688 and section 19.06.060. Sign location, square footage, etc., shall be computed based upon the main use of the property. Signs for ancillary uses shall not be permitted to exceed the maximum amounts prescribed for the main use of the property and shall be considered as one for calculation purposes. Any planning commission interpretations regarding signs shall automatically be included under this section. Any deviation shall require planning commission review and approval. 
(q)  Pump islands. Pump islands shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the ultimate right-of-way line. 
(r)  Canopies. Automobile service station canopies, whether attached or detached, shall not project closer than seven feet to the front or side property lines. Canopies shall maintain a minimum clearance of 12 feet above the centerline grade of the adjacent street. 
(s)  Nonconforming service station sites. Existing service station sites made nonconforming as a result of this section shall be made to conform when the service station is remodeled, or improvements are made to existing structures with a net increase in building area. An increase in building area shall be subject to subsection (t)(1)(b) of this section. 
(t)  Modernization of nonconforming use. 
(1)  All proposals to modernize existing service stations shall be subject to review and approval as provided below: 
a.  The corporate reimage or rebranding of a service station shall be reviewed and approved administratively. 
b.  A conditional use permit shall be required for the expansion in building area, reconstruction or addition of building, canopy, or other accessory structure, or the addition of a use (such as a car wash) or fuel pumps to the service station. 
c.  The addition or replacement of the fuel tanks, or conversion to another fuel (i.e., gasoline to diesel) shall be reviewed and approved administratively and shall require all approvals from other departments and agencies, including but not limited to the fire department and San Bernardino County Fire Department, hazardous materials division. 
d.  The replacement of fueling pumps (including the addition of another fuel product to an existing pump) shall be reviewed and approved administratively. However, the addition of fuel pumps shall require the approval of a conditional use permit. 
(2)  Proposals to modernize nonconforming service station sites shall be subject to the appropriate requirements identified under chapter 19.38. 
(u)  Compliance required. Any service station erected or constructed contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or an idle service station, (one which has been unoccupied for six months or longer) shall be declared unlawful and a public nuisance and shall be subject to review by the planning commission for compliance with one or more of the following recommendations: 
(1)  After six months, all windows and doors shall be covered with sheet metal or other approved material and painted to match the building to which applied. 
(2)  One year from the date of formal notification by the code enforcement officer, all gas pumps shall be removed from the site. 
(3)  One year from the date of formal notification by the code enforcement officer, all signs, sign poles, etc., shall be removed from the site. 
(4)  All underground tanks shall be removed from each site consistent with all time frames and procedures prescribed by all local, state and federal regulations. 
(5)  Any vapor recovery system shall be screened from view with a fence a minimum of 80 percent opaque. 
(6)  Each vacant service station site shall be reviewed annually to determine whether the structure should be demolished and removed from the site. 
(7)  All landscaping shall be maintained pursuant to section 19.06.080. 
(8)  When a service station site is changed to another use, the pump island canopy shall be removed within one year from the date of issuance of the new business license; or the pump island shall be incorporated into a structural element approved by the planning commission. 
(9)  Should it be necessary to fence a site, the fencing shall include slats approved by staff. 
(10)  All vacant service station sites shall remain lighted during nighttime hours to prevent vandalism. 
(11)  Other remediation measures deemed necessary to remove nuisance factors, as determined by the planning commission. 
(12)  Any exceptions to the remediation measures shall be approved by the planning commission pursuant to chapter 19.30. 
(v)  Exempted stations. Electric vehicle charging stations installed as an ancillary use in conjunction with a primary use, including those installed as part of an environmental mitigation shall be exempt from the service station requirements. Design of ancillary structures (i.e., canopies and supports) for charging stations shall be integrated with the architectural design of the primary use (i.e., colors, finishes and materials). Exposed conduits and mounting hardware shall be concealed or painted to match the surface to which applied. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.06.070, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.06.080. - Landscape water conservation. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the City of Barstow "Landscape Water Conservation Ordinance." 
(b)  Purpose and intent. In accordance with Water Conservation in the Landscaping Act (Government Code § 65591 et seq.), the purpose and intent of this section is to: 
(1)  Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to utilize water and other resources as efficiently as possible; 
(2)  Establish a structure for designing, permitting, installing and maintaining water-efficient landscapes in new projects; 
(3)  Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for established landscapes; 
(4)  Implement procedures required to maximize the beneficial use of the available water resources to the extent capable and that the waste or unreasonable use or unreasonable method of use, of water, be prevented and the conservation of such water is to be extended with a view to the reasonable and beneficial use thereof in the interests of the people of the city; 
The community development director or his designee is authorized to implement the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Definitions. The words used in this section have the meanings set forth below: 
    Application rate means the depth of water applied to a given area, usually measured in inches per hour. 
    Applied water means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape. 
    Automatic controller means a mechanical or solid state timer, capable of operating valve stations to set the days and length of time of a water application. 
    Backflow prevention device means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
    Bubbler emitter. See definition of "Low volume irrigation systems." 
    Check valve means a valve located under a sprinkler head to hold water in the system so it minimizes drainage from higher elevations to downstream sprinkler heads. 
    City of Barstow means the City of Barstow, a municipal corporation. 
    Commercial refers to the purchase, sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, substance, service or commodity (except as included hereafter under "industrial") for profit or livelihood. 
    Corner lot. Both front and side-street yards shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
    Distribution uniformity means a measure of how evenly sprinklers apply water. The distribution uniformity low quarter (DULQ) measurement method utilized in the irrigation audit procedure is utilized for the purposes of this section. This section assumes an attainable performance level of 75 percent DULQ for spray heads, 80 percent DULQ for rotor heads and 85 percent DULQ for recreational turf grass rotor heads. 
    Drip emitter. See definition of "Low volume irrigation system." 
    Duplex means a building designed and used for occupancy by two families, both living independently of each other. 
    Electric automatic controllers refers to time clocks that have the capabilities of multiprogramming and multiple start times in order to control amount of water applied to landscaping. 
    Emission uniformity means a measure of how evenly drip and micro spray emitters apply water. The low quarter measurement method (EULQ) utilized in the landscape irrigation evaluation procedure is used for the purpose of this section. This section assumes 90 percent DULQ for drippers, micro sprays, and pressure compensated bubblers. 
    Established landscape means the point at which new plants in the landscape have developed roots into the soil adjacent to the root ball. 
    Establishment period means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape. 
    ET adjustment factor means a factor of 0.35 that when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. 
    Evapotranspiration or ET means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil surfaces and transpired by plants expressed in inches for a specific time. 
    Hardscapes means any inorganic decorative landscape materials, including but not limited to, stones, boulders, cobbles, pavers, decorative concrete and/or mulch, incorporated into an overall landscape design. 
    Hydrozone means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated. For example: A naturalized area planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation (once established) is a nonirrigated hydrozone. 
    Industrial refers to the manufacture, fabrication, processing, storage, reduction or destruction of material, or any other treatment to change the form character or appearance thereof. 
    Infiltration rate means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (inches per hour). 
    Institutional refers to a facility having public character such as a school, church or hospital. 
    Irrigation efficiency means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum irrigation efficiency for purposes of these regulations is 75 percent. 
    Landscape area means the entire parcel less the building footprint, driveways, and nonirrigated portions of parking lots including hardscapes, such as decks, patios and other nonporous areas. Water features (including pools and ponds) are included in the calculation of the landscaped area. Areas dedicated to edible plants, such as orchards or vegetable gardens, are not included. 
    Landscape documentation package means and includes: 
(1)  Information on annual irrigation program (with schedule) including timer based and ET controllers; 
(2)  Manufacturer information on component parts; 
(3)  System design information; 
(4)  Final planting and irrigation plan; and 
(5)  Water use application projection (water budget). 
    Landscape irrigation audit means a process to perform site inspections, evaluate irrigation systems and develop efficient irrigation systems. At a minimum, the audit shall be in accordance with the California Landscape Water Management Program as described in the Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook, the entire document which is hereby incorporated by reference. (See Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook, Department of Water Resources, Water Conservation Office, most recent version.) 
    Landscape plans means planting plans, notes, details and specifications as well as irrigation plans, notes, details and specifications. 
    Landscaping and/or landscaping improvements refers to plantings of turf grass, shrubs, trees or similar living plants, with minimal use of other ground surface treatment such as decorative rock, bark or stone. These inert materials are allowed to be used in conjunction with live material in planting beds, but do not count toward the calculations of required landscaping and/or landscaping improvements. 
    Low volume irrigation systems means appropriately designed irrigation systems that utilize low volume devices appropriate to the climatic and site factors. Such heads include micro sprinkler heads, drip emitters and bubbler emitters. 
    Low water use plant material means trees, shrubs and ground covers that survive with a limited amount of supplemental water, as identified by the Alliance for Water Awareness and Conservation (AWAC) or similar lists approved by the community development director or his designee. 
    Main line means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to a valve or outlet. 
    Maximum applied water allowance means, for design purposes, the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscape area as specified in division 2, title 23, California Code of Regulations, chapter 7 and section 702. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, ET adjustment factor and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. 
    Micro sprinkler. See definition of "Low volume irrigation systems." 
    Model home means a facility used exclusively for the promotion and sale of homes similar to the model. 
    Mulch means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw or inorganic material such as pebbles, stones, gravel and decorative sand or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation. 
    Multifamily dwelling means a building or buildings designed and used for occupancy by three or more families, all living independently of each other. 
    Native plants means plants that are: 
(1)  Indigenous to the desert region of California, Nevada and Arizona; 
(2)  Native to the southwestern United States and northern Mexico; and 
(3)  Low to minimal water users. 
    Overdraft means that wherein the current total annual consumptive use of water in the Mojave basin area exceeds the long-term average annual natural water supply to the basin area or sub-area. 
    Overspray means the water which is delivered beyond the landscaped area, wetting pavements, walks, structures or other nonlandscaped areas. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated association or any other similar entity. 
    Plant factor means a factor when multiplied by reference evapotranspiration, estimates the amount of water used by plants. For purposes of this section, the plant factor of very low water using plants ranges from 0.01 to 0.10, for low water using plants the range is 0.10 to 0.30, for moderate water using plants the range is 0.30 to 0.60 and for high water using plants the range is 0.60 to 0.90. Reference: Water use classifications of landscape species III (WUCOLS III). 
    Qualified professional means a person who has been certified by their professional organization or a person who has demonstrated knowledge and is locally recognized as qualified among landscape architects due to long time experience. 
    Recreation areas means public and institutional areas designed for active play or recreation such as sports fields, school yards, picnic grounds or other areas with intense foot traffic. 
    Reference evapotranspiration or ETo means a standard measurement of the environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants, using cool season grass as a reference. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month or year and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of cool season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as a basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances so that the regional differences in climate can be accommodated. 
    Rehabilitated landscape means any re-landscaping project that requires discretionary approval. Any re-landscaping project whose choice of new plant material and/or new irrigation system components is such that the calculation of the site's estimated water use will be significantly changed. The new estimated water use calculation must not exceed the maximum applied water allowance calculated for the site using a 0.6 ET adjustment factor. 
    Residential development means the development of any type of dwelling unit or units suitable or designed for human habitation, including, but not limited to, single-family homes, condominiums or manufactured homes, but not including hotels, motels, licensed convalescent homes, commercially operated retirement homes, time share units or the like. The term "Residential development" shall not include remodeling or reconstruction. 
    Right-of-way means land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for or dedicated to the general public for street, highway, alley, public utility or pedestrian walkway purposes. 
    Run-off means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the area. For example: Run off may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate), or when there is a severe slope. 
    Shall or must means an action which is mandatory. 
    Single-family dwelling means a detached building designed exclusively for the occupancy of one family. 
    Sprinkler head means a device which sprays water through a nozzle. 
    Station means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously. 
    Tract homes means five or more single-family residential units. 
    Turf means a surface layer of earth containing mowed grass with its roots. 
    Valve means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. 
    Water feature means any water applied to the landscape for nonirrigation, decorative purposes. Fountains, streams, ponds and lakes are considered water features. Water features use more water than efficiently irrigated turf grass and are assigned a plant factor of 1.1 for a stationary body of water and 1.2 for a moving body of water. 
    Water intensive landscape means an area of land that is watered with a permanent water application system and planted primarily with plants not referred to in the low water use plant list approved by the community development director or his designee. Included is the total surface area of all water features (i.e., swimming pools of any size, fountains, ponds, watercourses, waterfalls and other artificial water structures) filled or refilled with water from any source. 
    Water waste means any unreasonable or nonbeneficial use of water or any unreasonable method or use of water, including but expressly not limited to, the specific uses, conditions, actions or omissions prohibited or restricted by this section, as hereinafter set forth. 
    Zone means an area served by one valve, sometimes referred to as a station. 
(d)  Applicability. 
(1)  This section shall apply to landscaping for all new residential, commercial, industrial, institutional projects that require permitting. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to registered historical sites and ecological restoration projects that do not require permanent irrigation systems. 
(e)  Required approval for projects. No building permit shall be approved unless the community development director or his designee, finds that the landscape and irrigation plan satisfies the criteria set forth in this section. 
(f)  General requirements for new landscaping projects. 
(1)  The following are requirements applicable to all new landscaping projects: 
a.  Landscapes shall be designed in accordance with the city of Barstow Landscape Manual: 
1.  The drip irrigation details as outlined in the city of Barstow Drawing No. 118, as adopted by the city; 
2.  The water-efficient plant list as found in the city Landscape Manual, substitutions shall be approved by the planning director or duly appointed representative; and 
3.  The water conservation plan as outlined in chapter 13.40 of this Code. 
b.  The maximum slope of a turf area shall not exceed four to one or 25 percent. 
c.  Turf areas shall not be located within six feet of a street, curb, paved surface or sidewalk unless watered with subterranean drip irrigation. 
d.  No area of turf (unless watered with subterranean drip irrigation) shall have a width less than five feet unless adjacent to a planter bed or other landscape area which will catch overspray. 
e.  No water intensive landscape or turf (unless watered with subterranean drip irrigation) shall be permitted in any right-of-way. Low water use plant material shall be allowed. 
f.  Plant grouping and masses shall be incorporated, grouping plant materials together that have similar water requirements (this is called a hydrozone). 
g.  Any ponds, fountains or any similar water features shall use recirculated water. Reclaimed water may be used if available and/or feasible, and verification of limited public access is provided to the city. 
h.  The city shall make information prepared by the Alliance for Water Awareness (AWAC) available to new homeowners about designing, installing and maintaining water-efficient landscapes. 
i.  Recreational areas shall not be considered in calculating the percentage of the total lot area and shall not be considered in determining compliance with this section, but shall be subject to subsection (i)(4) (Water-efficiency in landscape irrigation and design). 
j.  Artificial turf/plant quantities are not limited. 
(2)  The following are additional requirements applicable to commercial, industrial, institutional, and multifamily development: 
a.  Tracts of 20 or more lots shall have at least one model home demonstrating a water-efficient landscape and have literature and/or brochures available explaining xeriscape landscaping and irrigation. 
b.  Provisions for the use of reclaimed water supplied through dual distribution systems, if feasible and cost effective, subject to the appropriate health standards, and if required in project review and approval by the planning commission and/or city council. 
c.  No slope adjacent to a parking lot shall exceed a four to one slope, to minimize potential run-off problems. 
d.  Decorative rock shall be utilized in lieu of ground cover in interior planter areas and shall not be utilized adjacent to streets and public sidewalks. 
e.  All landscape and irrigation shall be continuously maintained. Any faulty equipment or dying plant material shall be replaced with the same type of equipment or the same species of plant material originally approved. Any substitution shall require the approval of the planning director or duly appointed representative. 
(g)  Provisions for new landscapes. This section provides two approaches to conservation in new landscapes: the "Turf Limitation Approach" set forth in subsection (h) of this section and the "Water Budget Approach" set forth in subsection (i) of this section. All new landscapes shall conform to either subsection (h) or subsection (i) of this section, not both. 
(h)  Turf limitations approach. 
(1)  Residential. 
a.  Single/duplex dwelling. Landscaping shall be installed in the front yard of the residence. Landscaping shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Limit total area of water intensive landscaping/turf to not more than 30 percent of the landscaped area (up to a maximum of 900 square feet). 
2.  Use only low water use plants on all additional landscaped areas, or equivalent materials as approved by the community development director or his designee. Install low volume irrigation systems on these landscaped areas. 
b.  Multifamily dwelling. Water intensive landscaping shall be limited to ten percent of the first 9,000 square feet. Additional acreage of development over 9,000 square feet shall be limited to a maximum of five percent water intensive landscape/turf. 
(2)  Nonresidential. 
a.  The following types of facilities shall limit the water intensive landscape and turf within the landscaped area to the following percentages of the total lot area, and all remaining landscaped area shall consist of plants identified in Appendix A, as used as reference codified in this section. Turf areas shall not be located within six feet of a street, curb, paved surface or sidewalk if adjacent to a paved surface. Turf areas may be located within six feet of the aforementioned features if subterranean drip irrigation is used. The maximum slope of a turf area shall not exceed 25 percent or four to one. 
1.  Churches: 25 percent. 
2.  Resorts, including hotels and motels: ten percent of the total area. 
3.  Commercial, institutional and industrial uses: shall be limited to ten percent of the first acre and not more than five percent water intensive landscape/turf of any additional acreage. 
b.  Recreational areas shall not be considered in calculating the percentage of the total lot area and shall not be considered in determining compliance with this section, but shall be subject to subsection (i)(4) of this section (Water-efficiency in landscape irrigation and design). 
(3)  Processing procedures and submittal requirements. 
a.  For any development proposal, the applicant shall submit landscape plans, meeting the requirements listed below to the city. 
b.  Plans submitted for single-family residential development are not required to be prepared by a landscape architect. However, all landscape plans submitted by the applicant shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Plans must be at a reasonable scale to indicate all proposed improvements; 
2.  All landscape plans must contain the following minimum information: 
(i)  Name of applicant/owner; 
(ii)  The dates the plans are submitted and revised; 
(iii)  All existing and proposed buildings and other structures, paved areas, landscaped areas (including nonirrigated areas), power poles, fire hydrants, water meters, light standards, streets, street names, signs, fences, walls, water features (including pools and ponds), stormwater retention/detention areas and other permanent features to be added and/or retained on the site; 
(iv)  All property lines; 
(v)  Project information, including total square footage of the landscaped area, total square footage of the proposed turf grass area; 
(vi)  Existing protected trees including any vegetation identified in vegetation preservation plans, if required, to be preserved in place, indicated by botanical name and variety, common name, size and location; 
(vii)  Show all paved areas such as driveways, walkways and streets; 
(viii)  Show all pools, ponds, lakes, fountains, water features, fences and retaining walls; 
(ix)  Show an address or APN number to identify the property. 
If approved, the city will make an inspection of the completed project for compliance with the program before issuing a certificate of occupancy. 
(4)  Final planting plans shall contain the following minimum information: 
a.  The landscape plan shall indicate the name and location of all plants used. 
b.  All proposed lawn areas and ground cover areas shall be identified. 
(5)  Final irrigation plans shall contain the following minimum information: 
a.  The location and type of all sprinkler heads, including drip emitter configurations. 
b.  The location and type of irrigation controllers. Programmable controllers are required. 
c.  The size and type of all irrigation and emission lines. 
(6)  Systems must be designed and operated to maximize irrigation efficiency. 
a.  Sprinkler irrigation shall be scheduled to operate during the months of April through September, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. and during the remaining months of October through March, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to reduce water loss from wind and evaporation, and to avoid ice during winter months. Drip irrigation and subterranean devices shall not be subject to this water window. 
b.  Valves shall be scheduled for multiple repeat cycles, if necessary, to reduce runoff, especially on slopes and with soils with slow infiltration rates. 
c.  All zone run times shall be adjusted seasonally to accommodate landscape water needs or preferably the ET rate, exposure slope and soil types. 
d.  Turf and non-turf shall be irrigated on separate valves. 
e.  Drip emitters and sprinklers shall be placed on separate valves. 
f.  No single zone shall mix head types, such as rotors and pop-up spray heads on the same zone. 
g.  Plants with similar water requirements shall be grouped together. 
(i)  Water budget approach. 
(1)  Processing procedures and submittal requirements. 
a.  Projects will be required to submit a landscape documentation package including a water budget statement approved by the community development director or his designee. 
b.  As a condition of approval for any development proposal, the applicant shall submit landscape plans meeting the requirements listed below to the city. 
c.  All landscape plans submitted by the applicant shall meet the following requirements, or equivalents as approved by the community development director or his designee: 
1.  Plans must be at a reasonable scale to indicate all proposed improvements (minimum one inch equals 30 feet). 
2.  The drawings shall show zone number, valve size and gallons per minute (gpm), as well as point of connection, meter size, operating pressure, flushing devices, emitters and spray heads. 
3.  All must contain the following minimum information: 
(i)  North arrow and scale (including bar scale). 
(ii)  Name of applicant/owner. 
(iii)  The name, address and telephone number of the person or firm responsible for the preparation of the landscape plan. 
(iv)  The dates the plans are submitted and revised. 
(v)  All existing and proposed buildings and other structures, paved areas, landscaped areas (including nonirrigated areas), power poles, fire hydrants, water meters, light standards, streets, street names, signs, fences, walls, water features (including pools and ponds), stormwater retention/detention areas and other permanent features to be added and/or retained on the site. 
(vi)  Show a title block on each sheet with the name of the project, City of Barstow, name and address of the professional design company with its signed professional stamp if applicable. 
(vii)  Reserve a three-inch by six-inch space for a signature block on the lower right corner of the cover page and on all of the landscape, irrigation design/detail/specification sheets. 
(viii)  Existing or proposed elevations or contour lines at sufficient locations to clearly show the drainage pattern (or a copy of the grading plan). 
(ix)  All property lines and easements. 
(x)  Project information, including total square footage of the landscaped area, total square footage of the proposed recreational areas and total square footage of turf grass. 
(xi)  Existing protected trees including any vegetation identified in vegetation preservation plans, if required, to be preserved in place, indicated by botanical name and variety, common name, size and location. 
(xii)  Show all paved areas such as driveways, walkways and streets. 
(xiii)  Show all pools, ponds, lakes, fountains, water features, fences and retaining walls. 
(xiv)  Show location of all overhead and underground utilities. 
(xv)  Show total landscaped area in square feet. Separate area square footages by hydrozone. Show the total percentage area of each hydrozone. Include total area of all water features as separate hydrozones of still or moving water. 
(xvi)  Designate recreational areas and recreational turf areas. 
(xvii)  Show total maximum annual applied water budget allowance for the proposed project, the formula of which is approved by the community development director or his designee. 
If approved, the city will make an inspection of the completed project for compliance with the program before issuing a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Final planting plans shall contain the following minimum information or equivalents as approved by the community development director or his designee: 
a.  A table listing the plant material including the plant symbols, common and botanical names, sizes, spacing (if applicable), quantities and other remarks as appropriate to describe the plant selection. 
b.  The location of all plant material shall be shown on the plan at approximately two-thirds the mature size of the plant material. 
c.  All proposed lawn areas and ground cover areas shall be identified, including the types and amounts of living plant materials to be used and the size and depth of nonliving materials. The manner in which any lawn areas are to be established shall be included. 
(3)  Final irrigation plans shall contain the following minimum information or equivalents as approved by the community development director or his designee: 
a.  The location and type of all sprinkler heads, including drip emitter configurations. 
b.  The location and size of main line and lateral line piping. 
c.  The location and size of water meters. 
d.  The location of backflow prevention devices. 
e.  The location, size and circuit number of all valves. 
f.  The location and type of irrigation controllers. 
g.  A table including the manufacturer and a description of all parts used in the irrigation plan. 
h.  Details of the backflow prevention devices, valves, sprinkler heads, controllers, etc. 
(4)  Water-efficiency in landscape and irrigation design. New irrigation systems and improvements shall be designed to achieve water-efficiency. 
a.  Each valve shall irrigate a landscape with similar site, slope and soil conditions and plant materials with similar watering needs. 
1.  Turf and non-turf shall be irrigated on separate valves. 
2.  Drip emitters and sprinklers shall be placed on separate valves. 
3.  Bubblers shall be placed on a separate valve. 
4.  Plants with similar water requirements shall be grouped together. 
b.  Soil types, infiltration rate and slopes shall be considered in order to avoid runoff and overspray, where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks roadways or structures. Proper irrigation equipment, schedules and repeat cycles shall be used to minimize runoff. Spray zones shall run parallel to the slope to minimize runoff. 
c.  A minimum of three inches of mulch shall be applied to all exposed soil surface areas in new plantings. 
d.  Separate landscape water meters shall be installed for all projects except for single-family homes or any project with a landscaped area of more than 5,000 square feet. 
e.  A pressure-reducing valve shall be used when the static water pressure exceeds the pressure needed by the system by 15 pounds per square inch (psi). Pressure reducing valves can be installed within the project on the mainline or at the valve, if elevation changes require it. 
f.  Turf irrigation principles. 
1.  No single zone shall mix head types, such as rotors and pop-up spray heads on the same zone. 
2.  Uniform distribution shall meet 80 percent. 
3.  No sprinkler irrigation systems shall be installed in strips less than five feet wide. 
4.  Small areas (25 feet wide or less) shall be irrigated with fixed nozzle pop-up spray heads with matched precipitation nozzles. Nozzles shall be sized to provide head to head coverage. Heads shall pop-up a minimum of four inches in turf areas. Heads can be specified with pressure reducing features where needed. 
5.  Large areas (wider than 25 feet) shall be irrigated with gear driven rotor heads with a minimum precipitation rate of 1.45 inches per hour for a full circle head. Heads shall pop-up a minimum of four inches in turf areas. 
6.  Check valves shall be included in heads or valves where low head drainage will occur due to elevation changes. See irrigation head catalogue for elevation change tolerances. 
7.  Use of emerging water saving technology such as evapotranspiration controls and subterranean irrigation systems is highly encouraged. 
(5)  Irrigation control systems shall be employed that offer flexibility in programming as follows: 
a.  All irrigation systems shall include an electric automatic controller with multiple programs and multiple repeat and rest cycle capabilities and a flexible calendar program. 
b.  Each zone/valve shall have its own station on the controller. The exception is drip valves, which can be doubled on the controller. 
c.  Recreational areas are required to use ET controllers for irrigation. 
(6)  Systems shall be operated to maximize irrigation water-efficiency as follows: 
a.  Sprinkler irrigation shall be scheduled to operate during the months of April through September, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. and during the remaining months of October through March, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to reduce water loss from wind and evaporation, and to avoid ice during winter months. Drip irrigation and subterranean devices shall not be subject to this water window. 
b.  Valves shall be scheduled for multiple repeat cycles if necessary to reduce runoff, especially on slopes and with soils with slow infiltration rates. 
c.  All zone run times shall be adjusted seasonally to accommodate landscape water needs or preferably the ET rate, exposure slope and soil types. 
(7)  Irrigation schedules satisfying the following conditions shall be submitted as part of the landscape project tracking form approved by the community development director or his designee: 
a.  An annual irrigation program with monthly irrigation schedules shall be required for: 
1.  The plant establishment period; 
2.  The established landscape; and 
3.  Any temporarily irrigated areas. 
b.  For timer-based controllers include run time (in minutes per cycle), suggested number of cycles per day and frequency of irrigation for each station; and provide the amount of applied water (in hundred cubic feet, gallons or in whatever billing units the local water supplier uses) recommended on a monthly and annual basis. 
c.  For ET based controllers include essential details of the specific controller involved. 
d.  Water features shall be considered as high water zones. The total amount of water for irrigation, plus water needed for any water features, shall be combined in the total water budget. 
(8)  Certificate of project completion/landscape project tracking form. Verified completion of all elements on the landscape project tracking, as adopted by city council resolution, shall constitute a certification of project completion. 
(j)  Provisions for existing landscapes. 
(1)  Water management. All existing landscaped areas that are one acre or more in size, including, but not limited to, golf courses, cemeteries, green belts, common areas, multifamily housing, schools, businesses, parks and publicly owned landscapes shall be strongly encouraged to have a landscape irrigation audit at least once every five years. The audit shall be performed in accordance with the California Landscape Water Management Program as described in the Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook, by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. (See Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook, The Irrigation Association, most current version). 
(2)  Water waste prevention. The provisions of this section shall apply to all water users. The city shall encourage the reduction of water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways or structures. The city may, at the discretion of the planning department, require the property owner to conduct a landscape irrigation audit and make corrections to the landscape based on the findings of the water audit. The audit shall be performed in accordance with subsection A of this section. 
(k)  Low water use and California native plants. All landscape shall strive to maximize the use of native species. Where native material is not appropriate for the intended use or appearance, plant species that are regionally adapted and non-invasive may be used. A recommended plants list approved by the community development director or his designee is available at the city planning department. 
(l)  Prohibited water uses and water waste. It shall be unlawful for any water user to allow water waste at any location or premises within the jurisdiction of the city. Included but not limited to: 
(1)  Cause or permit any water furnished to any property within the city to run or to escape from any hose, pipe, valve, faucet, and sprinkler or irrigation device onto any sidewalk, street or gutter or to otherwise escape from the property. 
(2)  Wash driveways, sidewalks, parking lots or other hard surfaces by direct hosing except when necessary to prevent or eliminate risk of fire or contamination, which could result in a risk to public health and safety. 
(3)  Wash any vehicle, trailers, motor homes, buses, boats and mobile homes except from a bucket and except that from a hose equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle may be used for a quick rinse. 
(4)  Excess use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system. 
(m)  Public education. The city shall make available information about water-efficient landscaping to water users throughout the community. The city will also use public education to teach and assist water users in water conservation and the need for voluntary compliance. In addition to education, the city may use enforcement measures to curb water waste. 
(n)  Screening requirements. 
(1)  Motor vehicle parking spaces within an RM-2 development shall not be visible from view from public streets. Architectural walls, buildings, wing walls, or earthforms, a minimum of six feet in height, shall be constructed to screen these parking spaces. 
a.  Architectural walls are defined as decorative concrete, stone, brick, tile, or stucco, including combinations thereof (or equivalent masonry material) a minimum of four inches thick. The design of such walls shall be compatible with the architectural design of the project. 
b.  Where there is a difference in elevation between property zoned medium density and abutting property, section 19.06.030 shall be applicable. 
(2)  All nonresidential parking areas which abut a public street shall have an architectural wall 36 inches in height or equivalent screen composed of plant materials along the entire length of said parking area abutting a public street. Said wall shall be a part of or in conjunction with the landscaping planter strip. 
(3)  All outdoor living areas in residential developments (patios, rear yards) shall have an architectural wall a minimum of six feet in height along any portion of the outdoor living area that abuts any freeway, arterial, or collector street, as shown on the circulation element of the Barstow General Plan. The wall shall be located behind the required right-of-way in the case of single-family development, or along the setback line in the case of multiple-family development. Additional setback may be required by the planning commission if it is determined that additional landscaping is needed to support and enhance the landscape design. The design of any outdoor living areas above the ground level shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission. 
(4)  Trash enclosures. Bins for storage of trash and refuse shall be provided for all developments other than single-family residential. Said bins shall be screened by a steel-reinforced, decorative masonry wall a minimum of six feet in height. Trash enclosures shall be located outside of required setback areas. 
(o)  Penalties. 
(1)  For the first violation of any provision of this section, the city shall issue a written notice of first violation and provide the violator with educational materials on water conservation, including a copy of the relevant provisions of this section. The city shall give the water user a reasonable period of time to correct the violation. Failure to correct the violation within a reasonable period of time shall constitute a second violation. 
(2)  For a second violation of any provision of this section, the city shall issue a written notice of second violation to the water user imposing a fine in an amount not to exceed $50.00 and requiring immediate correction of the violation. 
(3)  For a third violation of any provision of this section, the city shall issue a written notice of the violation to the water user imposing a fine in an amount not to exceed $200.00 and requiring immediate correction of the violation. 
(4)  For a fourth or subsequent violation of this section, the city shall impose a fine in an amount not to exceed $500.00. The fourth and each subsequent violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance, which may be abated pursuant to the procedures provided in chapter 6.28 ("Public nuisances") of this Code. 
(5)  Any fine imposed under this section shall be collected in accordance with the procedures of chapter 6.30 ("Administrative Fines and Penalties") of this Code. Failure to pay any portion of a water user's account, including any fines imposed pursuant to this section, shall subject said account to termination of water service in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(6)  In addition to the remedies set forth above, the city may seize equipment, line, fountains and other devices, which are operated in violation of this section, until the fine is paid. The city may dispose of these items if the fine is not paid in six months from the date the equipment was confiscated. 
(7)  Right to hearing. Any water user against whom a penalty is levied under this section shall have a right to a hearing before the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(p)  Effective date. 
(1)  This section shall become enforceable as to tract homes, as that term is defined herein, 30 days after adoption of this section by the city council. 
(2)  This section shall become enforceable as to single-family dwellings, as that term is defined herein, 12 months after adoption of this section by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.06.080, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.06.090. - Alternative energy. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to address the increasing demand for alternative energy and reduce the governmental barriers to roof-mounted photovoltaic systems. Although most applications for alternative energy have been for residential installation of roof-mounted photovoltaic panels, other forms have been considered and proposed. In addition, this industry is frequently changing and may require regular amendment to this section to address new technological advances. The criteria established under this section are not intended to provide government barriers for other forms of alternative energy, but to minimize the risk (i.e., structural tower failure) and impacts (i.e., noise, glare) upon adjacent properties. 
(2)  In addition, this section addresses electrical charging stations for plug-in electric vehicles, and ensuring that adequate facilities are provided should residents wish to purchase such vehicles and businesses to provide charging stations for customers or for their own fleet use. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    AC Level 1 charging system means a system, typically 110-120 volts, that charges at a rate of two to five miles of range per hour of charging. 
    AC Level 2 charging system means a system, typically 220-240 volts, that charges at a rate of ten to 20 miles of range per hour of charging. 
    Concentrated solar energy systems means energy systems that utilize lenses and/or mirrors to concentrate the sunlight. The two most common types are listed below: 
(1)  Concentrated photovoltaic (CPV), which utilizes multiple small photovoltaic modules within a large panel with multiple lenses and/or mirrors. 
(2)  Concentrated solar system, utilizing ground-mounted mirrors that direct the sunlight to a fixed point in a tower that converts the thermal energy to electrical energy. 
    DC fast charging/DC Level 2 charging system means a system, typically 480 volts, that charges at a rate of 60 to 80 miles of range in 20 minutes of charging. 
    Decommissioning means the removal of a use from service, which includes safe storage, dismantling, disposal, recycling, removal of concrete pads, and/or site restoration. 
    Inductive charging system means a charging system that utilizes equipment that uses an electromagnetic field to transfer electricity to a plug-in electric vehicle (PEV) without a cord. Such systems typically operate at power levels comparable to an AC Level 2 system. 
    Solar energy systems means, for the purpose of this section, any solar collector device, or structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling; for domestic, recreational, therapeutic or service water heating; for the generation of electricity; for the production of process heat; and for the production of mechanical work. The term "solar energy system" shall include, but is not limited to, passive thermal systems, semipassive thermal systems, active thermal systems and photovoltaic systems. 
    Solar farm means a facility that is operated by a power producer and whose primary function is the provision of electricity to the electrical distribution system or transmission grid and produces electricity from a solar energy system. The area of the solar panels is in excess of the accessory use limitations allowed in subsection (c) of this section. 
    Wind generator includes, for purposes of this section, wind machines and similar accessory structures harnessing wind energy. For the purpose of this title 19, wind turbines, windmills, small wind energy system shall be considered a wind generator. 
(c)  Alternative energy technology standards. 
(1)  Wind generators as defined by subsection (b) of this section shall be permitted in accordance with subsection (d) of this section and subject to the provisions as provided herein. 
a.  The structure and all appurtenant equipment for all tower-mounted wind generators shall be located behind the primary building, not within the front or street side yard, and a minimum of 1.1 times the overall structure height from all property lines, but in no case shall it be less than 100 feet from any property line. Guy wires may encroach into the minimum setbacks, but shall not encroach over property lines. 
b.  The structure may need to be farther from the property lines based upon the required specifications regarding noise identified in subsection (c)(1)c of this section. 
c.  Specifications on the noise and vibration produced by the wind generator shall be submitted for wind generators within all zone districts, identifying the distance from the structure to the property line to meet the city's noise standards as identified in the General Plan. The wind generator shall be located so that it does not exceed the evening noise standard at any property line. A noise contour map shall be submitted as part of this submittal. Noise generation shall not exceed 60 dBA at any property line. The setback shall be increased should the manufacturers' specifications evidence that the wind generator would exceed the evening noise standard at any property line. 
d.  The height of tower-mounted wind generators shall be measured to the top of the blades or rotors or any other portion of the wind generator, which extends farthest above ground level. The blades and rotors of the wind generator shall be a minimum of 15 feet above ground level at the lowest point to ensure the safety of persons and property beneath. 
e.  Height. Roof-mounted wind generators shall not exceed 50 feet above the adjacent ground or the height regulation of the zone district, whichever is greater. Approval of a conditional use permit is needed to exceed the height restriction by up to ten percent and approval of a variance shall be required to exceed the allowed height beyond ten percent. The height shall be measured from the ground to the top of the blade/rotor or any other portion of the wind generator. 
1.  Roof-mounted wind generators pose a risk to emergency responders. Therefore, any roof-mounted wind generators shall be reviewed and approved by emergency responders to minimize potential safety risks. 
2.  Roof-mounted wind generators may generate vibrations that could cause structural damage to the roof and/or building. Vibration damping and structural engineering may be required. 
3.  ower or pole-mounted wind generators shall not exceed 80 feet in height, provided that the application includes evidence that the proposed height does not exceed the height recommended by the manufacturer or distributor. 
f.  ll wind generators shall be bright white or light off-white pursuant to FAA guidelines. Use of conspicuous colors is prohibited. Wind generators shall not contain signs or be illuminated, unless required by state or federal law. Minor informative signs (i.e., "High Voltage," etc.) used for the safety of emergency responders shall be permitted and must contain no advertisement. 
g.  Nothing in this zoning code amendment shall be construed to affect the structural requirements for any wind generator, as enforced by the building and safety division. All wind generators shall require issuance of a building permit prior to installation. 
h.  All mechanical equipment associated with the wind generator located outdoors shall be secured by a minimum five-foot high block wall to prevent unauthorized access. Ladders or step bolts on the side of towers shall be a minimum of nine feet above ground level or shall be equipped with an approved method to prevent unauthorized access. 
i.  Wind generators shall be equipped with manual and automatic controls to limit the operational speed of the blades/rotor to the design limits of the wind generator. An automatic braking, governing or feathering system shall also be provided to prevent uncontrolled rotation. 
j.  No wind generator shall cause any electromagnetic interference. 
k.  Wind generators shall be kept in good working order and shall be maintained in an aesthetic state. All wind generators which are in a nonoperational state for 180 consecutive days or more shall be considered abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed from the property at the owner's expense. 
l.  The system's turbine shall be approved by the California Energy Commission as qualifying under the emerging renewables fund of the commission's renewables investment plan or certified by a national program recognized and approved by the energy commission. 
m.  Standard drawings and engineering analysis of the systems tower, showing compliance with the California Building Standards Code (CBC), and certification by a professional mechanical, structural, or civil engineer licensed by the state shall be submitted with the building permit application. 
n.  Line drawings of the electrical components of the system shall be submitted with the building permit application. Said drawings shall include sufficient detail to allow for the determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National Electric Code (NEC). 
o.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the system will be used primarily to reduce on-site consumption of electricity. Evidence shall be submitted to the city that the electric utility service provider has been informed of the intent to install an interconnected customer-owned electricity generator. 
p.  A wind generator shall not be allowed where otherwise prohibited by any of the following: 
1.  Within any Alquist-Priolo earthquake fault zone. 
2.  An area considered as a scenic highway corridor designated pursuant to article 2.5 (commencing with section 260) of chapter 2 of division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code or as identified in the General Plan or an applicable area plan or community plan. 
q.  Aviation review. Prior to submittal of a conditional use permit, the applicant shall submit preliminary plans to the city. The city shall distribute copies of the proposed site plan, elevation plan, and location map to the aviation-related agencies and shall request comments within a minimum 30-day period. Aviation-related agencies to be consulted include but are not limited to, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Edwards Air Force Base and the Naval Air Weapons Station (NAWS) China Lake. Uses that potentially impact public safety, continued viability of the military training and/or testing operations, or physically obstruct any portion of the military installations and operations areas (MIOAs), shall not be approved unless mitigated to the satisfaction of the affected agency. Any and all costs for the review by other agencies shall be paid by the applicant. 
r.  A flashing red (type L-864/20 to 40 flashes per minute) or flashing medium intensity white (type L-865/40 flashes per minute) obstruction light shall be installed on the wind generator. 
(2)  Solar energy systems as defined by subsection (b) of this section shall be permitted in accordance with subsection (d) of this section and subject to the provisions as provided herein. 
a.  Solar systems are subject to compliance with the minimum setback and accessory structure lot coverage limitations. The area of a solar system is defined as the rectangular area of the solar panels for the purpose of determining accessory structure lot coverage. 
b.  Solar systems shall be kept in good working order and shall be maintained in an aesthetic state. All solar systems which are in a nonoperational state for 180 consecutive days or more shall be considered abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed from the property at the owner's expense. 
c.  Solar systems shall not contain signs or be illuminated, unless required by state or federal law. Minor informative signs (i.e., "High Voltage," etc.) used for the safety of emergency responders shall be permitted and must contain no advertisement. 
(d)  Alternative energy permitting requirements. In addition to required building permits, the following identifies permits that may also be required: 
Zone District Alternative Energy Technology Single-family residential, rural residential Multiple-family residential districts Commercial Districts 1 including the PF, DU, HS, and O districts Industrial and institutional districts 2 including agricultural 3 Tower/pole-mounted wind generator pursuant to subsection (c)(1) of this section Allowed as an accessory structure on parcels a minimum of five acres in size and if approved by a conditional use permit Not permitted Allowed as an accessory structure on a developed lot if approved by a conditional use permit application. A separation of 250 feet shall be required from any residential structure. Allowed as an accessory structure on developed lots if approved by a conditional use permit application. A separation of 250 feet shall be required from any residential structure. Roof-mounted wind generator Not permitted Not permitted Allowed as an accessory structure on a developed lot if approved by a conditional use permit application. Roof-mounted solar energy systems Limited to photovoltaic panels and solar water heating. Allowed as an accessory structure on a developed lot. Roof-mounted solar systems should, when practical and feasible, be designed to be parallel to the roof plane or integral to the roof material. Allowed as an accessory structure on a developed lot Ground-mounted solar energy systems Limited to photovoltaic panels. Shall be screened from public view and limited to the rear yard area. Allowed for parcels no less than one-half acre in size. City planner approval for parcels 9,000 square feet or greater provided no less than 1,000 square feet is available for recreational use adjacent to the rear of the residence. Limited to photovoltaic panels. Allowed as an accessory structure within the rear yard on a developed lot if approved by a conditional use permit application. Approval shall be subject to the determination that the configuration and location of buildings, orientation of the roof planes, tree locations, or other factors which negatively affect system efficiency, prevent installation on the roof. Allowed as an accessory structure on a developed lot if approved by a conditional use permit application. Limited to rear yard only. Solar farms including photovoltaic, concentrated photovoltaic (CPV), concentrated solar or parabolic mirror systems Not permitted Not permitted Permitted if approved by a conditional use permit. Limited to rear yard only. Permitted if approved by a conditional use permit. Plug-in or inductive electric vehicle charging Electrical permits required for Level 2 charging stations or any electrical installations required. Administrative approval required for incentives. Electrical permits required for Level 2 charging stations or any electrical installations required. Administrative approval required for incentives. Electrical permits required. Administrative approval required for parking reduction. Electrical permits required. Administrative approval required for parking reduction. 1. This includes similar commercial districts within specific plan and planned development districts. 2. This includes similar industrial and institutional districts within specific plan and planned development districts. 3. Agricultural uses are permitted in the industrial districts.  
For alternative energy systems not identified by this Code, a determination of use shall be required pursuant to subsection 19.30.030(p) (Conditional uses). 
(e)  Special applications. Special applications include the following: 
(1)  Passive solar water heating for use of heating pool water. Passive solar water heating used to heat pools that are imbedded in the concrete decking shall be permitted through the application of a building permit. Similar systems used to heat household water shall be permitted through the application of a building permit if the system is similarly integrated into concrete decking or roof-mounted panels parallel to the pitch of the roof. 
(2)  Concentrated photovoltaic systems. Concentrated photovoltaic systems (CPV) are systems that track the sun for optimal performance. However, they are also prone to complications as they consist of moving parts (two-axis sunlight tracking system). In addition, the installation of such systems can be hazardous due to the concentration of sunlight on a small area, thereby generating great heat. Therefore, great care must be taken when installing these systems. CPV systems are typically limited to commercial energy production systems known as solar farms or high energy demand uses, but are permitted subject to a conditional use permit, as noted in subsection (d) of this section. 
(3)  Concentrated solar systems. "Concentrated solar systems" are systems that include a series of mirrors that track the sun, typically focusing the sunlight directly onto a collector situated within a tower. This type of system generates great heat and is typically limited to commercial energy production. Like the CPV system, the tracking mechanism (two-axis) is prone to complications. 
(4)  Parabolic mirrors. "Parabolic mirror" systems are generally high maintenance due to the highly reflective surface impacted by dust and dirt. Many include a one-axis tracking system and are prone to complications. Parabolic mirror systems shall be limited to commercial energy production systems known as solar farms and permitted subject to a conditional use permit, as noted in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  Installation standards. 
(1)  Roof-mounted. 
a.  Photovoltaic systems are recommended for roof-mounted applications for single-family, multifamily, commercial and industrial installations. The photovoltaic panels should be mounted parallel to the roof pitch whenever practical and feasible. 
b.  Solar water heating systems that are roof-mounted are permitted in any zoning district provided that the system is mounted parallel to the roof pitch to which it is applied. 
c.  Setbacks for roof-mounted solar shall be pursuant to the latest adopted California Residential Code section R331-Solar Photovoltaic Panels/Modules for residential, and nonresidential shall be installed pursuant to the latest solar photovoltaic installation guidelines as adopted by the California fire marshal. 
(2)  Ground-mounted. 
a.  Ground-mounted systems (excluding solar water heating and concentrated photovoltaic systems) are classified as follows: 
1.  Commercial energy production: limited to systems that are for the sole purpose of selling energy to the utility companies. Said systems shall be located on a minimum of ten acres of land. Said system shall be screened from public view (off-site and public areas on-site). A conditional use permit is required. Erosion control measures shall be installed along the drip line of the panels to catch and disperse rainwater to minimize soil erosion. Such measures include a trench, no less than 12 inches deep and 12 inches wide, following the drip line filled with gravel. 
2.  Solar energy production for the sole use of the structures located on the same site as the solar panels (applicable to all zoning districts): pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. Erosion control measures shall be installed along the drip line of the panels to catch and disperse rainwater to minimize soil erosion. Such measures include a trench, no less than 12 inches deep and 12 inches wide, following the drip line filled with gravel. 
b.  Solar water heating integrated into concrete decking shall be permitted through the application of a building permit only. No other ground-mounted solar water heating shall be permitted, except through the approval of a conditional use permit and limited to industrial districts. 
c.  Concentrated photovoltaic/concentrated solar systems include mirrors and/or lenses that focus sunlight onto a small photovoltaic panel or other heat absorbing system. Typically, one system panel will include several small modules. This multimodule panel tracks the sun for optimal efficiency and may be 30 feet high or larger. Said systems shall be limited in installation and great care must be taken during the installation process to ensure the safety of the installers and surrounding properties due to the concentrated reflective properties. These systems shall be limited to remote locations and shall require a conditional use permit. These systems are typically associated with commercial electrical producers or large electrical users, not conducive to small business or residences at this time. 
(g)  Plug-in electric vehicle incentives. No part of this section shall be construed as a city requirement that land uses be equipped with electric vehicle charging capacity. Plug-in electric vehicles (PEV) shall be encouraged for in all new development as follows: 
(1)  New single-family residential development that includes an electrical raceway pursuant to section 106.6 of the latest edition of the California Green Building Standards Code adopted by the city for no less than one AC Level 2 (or equivalent) electrical charging station (i.e., dedicated circuit, raceway, etc.) that is consistent with the latest California Green Building Standards Code adopted by the city shall be accorded an incentive such as density bonuses, reduction in parking standards (i.e., carports in lieu of garages), reduction in setbacks, etc., as approved by the planning department. 
(2)  New multiple-family residential development that provides one AC Level 2 (or equivalent) electrical charging station (i.e., dedicated circuit, raceway, etc.), that are consistent with the latest California Green Building Standards Code adopted by the city, for each ten residential units shall be accorded incentives such as density bonuses, reduction in parking standards, reduction in setbacks, etc., as approved by the planning department. 
(3)  New commercial and industrial developments may be eligible for a parking reduction subject to the following criteria, as approved by the planning department: 
a.  Electric vehicle charging stations shall not supersede placement of required ADA parking spaces. 
b.  Parking may be reduced by up to two parking spaces for each electric vehicle charging station, not to exceed a ten percent reduction in overall parking. 
c.  Commercial centers utilizing electric vehicle charging stations shall utilize either AC Level 2 or DC Fast Charging (AKA, DC Level 2) technology, or latest charging technology available to charge no less than ten miles of range per hour of charging. 
d.  Industrial centers may utilize standard charging technology for employee parking, but shall utilize fast-charge technology (AC Level 2 or equivalent) for customer parking, when such stations are provided. 
(4)  Inductive (wireless) charging may be used in lieu of the plug-in systems for the charging of vehicles. The incentives available in subsections (g)(1) through (g)(3) of this section apply as applicable. 
(5)  Electric charging stations installed as an ancillary use to a primary use, including those installed as an environmental mitigation, shall be exempt from the conditional use permit process subject to the design criteria included in section 19.06.070(v). 
(h)  Decommissioning. In the event that the solar or wind energy generating system is not in operational condition for a consecutive period of six months, or ceased operation, operations for that use shall be deemed to have been discontinued. The code compliance department or planning department shall send written notice to the permittee advising of the discontinued use and require that the use be removed from the site within the time period specified below: 
(1)  Within six months after the written notice of discontinued use is sent to the permittee. 
(2)  Within the six-month period specified by subsection (h)(1) of this section, the permittee may provide the department with a written request and justification for an extension of up to six months to resume operations of the system. The director may approve one six-month extension. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.06.090, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.06.100. - Cellular communications facilities. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the siting of cellular communications towers and antennas. The goals of this section are to minimize potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas by providing guidance concerning their location, configuration and visual aesthetics. 
(b)  Locational criteria. Preferred locations for cellular communications towers shall include the following: 
a.  Public parks. 
b.  Private parks open to the public. 
c.  Public schools or private schools located on sites of at least five acres. 
d.  Churches located on sites of at least three acres. 
e.  Commercially designated properties of at least five acres in size. 
f.  Any industrially designated property. 
g.  Public facilities locations such as corporation yards, police or fire stations. 
    Cellular communications facilities placed upon or within such preferred locations shall be located in a manner so that the main structure on site is located between the facility and the main public right-of-way serving the site. Tower facilities proposed at locations other than those listed above shall require approval by the planning commission. 
(c)  Aesthetics. Cellular towers, antennas and related facilities shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  They shall be designed and placed in such a manner so as to be screened to minimize their appearance from surrounding properties and public rights-of-way. This shall include the color of the tower, antenna or related facility, the materials and textures of such tower, antenna or related facilities, and the materials or devices used to screen, conceal or blend the tower, antenna or related facility into or with the surrounding properties and development. 
(2)  At a tower site, the design of the related facilities shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings. 
(3)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(4)  Towers and antennas shall be designed and constructed to be stealth/camouflaged. The term stealth or camouflage shall mean the following: 
a.  The nature of design or construction do not draw undue attention to the structure; 
b.  Design and construction cannot clearly be distinguished from the general character of the area in which they are located; and 
c.  Design and construction do not cause a conflict with the appearance, character and aesthetics of the site upon which the facility is located, the surrounding properties or the general neighborhood in which they are located. 
(5)  Methods of achieving stealth/camouflage may include: 
a.  Ensure that physical design and construction are concealed within an architecturally designed feature/structure newly constructed on site, which matches or compliments the existing main structures on-site and in the surrounding area. 
b.  Locating the facility/tower and associated antenna/supporting equipment on or within an existing structure or building already on a site with no obviously distinguishable changes to that structure. 
c.  Mono-palms, mono-poles and mono pines are discouraged, but may be considered by the planning commission in the review of a conditional use permit application when the applicant can demonstrate the lack of a reasonable, available alternative consistent with the stealth/camouflaging above within the physical environment where the facility is proposed to be located. 
(6)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. 
(d)  Conditional use permit. Pursuant to chapter 19.30, a conditional use permit shall be required for all new or significant changes (pursuant to FCC Rule 6409(a)) are proposed for cellular towers and antennas. In addition to the requirements set forth in chapter 19.30, the following requirements must be met: 
(1)  All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. 
(2)  In granting a conditional use permit, the planning commission may impose conditions with specific consideration given to potential aesthetic impacts. 
(3)  A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning within 150 feet of the edges of the property on which the tower is proposed to be located shall accompany the permit application. 
(4)  Propagation maps shall be submitted reflecting coverage before the proposed facilities and after installation. 
(5)  Samples of the materials and design proposed for use to camouflage the proposed facility or blend it in with the surrounding area. 
(6)  Factors to be considered by the planning commission in reviewing the CUP application may include: 
a.  Height of the proposed tower; 
b.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
c.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d.  Impact of the tower(s) upon the present and reasonably foreseen future aesthetics of the site, adjoining properties and general vicinity of the site; 
e.  Design of the tower, including the equipment cabinet or structure, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
f.  Proposed ingress and egress; 
g.  Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures; and 
h.  Stealth and/or camouflaging techniques proposed. 
(e)  Colocation or modification of wireless facilities. The colocation of cellular communications facility is the locating of more than one cellular communications service (i.e., competing companies) on one tower, and is encouraged by the city to reduce the number of towers necessary within the city. This reduces the visual clutter and helps to preserve the views of and from the city. For the purpose of this chapter, the terms colocation, collocation and co-location shall be considered synonymous. 
(1)  The colocation or modification of wireless communications facilities shall be exempt from a conditional use permit provided that the expansion or modifications fall within the guidelines provided for within the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) Wireless Facility Rules, 6409(a). The basic guidelines indicate that the rule does not apply to leasing, and to be eligible, a facility must have been "approved" at least once. 
(2)  Application. An application shall be submitted to the City for the colocation or modification of a wireless facility. The applicant shall identify whether the project is applied pursuant to FCC Rule 6409(a) or 332(c)(7). Applicants seeking to collocate or modify an existing cellular communications site shall submit documentation whether Section 6409(a) requirements are met. The timelines of either FCC Rule 332(c)(7) or 6409(a) (as applicable) shall be followed for the approval/denial process. Wireless facilities pursuant to FCC Rule 106 (colocation on buildings or other nontower structures) may be exempt from a conditional use permit. 
(3)  Design elements. Any colocation or modification of a wireless facility shall incorporate the same concealment requirements as the original approved facility. In addition, any conditions of approval of the original application shall apply to the colocation and/or modifications. 
(4)  Structural integrity. The application for the colocation or modification of wireless facilities shall include structural calculations and shall be approved by the city engineer to ensure that the tower is capable of supporting the additional capacity or modifications to the facilities. This shall include but not limited to, deflection, wind load, etc. 
(f)  Installation standards. The installation of a new cellular communications facility, or modification to an existing facility, shall require the following standards as part of the installation: 
(1)  All operations of this use shall be in accordance with all federal, state and local laws and regulations, including all required permits and inspections. 
(2)  All towers shall be designed to structurally accommodate at least two antenna arrays and supporting equipment. This shall include but not be limited to, deflection, wind load, etc. 
(3)  At least one parking space shall be provided for any service vehicle. 
(4)  Parking shall be located within the access drive aisle easement for the telecommunications center. Said parking may be unimproved until such time that the site develops with a commercial, retail or industrial use. 
(5)  If the facility is unmanned, no trash enclosure or restroom shall be required. All trash generated by the maintenance of the facility shall be hauled away and disposed of legally by the maintenance crew. 
(6)  Any work lights along the perimeter of the enclosure shall be directed to confine light rays onto the property without encroaching onto adjacent properties or causing glare of pedestrian or vehicular traffic onto nearby streets. Light shields may be necessary to minimize glare. 
(7)  A sign posting an emergency contact number shall be placed on the access gate to the enclosure. Said sign shall be no larger than two feet high by three feet wide. 
(8)  The tower shall be camouflaged or architecturally enhanced to blend in with the surrounding development pursuant to section 19.06.100(c) above. A decorative block wall or other architectural treatment shall be used (as approved by planning department staff) for the enclosure when visible from a public street or adjacent residential property. 
(9)  Offsite improvements (including street, curb, gutter, driveways and sidewalk) may be necessary as part of the construction of the cellular communications tower. 
(10)  An improved access road shall be provided from the street to the telecommunications facility if one does not currently exist. The access road shall be a minimum of six inches of crushed aggregate base (CAB) a minimum of 26 feet wide for the pathway to the site. The CAB material shall be compacted to 95 percent relative compaction. 
(11)  The maintenance of any emergency backup generator shall be conducted between the daytime hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. to avoid creating a nuisance. In addition, sound and vibration attenuation measures shall be incorporated to minimize the impact on the nearby properties during times of emergency operation. 
(12)  The driveway shall be verified whether it meets Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards. Should the driveway not meet ADA standards, modifications or replacement will be required to bring the driveway into compliance. Should any work be required, an encroachment permit shall be necessary for any work to be completed within the street or public right-of-way. 
(13)  Should a driveway not exist, an ADA complaint driveway shall be provided for the access to the tower. Should an ADA compliant driveway be constructed, street improvement plans and an encroachment permit will be required as part of the driveway construction. Until such time that the entire site is developed and a hard-surface access is provided to the tower and block/fenced enclosure, an aggregate base as noted above in subsection (9) (or other material as approved by the city engineer) shall be provided from the driveway to the block enclosure. 
(14)  Approval is contingent upon applicant executing a lease agreement with the property owner for the project site. Construction may not commence until said agreement is fully executed. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.06.100, 7-20-2015; Ord. No. 946-2016, § 1(Exh. A), 2-16-2016 ) 
Sec. 19.06.110. - Special provisions. 
(a)  Distance between buildings in any residentially zoned districts. The distance between buildings located on the same parcel, including accessory structures, shall not be less than five feet. 
(b)  Zoning annexed areas. Any area annexed to the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein shall be prezoned by the planning commission. The commission shall recommend to the council appropriate districting of the land within 90 days after an application requesting a change has been filed with the commission. 
(c)  Architectural requirements. 
(1)  This section shall be applicable to all new single-family residential construction in any residential, DU and HS zoning districts. This criteria shall not apply to manufactured housing within mobile home parks. 
(2)  A review shall be performed by city staff on each residential unit for the following requirements: 
a.  A minimum 12-inch roof overhang is provided. 
b.  Roofing material shall be nonreflective, such as asphalt shingles, shake or wood shingles, rock or clay tile. Sheet metal roofing is not permitted. 
c.  Siding material shall be nonreflective; examples are stucco, approved masonite materials, and factory painted low gloss aluminum. Corrugated metal walls and vertical metal rib siding shall not be permitted. 
d.  The minimum roof pitch shall consist of no less than three inches rise for each 12 inches of horizontal run, unless the dwelling unit has a flat roof concealed behind a parapet. 
e.  Trim shall be provided around window and door frames and at gable ends, unless the dwelling unit has a stucco exterior. 
f.  All dwelling units shall be set on a permanent foundation compatible with the existing or anticipated foundation type within the neighborhood. All manufactured housing shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's specifications, subject to requirements of the state department of housing and community development (pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 18551). Details are on file with the building department. Wheels, axles and tongue shall be removed. Metal frame members shall be screened by concrete or masonry around the perimeter of the dwelling unit, a minimum of six inches and a maximum of 12 inches above adjacent finished grade. 
g.  All garages and/or carports shall be consistent and compatible with garages or carports constructed in the neighborhood. 
h.  The minimum dwelling unit width shall be 28 feet, measured from exterior wall to exterior wall. 
i.  All manufactured homes shall be constructed pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Corporation and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC 50401 et seq.) and shall not be more than ten years old at the time of application for installation. 
(3)  Dwelling units which do not comply with the above criteria may apply for review and approval by the planning commission (development permit application). 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.06.110, 7-20-2015; Ord. No. 945-2015 , § 1, 1-19-2016; Ord. No. 949-2016, § 1, 11-7-2016 ) 
CHAPTER 19.08. - DESIGN GUIDELINES 

Sec. 19.08.010. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Barstow Design Guidelines Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.08.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.08.020. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of these design guidelines is to complement the development guidelines for the various types of development found in this zoning code with respect to the design features of a given project. In addition, the purpose of these guidelines is to assist the developer in understanding the city's goals and objectives for high quality residential, commercial and industrial development, as described in the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.08.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.08.030. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to all new residential, commercial and industrial projects that require permitting. Some guidelines may not apply to a particular development because of insufficient size or scale. Where questions of applicability arise, the city planning office shall determine whether a specific provision does or does not apply. Additionally, some projects, such as minor alterations of land use, signage or building facades, may, at the discretion of the city planning office, be reviewed and approved administratively for their consistency with the design guidelines. Projects that entail expansion of built uses in excess of 50 percent of the existing built area or significant alteration of building and/or site features shall require design review and approval by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.08.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.08.040. - Review process. 
(a)  Administrative review. The following types of projects shall be reviewed administratively by the city planner or designee without the need for review by the planning commission: 
(1)  Residential remodels that entail expansion of less than 50 percent in the square footage of the home. 
(2)  Multifamily residential projects or remodels of four or fewer units. 
(3)  Minor subdivisions (four or fewer lots). 
(4)  Permitted commercial or industrial uses. 
(b)  Planning commission review. The following types of projects shall require review and approval by the planning commission: 
(1)  All proposed land uses that require a conditional use permit. 
(2)  Subdivisions of more than four lots. 
(3)  Multifamily residential projects of more than four units. 
(4)  Appeals of decisions made through the administrative review process. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.08.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.08.050. - Single-family residential design guidelines. 
(a)  Site planning. The following guidelines apply to the siting of single-family residences: 
(1)  Protect natural slopes, contours, ridgelines and other elevations. 
(2)  Preserve significant landscape features and patterns. 
(3)  Take into account existing sites and structures and be sensitive to the preservation of established vistas and view corridors. 
(4)  Lots one acre in area and larger shall utilize contour grading to blend into existing landforms, rather than severe cutting, filling, padding or terracing. 
(5)  Avoid steep cuts and minimize soil import or export, 
(6)  Avoid the creation of structures out of scale with their surroundings by not building up pads on artificial platforms to create or enhance views (unless warranted by flood risk factors). 
(7)  For infill and previously subdivided lots, minimize grading and site preparation to reduce erosion, soil exposure and minimize impacts on natural drainage courses. Except for activities required to extend access and infrastructure, and to provide for drainage, disturbance of a site shall be limited to 30 feet surrounding the building pad. 
(8)  Round and contour graded slopes to blend with the existing terrain. Native vegetation shall be retained and incorporated into the project wherever possible. Grading for building pads shall be sensitively designed to reduce disturbance and visual impacts. Split pad grading shall be utilized in place of excessive soil export/import to create a building pad. 
(9)  Minimize the removal of native vegetation. 
(10)  Separate and screen structures from each other to maximize privacy. 
(11)  Site single-family dwellings on a lot to respond to and to respect property views, site features, existing topography, and any adjacent existing development. 
(12)  Through lots or reverse frontage lots should be avoided. Tracts of single-family dwellings should not back onto local road rights-of-way and should front onto these local roads (except primary arterials). 
(13)  New single-family development in existing neighborhoods shall be compatible with the adjacent residences. Roadway improvements on infill lots in existing neighborhoods shall match roadway improvements of the two adjacent lots. 
(14)  Where ample room exists, circular driveway entries are preferred. Such driveways allow motorists to enter and exit the property in a forward motion. Garages may be detached and connected to the residence by a breezeway. 
(15)  Angled garages are encouraged to improve the streetscape by breaking up the monotony of all garage doors being parallel to the street. 
(16)  Xeriscaping should predominantly be used in all front yards, street side yards and in all parkway areas. Landscaping materials within parkway and common areas should be drought resistant, featuring native type plants and groundcover, and water efficient trees. 
(17)  Zero lot line residences and attached dwelling units are allowable in planned residential and mixed commercial/residential developments. Such uses shall provide courtyards and/or patios and shall be designed to provide larger, more functional open spaces between structures. 
(b)  Architectural design. The following guidelines apply to the design of single-family residences: 
(1)  Architectural style. While there is no particular architectural style required for single-family residential structures, the focus shall be on the development of a high quality residential environment. In selecting an architectural style, compatibility with the desert environment should be considered. Desert-appropriate architectural styles used to blend the dwelling unit into the natural desert environment are encouraged. In-fill development and exterior remodels shall utilize compatible materials as those of the surrounding residences, and as indicated in subsection (b)(4) below. 
(2)  Environmental design. Desert appropriate environmental design shall respond to the environmental conditions of the high desert by addressing sun, wind, heat and cold. Building and landscaping responses to the environmental conditions of the city's desert climate which provide shelter and relief from sun and wind, such as broad overhangs, entry treatments and arbors, are strongly encouraged. Building designs shall minimize the need for mechanical heating and cooling as required by the latest adopted Building Energy Guidelines or California Energy Code. 
(3)  Architectural diversity. In order to achieve diversity and to promote a lively and varied visual setting in the city's residential neighborhoods, new housing developments shall provide a range of floor plans and elevations as enumerated below: 
Minimum Floor Plans Minimum 
Elevations Fewer than 40 units Three plans Six elevations 40 to 100 units Four plans Eight elevations More than 100 units Five plans Ten elevations  
(4)  Building materials. Stone, brick, masonry, stucco, adobe and smooth plasters are required when such architectural treatments are used upon the main structure on site. Metal or aluminum siding, reflective materials and finishes, and unfinished concrete block should be avoided unless they are necessary as a part of an established or common architectural style upon review and approval of the planning commission on a case-by-case basis through a development permit. 
(5)  Building articulation. 
a.  Recessed windows and doors are encouraged to add articulation to the wall surface. Particular attention should be given to the shading of windows with southern and southwestern exposure. 
b.  A variety of heights, setbacks, roof shapes, trim, and sizes shall be used to create visual complexity within a cohesive design. 
c.  Broad roof overhangs are recommended to produce interest and to respond to climatic conditions, especially when used in combination with courtyards, porch enclosures, balconies and recesses. 
(6)  Front privacy walls/recessed entryways (this section supersedes section 19.06.030 where applicable). Front privacy walls finished to match the residence are encouraged. Such privacy walls can be utilized to define private space and act as a border between the natural desert landscape and intense use areas. Said privacy walls should not exceed six feet in height and shall be set back from the front and street side yard (for corner lots) a minimum of ten feet. Recessed entryways and other shade and wind mitigating devices (arbors, patio covers, courtyards, porches) which shelter the user from the natural elements are also encouraged. 
(7)  Additional architectural guidelines for attached and zero lot line units. In addition to the architectural design guidelines for single-family dwellings, the following design guidelines shall apply to attached single-family dwellings and zero lot line homes: 
a.  Single-family attached dwellings should be architecturally articulated to project an image of customized homes. Preferred configurations include architectural treatment either as a large custom single-family unit or as individually articulated dwellings such as traditional row houses, providing relief of large building expanses with the use of architectural features and building color changes. 
b.  Adjacent driveways shall be separated by a planting strip. 
c.  Dwellings with driveways less than 20 feet in length shall be provided with automatic garage door openers to prevent cars parked in the driveways from obstructing pedestrian movement on sidewalks. 
(8)  Roofing materials. Composition and rock (only when the roof pitch does not support composition) roofs are permitted. Metal roofing materials simulating traditional "S" shaped or flat tile roofing material simulating shake roofing material (if consistent with surrounding homes), shall be permitted. All other exposed metal material used for roofing may be reviewed and approved by the planning commission on a case-by-case basis as follows: 
a.  The planning commission shall determine that the proposed roofing material is consistent and compatible with and complimentary to the architectural and aesthetic character of the home upon which the roofing shall be placed, and consistent and compatible with and complimentary to the architectural and aesthetic character of the surrounding residential homes. Upon such determination, the commission may approve said roofing material. 
b.  If, however, the commission determines that the proposed roofing material is not consistent and compatible with and complimentary to the architectural and aesthetic character of the home upon which the roofing shall be placed, and consistent and compatible with and complimentary to the architectural and aesthetic character of the surrounding residential homes, the commission shall not approve said roofing material. 
(9)  Accessory structures. The design of accessory structures (greater than 120 square feet) including second units, garages, guesthouses, cabanas and storage buildings shall be architecturally compatible with the primary structure through the use of compatible building materials, walls/roofs/trellises, fence/wall connections and/or landscaping. Size is limited to one-half that of the primary residence; building heights and setbacks shall be the same as the requirements for primary residences. 
(10)  Mechanical equipment. Any equipment, whether on the roof, side of the structure or ground, should be screened from public view from adjacent property or from a public right-of-way. In new developments, the method of screening shall be integrated into the architectural design of the building and/or landscaping. In existing developments the method of screening shall be architecturally compatible with the structure on which it occurs in terms of materials, color, shape and size. 
(11)  Vents, gutters and downspouts. Roof flashing, rain gutters, downspouts, vents and other roof protrusions shall be finished to match the roof or facade materials and/or colors which provide the background. 
(12)  Walls and fences. Fencing requirements shall remain flexible, but installations shall take advantage of the natural features of the site, such as topography and vegetation whenever possible. 
a.  Closed privacy fencing should be limited to the immediate area around the home or outbuildings. 
b.  Vinyl or wooden fencing shall be designed to withstand high winds and harsh sunlight. 
c.  Large courtyards created by extending building walls with architectural walls similar to building walls providing private outdoor open space are strongly encouraged. 
d.  Property line walls and fences adjacent to streets shall be constructed of decorative materials such as vinyl or wood rail fencing, split face block or slump stone. Such fencing shall incorporate appropriate decorative enhancements such as caps or pilasters. 
e.  Chain link fencing in the front yard or abutting a street side yard of a corner lot should be avoided. 
(c)  Grading, drainage and stormwater runoff. 
(1)  Individual parcels shall be graded in such a way as to direct runoff away from buildings and into drainage facilities. 
(2)  Grading and the use of meandering berms within the streetscape shall be coordinated with development pad location and landscaping. 
(3)  Peak stormwater pass-through runoff shall be reduced by at least 10 percent from existing conditions prior to development. The design storm event shall be a 100-year storm. 
(4)  The planned stormwater runoff occurring after development shall be in such a manner that no increase in potential adverse impacts to downstream properties will occur. 
(5)  The maximum slope within any retention/detention basins shall be 4:1. 
(6)  All residential lots shall be graded to prevent cross-lot drainage. 
(7)  Whenever a slope condition is proposed, the top of the slope should be placed to be within the lower lot. If this cannot be achieved, a retaining wall may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.08.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.08.060. - Multifamily residential design guidelines 
(a)  Site planning. The following guidelines apply to the siting of multifamily residences: 
(1)  Multifamily residential developments shall be sited to respond to and respect property views, site features, existing topography, dwelling unit privacy and any adjacent existing development. 
(2)  Site grading shall recognize existing natural landforms and drainage patterns (where appropriate) by providing an appropriate transition of architectural elements to grade. 
(3)  Orient buildings to create a residential streetscape while providing access and partial views from dwelling units to natural features, landscaped open space, recreational amenities or landscaped parking areas. 
(4)  Neighborhood compatibility. New multifamily residential development shall relate to adjacent single-family residential districts in the following ways: 
a.  By stepping down the scale, height, and density of buildings at the edges of the development when surrounding neighborhoods are of lower density or smaller scale. Step the building down at the ends or sides nearest the single-family unit to a height approximately equal to that of the adjacent single-family residence (or of typical single-family residences in the vicinity if adjacent to an undeveloped single-family zoning district). 
b.  By incorporating architectural elements and materials that are similar to those used in the neighborhood. 
c.  By including a front yard that is similar to a single-family residence. 
d.  By locating parking areas within the project interior or at the side or back when necessary to achieve the "residential front yard" appearance. 
(5)  Maximize privacy for all residents by locating general pedestrian circulation away from living room and bedroom windows. 
(6)  The principal vehicular access into a multifamily development shall be through an entry drive free from parking for the first 30 feet. Colored, textured paving (i.e., interlocking pavers) treatment at entry drives is encouraged for projects up to 20 units and required for projects in excess of 20 units. 
(7)  Projects in excess of ten units shall include an entry statement consisting of at least two of the following elements: 
a.  Hardscape structure (trellis, decorative, low garden wall with berm, guardhouse, decorative gate); 
b.  Specimen landscaping (large, distinctive vegetation) or mature trees, either flowering or native trees, or 24-inch box trees; 
c.  Large boulder groupings; 
d.  Water saving and easy maintenance fountains; 
e.  Textured or stamped concrete or pavers; 
f.  Monument signage with accompanying landscaping; or 
g.  Other comparable installations. 
(8)  Building groups shall be clustered to provide views into the development from the outside; to provide views from the individual units to mountains, vistas, and adjacent neighborhoods; and to achieve a pleasing streetscape and visual variety at the perimeters of the development through variation in building siting, massing, orientation and landscaping. 
(9)  In multibuilding developments, pedestrian paths shall be provided to connect buildings in the development with one another, on-site amenities and adjacent streets pursuant to subsection (a)(12) of this section. 
(10)  On-site parking. 
a.  In general, parking areas should be visible from and convenient to the residential units that utilize them. 
b.  The location of parking and drives shall minimize conflict between pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
c.  At least one landscape or shade tree shall be provided for every ten parking spaces. 
d.  Provide landscaped planters in parking areas to break up expanses of pavement. 
(11)  Garages/carports. 
a.  Garages with parking aprons less than 20 feet in length shall have an automatic garage door opener. 
b.  Incorporating carports into exterior project walls adjacent to streets shall be discouraged. Any garages integrated into the exterior project walls adjacent to streets shall be constructed to resemble residential structures including false windows, trim, offsets, and other treatment to minimize the appearance of a garage. 
c.  Provide a visual buffer between the fronts of carports and residential units by use of planting screens and/or architectural features. 
d.  Provide landscaping on exposed sides of carport or garage structures. 
(12)  Pedestrian/bicycle paths. 
a.  In multifamily developments with three or more buildings, pedestrian paths to facilitate circulation between buildings shall be provided. 
b.  Paths shall be clearly defined with lighting, landscaping or contrasting paving materials. 
c.  Onsite pedestrian and/or bicycle paths shall connect the development to the citywide bicycle and pedestrian circulation network where a project is adjacent to the network. 
(13)  Landscaping (this section supersedes section 19.06.080 where applicable). 
a.  All areas not covered by structures, drives, parking or hardscape shall be landscaped. 
b.  A minimum of ten percent of the site shall be landscaped. 
c.  Landscaping shall include vertical elements such as trees and tall shrubs in addition to groundcover. 
d.  Although lawns and other high water use forms of landscaping are permitted in limited quantities, xeriscaping (i.e., drought-resistant landscaping) should be the primary form of landscaping employed. 
(14)  Lighting. All on-site lighting shall be designed to meet the following guidelines: 
a.  Lighting shall be stationary and directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. 
b.  Lighting fixtures shall be of a type and shall be located such that no light or reflected glare is directed off-site. 
c.  All garages, walkways, and driveways shall be lighted during the hours of darkness. 
d.  Low-rise (maximum 15-foot height), pedestrian scale lighting shall be employed within common open space areas. 
(15)  Utilize lighting and defensible space design principles to maximize resident and visitor security. 
(16)  All other lighting shall be consistent with section 19.06.010 (Outdoor lighting). 
(b)  Architectural design. The following guidelines apply to the design of multifamily residences: 
(1)  Compatibility with surrounding neighborhood character, including building style, form, size, color, materials and rooflines, shall be considered. 
(2)  Desert-appropriate architectural styles shall be used to blend the development into the natural desert environment to the greatest extent possible. Desert-appropriate styles will respond to desert conditions such as sun, wind, heat and cold. 
(3)  Building and landscaping features that provide shelter and relief from the sun, wind and other elements of the community's desert climate are strongly encouraged. Such features may include broad overhangs, sheltered entry treatments, arbors and screen walls. Courtyard concepts offering shelter from wind and providing outdoor open space are especially encouraged. 
(4)  Building designs should minimize the need for mechanical heating and cooling as required by the latest adopted Building Energy Guidelines or California Energy Code. 
(5)  Architectural unity and variation. Within multifamily developments containing several buildings, a common architectural theme among the buildings must be evident so that a unified image is presented. Within the unified image, each building should contain some identifying features setting it apart from other buildings in the development so that occupants can readily identify their building. Such identifying features may include: 
a.  Variations in trim color; 
b.  Distinctive entries; 
c.  Variations in building footprints, for example, by altering the number of units provided in each structure; and 
d.  Variations in building embellishments or architectural details. 
(6)  Blank end walls are not allowed. Instead, end walls shall be given some form of articulation or architectural treatment or be substantially screened by densely planted trees or fast growing creeping vines. 
(7)  Long barracks-like multifamily structures shall be avoided through the use of separations, changes in roof plane, horizontal offsets, and the inclusion of elements such as balconies, varied floor elevations, awnings, porches and patios. 
(8)  Any equipment or utility service areas, whether on the roof, side of the structure or ground, shall be screened from public view from adjacent property or from a public right-of-way. The method of screening shall be architecturally integrated and compatible with the structure on which it occurs in terms of materials, color, shape and size. 
(9)  Solar panels. 
a.  Where utilized in new multifamily developments, solar panels should be integrated into the design of the roof and the frames of solar panels should be colored to match the roof materials. Any appurtenant mechanical equipment shall be enclosed and completely screened from view. 
b.  When adding solar collectors to an existing building, coordinate solar collectors with the building architecture to the maximum extent possible. Coordinate any new structures not located on the roof with the building architecture by using colors and materials similar to those used in the existing building. 
(c)  Grading, drainage and stormwater runoff. 
(1)  Individual parcels shall be graded in such a way as to direct runoff away from buildings and into drainage facilities. No cross-lot drainage shall be permitted. 
(2)  Grading and the use of meandering berms within the streetscape shall be coordinated with development pad location and landscaping to screen parking areas. 
(3)  Peak stormwater pass-through runoff shall be reduced by at least ten percent from existing conditions prior to development. The design storm event shall be a 100-year storm. 
(4)  The planned stormwater runoff occurring after development shall be in such a manner that no increase in potential adverse impacts to downstream properties will occur. 
(5)  The maximum slope within any retention/detention basins shall be 4:1. 
(6)  Whenever a slope condition is proposed, the top of the slope should be placed to be within the lower lot. If this cannot be achieved, a retaining wall may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.08.060, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.08.070. - Commercial development design guidelines. 
(a)  Unifying theme. Commercial development projects in excess of five acres shall be encouraged to incorporate a unifying design theme in order to provide differentiation between different commercial areas within the city, thereby avoiding the homogenization that characterizes most modern urban development. Themes should be consistent with the historical and cultural identity of the community, serving to strengthen and build upon Barstow's distinctive character. Possible design themes for commercial development projects may include Route 66, the Old Spanish Trail, railroading, the desert environment or other attributes of the community and surrounding area that lend themselves to being featured as part of the design of a commercial area within the city. 
(b)  Site planning. 
(1)  Significant topographical, visual, natural or geologic features of the site, where in evidence, should be preserved and enhanced. 
(2)  Building footprints shall be varied throughout a site plan. 
(3)  Buildings shall, wherever practical, be placed close to the street to create a more attractive streetscape, ensure privacy of adjacent uses, and minimize the visual impact of large areas of pavement or parking from public streets. 
(4)  Buildings shall be clustered to optimize on-site open space and create opportunities for plazas and pedestrian circulation. 
(5)  Arrangement of structures, landscaping and hardscape shall create view corridors into projects while establishing a sense of arrival and place. 
(6)  Buildings shall be sited or arranged so as not to encroach on any utility, public, or private easements. 
(7)  Curb cuts shall be kept to a minimum and driveways between parcels shall be shared whenever possible. 
(8)  Coordinated site design (including shared parking, driveways and circulation, sign facilities, landscaped areas and garbage collection areas) shall be encouraged on adjacent parcels with similar uses. Such coordination will typically involve (mutual access) rights-of-way over all participating properties or reciprocal easements and mutual access agreements. 
(9)  Adjacent parking lots shall be connected whenever possible to minimize conflicts along streets. Reciprocal access and parking for adjacent uses shall be provided. 
(10)  All trash, loading and service areas shall be screened from public rights-of-way and adjacent residential uses or districts. Loading areas shall be located to the rear of the site and service bays shall be oriented away from public rights-of-way and adjacent residential uses or districts. 
(11)  Physical barriers (e.g., fences, walls, curbs) between adjacent parcels with similar uses shall be avoided unless necessary for security purposes. 
(12)  Street addresses shall be conspicuously displayed along the street frontage, visible from the street and illuminated during evening hours as required under section 12.20.060 of this Code. 
(c)  Grading, drainage and stormwater runoff. 
(1)  Site grading and disturbance shall be minimized. 
(2)  The site plan shall be designed to integrate the development into existing topography and natural vegetation as much as possible. 
(3)  Individual parcels shall be graded in such a way as to direct runoff away from buildings and into drainage facilities. No cross-lot drainage shall be permitted. 
(4)  Whenever a slope condition is proposed, the top of the slope shall be placed to be within the lower lot. If this cannot be achieved, a retaining wall may be necessary. 
(5)  Grading and the use of meandering berms within the streetscape shall be coordinated with development pad location and landscaping to screen parking or loading areas. 
(6)  Peak stormwater pass-through runoff shall be reduced by at least ten percent from existing conditions prior to development. The design storm event shall be a 100-year storm. 
(7)  Where feasible, retention/detention basins shall be designed as dual use facilities. 
(8)  The maximum slope within any retention/detention basins shall be 4:1. 
(9)  Retention/detention basins should be extensively if not completely landscaped; conceptual landscaping plans shall be included with the discretionary permit application. Detailed landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted to the planning department for review and approval. 
(d)  Circulation. 
(1)  Separate vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems shall be provided. Pedestrian linkages between uses in commercial developments shall be emphasized, including distinct pedestrian access from parking areas in large commercial developments, such as shopping centers. 
(2)  Site access from major roads should be minimized. Where no alternatives exist, turning lanes shall be provided. 
(3)  Corner lots with frontage on both major and secondary or local streets shall concentrate access on the secondary or local street wherever possible. 
(4)  The location of curb cuts shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer. 
(5)  Access and parking reciprocity between parcels shall be accomplished whenever feasible to reduce the number of curb cuts and potential conflict points along streets. 
(6)  Bricks, pavers or decorative stamped concrete should be employed to accent and highlight street entries, corners, pedestrian walkways in parking areas and plaza or focal areas. 
(7)  Parking areas shall be designed so that pedestrians walk parallel to moving cars. The need for pedestrians to cross parking aisles shall be minimized. 
(8)  Pedestrian walkways shall be provided on both sides of major, secondary and local commercial streets and shall connect developments to one another as well as to adjacent land uses. 
(9)  On-site pedestrian walkways shall be provided for customers to walk safely from parking and street sidewalk areas to the central use area. 
(10)  Pedestrian walkways shall be delineated through the use of textured paving and/or concrete pavers, landscaping, trellises and other hardscape features. 
(11)  Pedestrian walkways shall connect developments through open space areas whenever possible. 
(12)  Separations between bicycle and pedestrian circulation shall be provided whenever possible. 
(13)  Reductions in required parking spaces (not to exceed 20 percent of total required parking) will be considered in exchange for design features such as bicycle racks, demarcated pedestrian pathways, electric vehicle charging facilities and public art. 
(e)  Landscaping (this section supersedes section 19.06.080 where applicable). 
(1)  Landscaping shall consist of native or drought-tolerant plants capable of surviving the desert environment and climate with a minimum of maintenance and supplemental watering. Other plants may be considered on their merits in addressing this criterion. 
(2)  Landscaping, meandering earth berms, decorative walls and other buffers shall be used to define project boundaries and to reduce impacts on adjacent properties. 
(3)  Individual developments shall integrate on-site landscaping with the streetscape landscaping in the project vicinity. 
(4)  Landscaping shall be used to break up uninterrupted building mass, expanses of paved surfaces, frame views, and connect development on adjacent pads. 
(5)  A minimum of one tree planting shall be provided for every 30 linear feet of street and access drive frontage with trees informally clustered and grouped. At least one-third of all required trees shall be a minimum 24-inch box size. 
(6)  Landscaping trees shall be distributed throughout parking areas in islands and fingers between parking spaces to shade parking areas and reduce the accumulation and radiation of heat from large paved areas. A minimum of one landscaped island or finger containing a tree or trees per ten parking spaces shall be provided. 
(7)  Driveways perpendicular to streets shall have triangular shaped extended landscape areas, with one side running along the driveway and one side running along the street right-of-way, each measuring 30 feet. This will create areas for enhanced landscaping and monument signs; within these areas a clear sight triangle of ten feet shall be maintained. 
(8)  Accent trees and vegetation shall be used as identity plantings at major entries and intersections and shall be used to highlight key features such as entry monument signs or hardscape elements. 
(9)  Project entry statements consisting of hardscape elements shall be provided with all commercial developments. The entry statement may include but shall not be limited to: 
a.  Enhanced landscaping treatment. 
b.  Enhanced monument signage. 
c.  Boulder groupings. 
d.  Decorative entryway. 
e.  Exposed aggregate or stamped concrete. 
f.  Berm/low decorative wall. 
(10)  Commercial projects larger than five acres in size are advised to include a hardscape element that creates a focus for the development and creates a usable public open space amenity such as a plaza or arbor facility. Appropriate hardscape elements shall include but not be limited to plaza areas, arbor or patio facilities, courtyards, atriums and outdoor gathering and eating areas. Hardscape shall relate individual buildings to an overall theme of the project area. 
(11)  Enhanced paving treatments shall be used for major entries into the site and intersections to highlight key areas of the streetscape. Such treatments shall be located at building entryways, plaza areas and courtyards, pedestrian approaches to buildings, and on-site crosswalks, driveways, and passenger drop off areas. 
(12)  Ancillary structures and service areas such as trash enclosures or loading areas shall be screened from public streets and adjacent properties through a combination of landscaping and walls. 
(13)  All outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, whether rooftop, side of structure, or on the ground, shall be hidden from view by architectural elements designed to be an integral part of the building. Plans submitted shall include the locations and elevations of all outdoor equipment. 
(14)  Unless required for a specific screening or security purpose, walls ought to be avoided within commercial areas. Walls shall be kept as low as possible while still performing their screening or security function. 
(15)  Long expanses of wall surface or fence surface shall be offset and architecturally designed to avoid monotony using features such as landscaped pockets. 
(16)  Retaining walls of more than 120 square feet shall be constructed of finished decorative material which is compatible with the primary material used on the main building. 
(17)  All lighting used in parking lots for security purposes or safety-related uses shall be designed in such a manner that the light is directed away from streets and adjoining properties pursuant to section 19.06.010 (Outdoor lighting). 
(18)  Lighting guidelines and fixtures should be of a design compatible with the architecture of on-site buildings. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.08.070, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.08.080. - Industrial development design guidelines. 
(a)  Site planning. 
(1)  Buildings shall be sited to complement existing buildings and landscape, the shape of the parcel, and natural conditions such as topography and significant vegetation. 
(2)  Building footprints should be varied throughout the site, but not to the detriment of the feasibility of the proposed use. Repetitious or continuous expanses of rectangular buildings should be avoided in favor of varied and articulated footprints. 
(3)  Buildings shall be sited so that main pedestrian entrances are generally oriented toward the driveway (parking circulation area). Visitor parking shall be located outside of any fenced area. 
(4)  Buildings shall be sited or arranged so as not to encroach on any utility, public, or private easements. 
(5)  All trash, loading and service areas shall be screened from public rights-of-way and adjacent residential uses or districts. 
(6)  Street addresses shall be conspicuously displayed along the street frontage, and visible from the street and shall be consistent with section 12.20.060 of this Code. 
(b)  Grading, drainage and stormwater runoff. 
(1)  Individual parcels shall be graded in such a way as to direct runoff away from buildings and into drainage facilities. No cross-lot drainage shall be permitted. 
(2)  Whenever a slope condition is proposed, the top of the slope shall be placed to be within the lower lot. If this cannot be achieved, a retaining wall may be necessary. 
(3)  Grading and the use of meandering berms within the streetscape shall be coordinated with development pad location and landscaping to screen parking or loading areas. 
(4)  Peak stormwater pass-through runoff shall be reduced by at least ten percent from existing conditions prior to development. The design storm event shall be a 100-year storm. 
(5)  The planned stormwater runoff occurring after development shall be in such a manner that no increase in potential adverse impacts to downstream properties will occur. 
(6)  The maximum slope within any retention/detention basins shall be 4:1. 
(c)  Circulation. 
(1)  Adequate visibility for vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall be provided by clear sight triangles at all intersections of public rights-of-way and private driveways. 
(2)  Opposing driveways and intersections along major streets shall be spaced a minimum of 150 feet apart. 
(3)  Corner lots with frontage on both major and secondary or local industrial streets shall concentrate access on the secondary or local industrial street. Access from local industrial streets is preferred. 
(4)  Reciprocal ingress and egress, circulation and parking arrangements shall be required where possible and feasible to facilitate ease of vehicular movement between adjoining properties and to limit unnecessary driveways. 
(d)  Landscaping (this section supersedes section 19.06.080 where applicable). 
(1)  Landscaping, meandering earth berms, decorative walls and other buffers shall be used to define project boundaries and to reduce impacts on adjacent properties. 
(2)  Landscaping shall be provided along the project frontage, at the periphery of the parking areas and between parking areas and the structure. 
(3)  Landscaping shall be used to break up uninterrupted building mass, frame views, and connect development on adjacent pads. 
(4)  Landscaping shall be provided in sufficient size and quantity to adequately screen and soften the effect of new building planes within the first year (typically a mix of 24-inch box and 15-gallon trees and five-gallon shrubs). 
(5)  A minimum of one tree planting shall be provided for every 30 linear feet of street and access drive frontage with trees informally clustered and grouped. 
(6)  The visual impact of parking areas shall be reduced by landscaping, hedges, meandering berms, planted islands and fingers. 
(7)  Trees shall be distributed throughout parking areas in islands and fingers between parking spaces to shade parking areas and reduce the accumulation and radiation of heat from large paved areas. A minimum of one landscaped island or finger containing a shade tree or trees per ten parking spaces shall be provided. At least one-third of all required trees shall consist of a minimum 24-inch box size. 
(8)  Accessory structures and service areas such as trash enclosures or loading areas shall be screened from public streets and adjacent properties through a combination of landscaping and walls. 
(9)  All outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, whether rooftop, side of structure, or on the ground, shall be screened from view from the public street by architectural elements designed to be an integral part of the building. Plans submitted shall include the locations and elevations of all outdoor equipment. Plumbing, vents and ducts shall be grouped together whenever possible to minimize roof penetration. 
(10)  Walls shall be designed to blend with the architecture of the site. Both sides of all walls shall be finished. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.08.080, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.08.090. - Incentives for creative/sustainable residential, commercial and industrial design. 
    Design incentives are included for new development using site design that is creative and incorporates sustainability principles, as described below and/or that involves the incorporation of innovative and creative architectural design as well as sustainable building materials and practices and energy-conservation measures for both exterior and interior spaces. Incentives are also considered for existing development that is rehabilitated, remodeled and/or retrofitted to improve and enhance aesthetics and/or energy efficiency. Incentives may also be provided for dedication of parklands or conservation easements. Available incentives may include: 
(1)  Modification of site development guidelines, zoning requirements or architectural design guidelines including but are not limited to: 
a.  Reductions in setback and minimum square footage requirements; 
b.  Reductions in the number of required vehicular parking spaces (not to exceed 20 percent of total required spaces); 
c.  Density bonuses and other incentives for projects qualifying for LEED certification; 
d.  Density bonuses and other incentives for projects that provide day care, carpooling, electric vehicle charging stations or other features that promote jobs/housing balance and/or environmental sustainability; 
(2)  Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the city that result in identifiable reductions in energy, water use or greenhouse gas emissions. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.08.090, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.10. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 19.10.010. - Residential lot standards. 
    The residential district lot development standards are intended as a guide to establish the lot size, configuration, setbacks, building heights and, as applicable, lot coverage. These are provided in the following tables: 
Setbacks Zoning Front/Street Side Side Rear Garage/Carport Maximum Bldg. Height Maximum Lot Coverage ER 25', 15' Street Side 10' 25' 25' Three stories NA LDR 25', 15' Street Side 10' 25' 25' Three stories NA SFR 10' 5' 5' 24' 1 Two Stories 45% MD 2 15' 5' 5' 24' 1 Four stories NA Notes: 1. When garage or carport opening faces, or is directed towards, the street. 2. Development must meet all setback and parking requirements.  


Zone Standards 
Zoning Lot Width Lot Depth Area of Lot Garage/Carport
ER 300' 300' 2.5 acres 2 car garage 
LDR 150' 150' 1 acre to 2.5 acres 2 car garage 
SFR 50' 90' 4,500 SF 2 car garage 
MD 60' 100' 6,000 SF See section 19.06.050. 
Notes: 1. Quantity of parking required is established by section 19.06.050.  
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.10.010, 7-20-2015; Ord. No. 953-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
_____
Sec. 19.10.020. - ER - Estate residential. 
    The ER - Estate residential district is intended as a district for very low density residential uses and related activities. This district allows for the orderly growth and development while protecting the natural amenities unique to the desert. 
    Permitted uses in the ER district are as follows: 
(a)  One dwelling unit of a permanent nature on each parcel of land. 
(b)  Commercial poultry and rabbit raising as well as chinchilla, nutria and hamster ranches, subject to the following site improvements: 
(1)  Where the ranch abuts a residence, subdivision, or any other residential development on one or more of the side or rear property lines, screening shall be provided on those lines by one of the following methods: 
a.  Six-foot solid fence. 
b.  Solid row or rows of trees to be maintained in good condition and as approved by the planning commission. 
c.  Other screening as approved by the planning commission; 
(2)  Wastewater shall be disposed of in a manner that will meet the requirements of the county health department; 
(3)  All enclosures for fowl or animals shall be located at least fifty feet from all exterior boundaries of the property including abutting streets. 
(c)  Farms or ranches for grazing, breeding, raising or training of the following animals, including supplementary feeding; provided that no concentrated feeding is done in conjunction therewith: 
(1)  Small livestock with the number of goats, sheep and similar animals over six months of age limited to six per acre of total ground area of the farm with no more than one male goat per acre; 
(2)  Cattle or horses including calves, heifers and colts over six months of age with a maximum number of four animals per acre of total ground area of the farm permitted; or 
(3)  Hogs (not garbage fed) with a maximum number of two per acre of total ground area of the farm, the total number of such animals on any farm or ranch not to exceed five weaned animals; 
(4)  In computing animal density as specified above, combinations of species, both large and small, will be permitted as long as the maximum number of animals does not exceed six per acre, as set forth above in subsection (c)(1)of this section or four per acre as set forth above in subsection (c)(3) of this section or two per acre as set forth in subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
(d)  Accessory uses and structures including the following: 
(1)  Accessory dwelling unit conforming to section 19.10.060; 
(2)  Guesthouse; 
(3)  Greenhouse or lath house; 
(4)  Stable, barn, pen, corral, coop; 
(5)  Child or day care subject to standards and requirements established under state law; 
(6)  A home occupation subject to section 19.10.080; 
(7)  Other uses similar to the above which the commission determines to be similar. 
(e)  The following uses shall be permitted when approved by the commission as provided section 19.30.030: 
(1)  Dog kennels, dog training schools, animal shelters and dog breeding establishments with outside runs; 
(2)  Labor camp; 
(3)  Commercial riding stable or academy; 
(4)  Dude or guest ranch; 
(5)  Grange halls, community halls, and similar uses 
(6)  Other uses which the commission determines to be similar to the above uses. 
(f)  The keeping of domesticated animals for non-commercial purposes with the maximum number of animals being four weaned dogs and cats, or any combination of weaned dogs and weaned cats; provided that the total number of weaned dogs and weaned cats does not exceed four; small birds; small reptiles; and amphibians enclosed within a cage normally built for such animals. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.10.020, 7-20-2015; Ord. No. 953-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 19.10.030. - LDR - Low density residential. 
    The LDR - Low density residential district is intended as a district for low density residential uses and related activities. This district allows for the orderly growth and development while protecting the natural amenities unique to the desert. 
    Permitted uses in the LDR district are as follows: 
(a)  One dwelling unit of a permanent nature on each parcel of land. 
(b)  Commercial poultry and rabbit raising as well as chinchilla, nutria and hamster ranches, subject to the following site improvements: 
(1)  Where the ranch abuts a residence, subdivision, or any other residential development on one or more of the side or rear property lines, screening shall be provided on those lines by one of the following methods: 
a.  Six-foot solid fence. 
b.  Solid row or rows of trees to be maintained in good condition and as approved by the planning commission. 
c.  Other screening as approved by the planning commission; 
(2)  Wastewater shall be disposed of in a manner that will meet the requirements of the county health department; 
(3)  All enclosures for fowl or animals shall be located at least fifty feet from all exterior boundaries of the property including abutting streets. 
(c)  Ranchettes for grazing, breeding, raising or training of horses, including supplementary feeding; provided, that no concentration feeding is done in conjunction therewith; 
(1)  Ranchettes shall have equestrians only including colts over the age of six months with a maximum number of two horses per acre of total ground area of the ranchette permitted. 
(d)  Accessory uses and structures including the following: 
(1)  Accessory dwelling unit conforming to section 19.10.060; 
(2)  Guesthouse; 
(3)  Greenhouse or lath house; 
(4)  Stable, barn, pen, corral, coop; 
(5)  Child or day care subject to the standards and requirements established under state law; 
(6)  A home occupation subject to section 19.10.080; 
(7)  Other uses similar to the above which the commission determines to be similar. 
(e)  The following uses shall be permitted when approved by the commission as provided in section 19.30.030: 
(1)  Commercial riding stable or academy; 
(2)  Dude or guest ranch; 
(3)  Grange halls, community halls, and similar uses; 
(4)  Other uses which the commission determines to be similar to the above uses. 
(f)  The keeping of domesticated animals for non-commercial purposes with the maximum number of animals being four weaned dogs and cats, or any combination of weaned dogs and weaned cats; provided that the total number of weaned dogs and weaned cats does not exceed four; small birds; small reptiles; and amphibians enclosed within a cage normally built for such animals. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.10.030, 7-20-2015; Ord. No. 953-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 19.10.040. - SFR - Single-family residential. 
    The SFR - Single-family residential district is intended as a district of medium density single-family homes. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any building or premises used or occupied, and every building erected, constructed or established within the SFR district shall be only in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. 
    In the SFR district, the following uses are permitted: 
(a)  One detached single-family dwelling unit of a permanent nature placed in a permanent location and the accessory structures and uses normally auxiliary to it. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures including the following: 
(1)  Accessory dwelling unit conforming to section 19.10.060; 
(2)  Child or day care subject to standards and requirements established under state law; 
(3)  The keeping of domesticated animals for non-commercial purposes with the maximum number of animals being four weaned dogs and cats, or any combination of weaned dogs and weaned cats; provided that the total number of weaned dogs and weaned cats does not exceed four; small birds (except poultry and game birds), enclosed within a cage inside the dwelling unit; small reptiles; and amphibians enclosed within a cage normally built for such animals. 
(c)  A home occupation subject to section 19.10.080. 
(d)  The following uses shall be permitted when approved by the commission as provided in chapter 19.30: 
(1)  Country clubs and golf courses, excepting miniature courses and similar commercial enterprises; 
(2)  The office of a physician, dentist, or other person authorized by law to practice medicine or healing used only for consulting and emergency treatment as an adjunct to a principal office located in the appropriate land use district; 
(3)  Parks and playgrounds; 
(4)  Publicly owned buildings and structures; 
(5)  Other uses which the commission determines to be similar to the above uses. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.10.040, 7-20-2015; Ord. No. 953-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 19.10.050. - MDR - Medium density residential. 
    The MDR - Medium density residential district is intended as a higher-density residential district of multiple-family units. Except as specifically provided for elsewhere in this title, any building or premises in the MDR district used or occupied, and every building erected, constructed, or established within the MDR district shall be only in accordance with the regulations set forth in this section. 
(A)  In the MDR district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the SFR district as listed in section 19.10.040 subject to any development standards of that district; 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings of a permanent character placed in permanent locations and of not less than four hundred square feet of floor area per dwelling unit exclusive of open porches and garages and bachelor or efficiency units of not less than three hundred forty square feet of floor area per unit exclusive of open porches or garages; 
(3)  Boarding and lodging houses; 
(4)  Home occupations, subject to section 19.10.080; 
(5)  Hotels or apartment hotels in which incidental business may be conducted for the convenience of the residents of the buildings provided there is no entrance to the place of business except from the inside of the building. 
(6)  The following uses shall be permitted when approved by the commission as provided in chapter 19.30: 
a.  Clubs and lodges, private and non-profit; 
b.  Country clubs and golf courses, excepting miniature courses and similar commercial enterprises; 
c.  Large residential care facility, group home pursuant to criteria of chapter 9.66; 
d.  Mobile home parks; 
e.  The office of a physician, dentist, or other person authorized by law to practice medicine or healing; 
f.  Parks and playgrounds; 
g.  Publicly owned buildings and structures including public maintenance yards; 
h.  Sober living facilities; 
i.  Other uses which the commission determines to be similar to the above uses. 
(b)  Outdoor living area. 
(1)  There shall be an outdoor living area for each dwelling unit permitted in the MDR district according to the standards as set forth in either subsection (1) or (2). The applicant may have the option of selecting either standard as follows: 
a.  An area of not less than 15 percent of the gross floor area of each dwelling unit shall be provided as an outdoor living area, excluding required yard areas. At least one-third of the outdoor living area must be landscaped and continuously maintained. 
b.  An area of not less than five percent of the gross floor area of each dwelling unit shall be outdoor living area; provided, that the required yard areas are landscaped, continuously maintained, and that at least one of the required yards is contiguous to the remaining required outdoor living area. At least one-third of the outdoor living area must be landscaped and continuously maintained. 
(2)  The minimum dimensions of the required outdoor living area shall be five feet in width. This dimension refers to the width of a rectangular space or to the shortest diameter of an irregularly shaped space. 
(3)  The outdoor living area may include the deck area of a swimming pool, patios, or porches. The outdoor living area shall not include driveways, roofs or parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.10.050, 7-20-2015; Ord. No. 953-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 19.10.060. - Reasonable accommodations. 
(a)  Purpose. In accordance with federal and state fair housing laws, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide reasonable accommodations in the city's zoning and land use regulations, policies, and practices when needed to provide an individual with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
(b)  Review authority. 
    The hearing officer, the community and economic development director or designee, is hereby designated to approve, conditionally approve, or deny all applications for a reasonable accommodation, except as prescribed under 19.10.060(C)(3) below. 
(c)  Application for reasonable accommodation. 
(1)  Applicant. A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, their representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with a disability. A reasonable accommodation may be approved only for the benefit of one or more individuals with a disability. 
(2)  Application. An application for a reasonable accommodation from a zoning regulation, policy, or practice shall be made on a form provided by the planning department. No fee shall be required for a request for reasonable accommodation, but if the project requires another discretionary permit, then the prescribed fee shall be paid for all other discretionary permits. 
(3)  Other discretionary permits. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is made requires another discretionary permit or approval, then the applicant may file the request for reasonable accommodation together with the application for the other discretionary permit or approval. The processing procedures of the discretionary permit shall govern the joint processing of both the reasonable accommodation and the discretionary permit. 
(4)  Required submittals. An application for reasonable accommodation shall include the following: 
a.  Documentation that the applicant is: (i) an individual with a disability; (ii) applying on behalf of one or more individuals with a disability; or (iii) a developer or provider of housing for one or more individuals with a disability. 
b.  The specific exception or modification to the Zoning Code provision, policy, or practices requested by the applicant. 
c.  Documentation that the specific exception or modification requested by the applicant is necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy the residence. 
d.  Any other information that the city planner reasonably concludes is necessary to determine whether the findings required by section 19.10.060(d)(4) can be made, so long as any request for information regarding the disability of the individuals benefited complies with Fair Housing Law protections and the privacy rights of the individuals affected. 
(d)  Decision. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the hearing officer, using the criteria set forth in section 19.10.060(d)(4), (d)(5) and (d)(6). The hearing officer shall consider the request for reasonable accommodations as part of a public hearing that was noticed in a manner consistent with Government Code Section 65901 and section 19.40.010 of this Code. 
(1)  The hearing officer shall issue a written decision on a request for reasonable accommodation within 30 days of the date of the application and may either approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for reasonable accommodations in accordance with the required findings set forth in section 19.10.060(d)(4). 
(2)  If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the hearing officer may request further information from the applicant consistent with fair housing laws, specifying in detail the information that is required. In the event that a request for additional information is made, the 30-day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant responds to the request. 
(3)  Findings. The written decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be based on the following findings, all of which are required for approval: 
a.  The requested accommodation is requested by or on the behalf of one or more individuals with a disability protected under the fair housing laws. 
b.  The requested accommodation is necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
c.  The requested accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city as "undue financial or administrative burden" is defined in fair housing Laws and interpretive case law. 
d.  The requested accommodation will not result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city's zoning program, as "fundamental alteration" is defined in fair housing laws and interpretive case law. 
e.  The requested accommodation will not, under the specific facts of the case, result in a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
In making these findings, the decision-maker may approve alternative reasonable accommodations which provide an equivalent level of benefit to the applicant. 
(4)  The city may consider, but is not limited to, the following factors in determining whether the requested accommodation is necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
a.  Whether the requested accommodation will affirmatively enhance the quality of life of one or more individuals with a disability. 
b.  Whether the individual or individuals with a disability will be denied an equal opportunity to enjoy the housing type of their choice absent the accommodation. 
c.  In the case of a residential care facility, whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make facilities of a similar nature or operation economically viable in light of the particularities of the relevant market and market participants. 
d.  In the case of a residential care facility, whether the existing supply of facilities of a similar nature and operation in the community is sufficient to provide individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to live in a residential setting. 
(5)  The city may consider, but is not limited to, the following factors in determining whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city's zoning program. 
a.  Whether the requested accommodation would fundamentally alter the character of the neighborhood. 
b.  Whether the accommodation would result in a substantial increase in traffic or insufficient parking. 
c.  Whether granting the requested accommodation would substantially undermine any express purpose of either the city's general plan or an applicable specific plan. 
d.  In the case of a residential care facility, whether the requested accommodation would create an institutionalized environment due to the number of and distance between facilities that are similar in nature or operation. 
(6)  Rules while decision is pending. While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the request shall remain in full force and effect. 
(7)  Effective date. No reasonable accommodation shall become effective until the decision to grant such accommodation shall have become final by reason of the expiration of time to make an appeal pursuant to the procedures established in chapter 19.44. In the event an appeal is filed, the reasonable accommodation shall not become effective unless and until a decision is made by the planning commission on such appeal. 
(e)  Expiration, time extension, violation, discontinuance, and revocation. 
(1)  Expiration. Any reasonable accommodation approved in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall expire within 24 months from the effective date of approval or at an alternative time specified as a condition of approval unless: 
a.  A building permit has been issued and construction has commenced; 
b.  A certificate of occupancy has been issued; 
c.  The use is established; or 
d.  A time extension has been granted. 
(2)  Time extension. The hearing officer may approve a time extension for a reasonable accommodation for good cause for a period or periods not to exceed three years from the effective date of approval. An application for a time extension shall be made in writing to the city planner no less than 30 days or more than 90 days prior to the expiration date. 
(3)  Notice. Notice of the hearing officer's decision on a time extension shall be sent to the applicant. All written decisions shall give notice of the right to appeal and to request reasonable accommodation in the appeals process as set forth in subsection (d) below. 
(4)  Appeal of determination. A time extension for a reasonable accommodation shall be final unless appealed to the city planning Commission within 14 calendar days of the date of mailing of the determination. An appeal shall be made in writing and shall be noticed and heard pursuant to the procedures established in chapter 19.44 of this Code, as modified by section 19.10.060(d)(1), (d)(2), and (d)(3). 
(5)  Violation of terms. Any reasonable accommodation approved in accordance with the terms of this Code may be revoked if any of the conditions or terms of such reasonable accommodation are violated, or if any law or ordinance is violated in connection therewith. 
(6)  Discontinuance. A reasonable accommodation shall lapse if the exercise of rights granted by it is discontinued for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. If the disabled person initially occupying a residence for whom a reasonable accommodation was made vacates, the reasonable accommodation shall remain in effect only if the city planner determines that (1) the modification is physically integrated into the residential structure and cannot easily be removed or altered to comply with the Code, and (2) the accommodation is necessary to give another disabled individual an equal opportunity to enjoy the dwelling. The city planner may request the applicant or his or her successor-in-interest to the property to provide documentation that subsequent occupants are persons with disabilities. Failure to provide such documentation within ten days of the date of a request by the city shall constitute grounds for discontinuance by the city of a previously approved reasonable accommodation. 
(f)  Amendments. A request for changes in conditions of approval of a reasonable accommodation, or a change to plans that would affect a condition of approval shall be treated as a new application. The city planner may waive the requirement for a new application if the changes are minor, do not involve substantial alterations or addition to the plan or the conditions of approval, and are consistent with the intent of the original approval. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.10.060, 7-20-2015; Ord. No. 953-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 19.10.070. - Accessory dwelling units. 
(a)  Purposes. The purposes of this chapter are to authorize accessory dwelling units (AKA, second units); to establish a procedure for reviewing and approving their development to ensure and maintain healthy and safe residential living environments; to establish location and development standards for second units; and to comply with Government Code Section 65852.2 and Senate Bill 1069 (2016), which requires local agencies to consider applications for second unit permits ministerially without discretionary review or a public hearing. 
(b)  Definition. 
(1)  Accessory dwelling unit. For purposes of this chapter, "accessory dwelling unit" and "second unit" are the same and have the meaning set forth in California Government Code Section 65852.2. 
(2)  Manufactured home. "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and complies with the standards established under the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, also known as The HUD Code. 
(3)  Mobile home. A mobile home may be defined as a movable or portable dwelling built on a chassis, connected to utilities, designed without a permanent foundation, and intended for year-round living built prior to June 15, 1976. 
(4)  Modular home. Modular homes are homes that are built in sections in a factory and then transported to a building site on truck beds, then joined together by local contractors. Modular homes are built to conform to all state, local or regional building codes at their destinations. Local building inspectors are responsible for verifying that a modular home's structure meets requirements and that all finish work is done properly. Modular homes are sometimes less expensive per square foot than site built houses, but may endure and increase in value if properly constructed. 
(c)  Permitting procedure. An application for a second unit permit that meets the location and development standards contained in this chapter and all applicable building standards in title 15 shall be approved ministerially without discretionary review or public hearing. A complete application shall be reviewed and approved no more than 120 days from its acceptance. Any application for a second unit permit that does not meet the location and/or development standards contained in this chapter shall be approved by the planning commission as provided in chapter 19.30. The application for a second unit shall be submitted to the community development department to determine whether the proposal is consistent with the location and development standards contained within this chapter. 
    A second unit which conforms to the requirements of this section shall not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located, and shall be deemed to be a residential use which is consistent with the existing general plan and zoning designations for the lot. The second units shall not be considered in the application of any local ordinance, policy or program to limit residential growth. 
(d)  Location. 
(1)  One second unit may be located on any lot in a single-family residential, or the multiple-family residential district and any specific plan district that authorizes residential development. 
(2)  No subdivision rights are authorized that would result in the second unit being located on a separate lot. 
(3)  The lot must contain an existing single-family dwelling. 
(e)  Applications. 
(1)  An application for a second unit permit must be submitted to the community development department prior to the submittal to the city for a building permit application. 
(2)  An application for a second unit permit must be made in writing and contain the following information: 
a.  Name(s) and address(es) of applicant(s) and property owner(s). 
b.  Address and assessor's parcel number for the lot. 
c.  Size, indicating dimensions and square footage of the primary residence and the proposed second unit. 
d.  A legible scale drawing, showing: 
i.  A north arrow to indicate parcel orientation. 
ii.  Lot dimensions and labels for all property lines. 
iii.  Siting and location of the primary residence and the proposed second unit. 
iv.  Floor plan configuration of the primary residence and the proposed second unit. 
v.  All other existing improvements, including driveways and parking areas. 
vi.  Exterior design of the primary residence and the proposed second unit. "Exterior design" includes architectural style and exterior features, such as trim, windows, and roof. 
e.  A description of the building and roof materials of the primary residence and second unit, and a sample board of the colors of the primary residence and second unit. 
f.  Color photographs of the primary residence and surrounding properties taken from each of the property lines of the project site. 
g.  Location and description of water and sanitary sewer for both the primary residence and the proposed second unit. 
h.  Property owner's consent to physical inspection of the premises. 
i.  A written legal description of the property. 
(f)  Development standards . A second unit permit will be issued only if it complies with the following development standards: 
(1)  Yards and building height. 
a.  In single-family and multifamily residential districts, second units must comply with requirements relating to yards (front, side, and rear setbacks) and building height that are generally applicable to residential construction in the zone in which the property is located. 
b.  In PUD planned unit districts where an approved final development plan specifies requirements relating to yards (front, side, and rear setbacks) and building height, second units must comply with the requirements specified in the plan. In PUD planned unit districts where an approved final development plan does not specify requirements relating to yards and building height, second units must comply with requirements relating to yards and building height that are generally applicable to residential construction in the SFR zone. 
(2)  Lot size. A second unit shall not be located on any residential lot that is substandard in area, width or depth. 
(3)  Second unit configuration. 
a.  Second unit attached to an existing primary residence. A second unit may be attached to an existing primary residence only if the second unit is one of the following: 
i.  An internal conversion of a garage or other area within the existing primary residence. 
ii.  An addition to the existing primary residence. 
b.  Second unit attached to an accessory structure. A second unit may be attached to an existing or newly constructed accessory structure only if the accessory structure meets all of the following requirements: 
i.  The remainder of the accessory structure is limited to garage space. 
ii.  The accessory structure complies with all requirements relating to yards (front, side, and rear setbacks) and building height that are applicable to the primary residence in the zone in which the property is located. 
iii.  The total floor area of the accessory structure with an attached second unit shall not exceed the total floor area of the primary residence, except as indicated under section 19.10.070(f)(4)(b) below. 
c.  Detached second unit. A second unit may be detached from an existing primary residence only if the second unit is located on the same lot as the existing primary residence. The second unit shall not be located between the primary residence and the street. 
d.  A second unit may be constructed above an existing garage without discretionary permit provided that it can demonstrate that the garage can structurally support the addition. 
e.  Number of second units. There shall be a maximum of one second unit on any residentially oriented lot. 
f.  Guest house. A second unit shall not be permitted on any lot that includes a guest house. However, a guest house may be converted if it meets the criteria of this chapter. 
(4)  Second unit size. 
a.  A second unit must not exceed 50 percent of the existing living area (including basement and usable attic) of the primary residence, or 1,200 square feet (whichever is less). 
b.  A second unit shall not be less than 150 square feet in area, or the area of an efficiency unit as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(5)  Lot coverage. 
a.  In single-family residential districts, the second unit must not cause the maximum total structural lot coverage to exceed the maximum lot coverage of the district which the property is located. In multiple-family residential districts, the second unit must be configured to provide all yard setbacks, parking and outdoor living areas within the district which the property is located. 
b.  In PUD planned unit districts where an approved final development plan specifies maximum total structural lot coverage, the second unit must not cause the maximum total structural lot coverage to exceed the specified percentage. In PUD planned unit districts where an approved final development plan does not specify maximum total structural lot coverage, the second unit must not cause the maximum total structural lot coverage to exceed that identified for the RS-6 district. 
(6)  Building height. The overall building height shall not exceed the allowable building height in the zone which the second unit is located. 
(7)  Living provisions. A second unit must provide complete independent living facilities for one or two persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. The second unit may include one kitchen, living room, and dining room, and no more than two bathrooms and two bedrooms. 
(8)  Entry. The second unit must have a separate entrance located on either building side or rear and not visible from the street front area. 
(9)  Off-street parking. A lot containing a second unit must provide at least one additional off-street parking space pursuant to section 19.06.050(1)(g) to serve the second unit above what is required for the primary unit. The additional space may be in tandem if the additional space is outside the existing rear yard setback and must be paved with a hard-surface. Parking spaces shall be prohibited in other setbacks if determined to be a life safety condition. The use of gravel or asphalt grindings is not an acceptable surface. Any structure such as a garage or carport shall not be located in any yard setback. Should the existing garage of the primary unit be converted to an accessory dwelling unit, a two-car garage shall be required for the primary unit. Off-street parking may be waived for the following: 
a.  The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile of public transit. 
b.  The accessory dwelling unit is located within an architecturally and historically significant district. 
c.  The accessory dwelling unit is part of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure. 
d.  When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit. 
e.  When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the accessory dwelling unit. 
(10)  Architectural compatibility. The second unit must incorporate the same exterior design, building and roof materials, and colors as the primary dwelling unit. "Exterior design" includes architectural style and exterior features, such as trim, windows, and roof. 
(11)  Permanent foundation. A permanent foundation is required for all second units. 
(12)  Modular homes. Modular homes may be used for a second or primary unit. Manufactured homes shall be subject to city review and approval. Mobile homes, recreational vehicles, campers or travel trailers shall not be permitted for a second unit. 
(13)  Utility services. The sewer and water services have historically been installed to meet the capacity of single-family residential (i.e., one dwelling unit per parcel) or multiple-family residential (at up to 20 dwelling units per acre or as specified in the general plan). Any increase in density may result in exceeding the design standards. The following standards shall be followed to ensure that the capacity of the sewer and water service are not exceeded: 
a.  Sewage and water services. If a private sewage disposal system, water system or both are proposed to be used, it must meet all applicable county regulations and be approved by the city engineer before a second unit may be established. Verification that the standard has been met is required prior to final inspection. Should it be determined that capacity of either sewer or water cannot be provided due to capacity limitations, the second unit shall not be permitted. 
i.  Written verification of capacity for both sewer and water shall be required from the serving agencies. 
ii.  A sewer line shall be considered at capacity and therefore determined that no additional units can be supported under the following conditions pursuant to the City of Barstow Sewer Master Plan adopted May 2000: 
(a)  Less than 12 inch sewer line: 50 percent. 
(b)  12 inch to 36 inch sewer line: 75 percent. 
(c)  Greater than 36 inch sewer line: 100 percent. 
For the purpose of this chapter the latest adopted sewer master plan shall be used. 
iii.  The sewer flow generation for each residence shall be based upon Table III-1 of the City of Barstow Sewer Master Plan adopted May 2000, or as indicated in the latest adopted revised or amended sewer master plan. 
b.  The configuration of the site (existing residence, second unit and associated parking) shall allow the free, unobstructed access by both the police and fire departments. 
i.  The applicant shall gain written approval from both the police and fire departments and shall submit the approvals as part of the application. 
c.  For the purpose of this chapter and consistent with SB 1069 (2016), a new accessory dwelling unit shall not be charged for new connection fees. However, a detached accessory dwelling unit may require a separate connection or separate meter subject to the criteria of Section 65852.2(f)(2)(B) of the California Government Code. 
(14)  Street access. No second unit shall be permitted in any area that is served by substandard developed streets (i.e., street width) except as permitted under chapter 19.30 of this Code. 
(g)  Occupancy. The owner of a parcel in any multiple-family zoning district or a single-family zoning district with a second unit shall occupy either the primary dwelling unit or the second unit. Should either unit be rented, the rental of the property shall be no less than 31 days per tenant. Short-term rentals, including Airbnb shall be prohibited. 
(h)  Deed restrictions. Before obtaining a second unit permit, the applicant shall do the following: 
(1)  Enter into an agreement of restrictions with the city that refers to the deed under which the property was acquired by the applicant and provides the following: 
a.  The second unit shall not be sold separately. 
b.  The second unit is restricted to the maximum size allowed under section 19.10.070(f)(4) of this Code. 
c.  The owner of a parcel in any multiple-family zoning district or a single-family zoning district with a second unit shall occupy either the primary dwelling unit or the second unit. 
d.  The restrictions are binding upon any successor in ownership of the property and lack of compliance may result in legal action by the city against the property owner. 
(2)  Record the agreement with the county recorder. 
(3)  Prepare a disclosure statement that shall be included in any future offer or sale documents. The statement shall read as follows: 
"You are purchasing a property with a permit for a second residential unit. This permit carries with it certain restrictions that must be met by the owner of the property. You are prohibited from selling the second unit separately. The second unit is restricted to the maximum size allowed under City Ordinance Code Section 19.10.070(F)(4). The property owner shall occupy either the primary dwelling unit or the second unit. The permit is available from the current owner or from the City of Barstow Community Development Department." 
(i)  Nonconforming units. Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 19.38 of this Code, if the existing primary residence is a legal nonconforming unit, a second unit may be constructed only if the nonconformity is not expanded and the second unit meets all current applicable zoning and building standards. Any expansion of the nonconforming unit shall be subject to chapter 19.38. 
    Should the accessory dwelling unit be a garage conversion where the garage is nonconforming (i.e., setbacks), it shall be permitted provided that there is no increase in the nonconformity. 
(j)  Sale of accessory dwelling unit is prohibited. The purpose of permitting accessory dwelling unit is to provide affordable housing without discretionary review. The accessory dwelling unit shall be deemed part of the residential property, similarly to the primary residence, and cannot be sold separately from the primary residence. 
(k)  Fees. Fees for second unit permits will be in amounts established by the City of Barstow's building fee schedule. Second units are subject to all new development fees, including but not limited to development impact fees, park fees, fire department fees and assessment district assessment allocations. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.10.070, 7-20-2015; Ord. No. 953-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 19.10.080. - Home occupation permits. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall use any dwelling or structure in a residential district for home occupation without filing an application with the economic development and planning manager, and obtaining a permit to allow such use. 
(b)  Application. Application for a home occupation permit shall be made to the planning department in writing on forms provided by the city for this purpose and shall set forth in detail such information as may be required by the planning department. 
(c)  Filing fee. Filing fees shall be established by city council resolution. The standards of section 19.10.080(d) shall apply to the conducting of any home occupation. 
(d)  Validity criteria. The following criteria shall be used by city staff in approving or denying a home occupation: 
(1)  No employment of help other than members of the resident family. 
(2)  There will be no direct sales of products or merchandise. 
(3)  Business related to the home occupation shall be conducted substantially away from the premises, and on-premises activities shall include only telephone calls, postal correspondence, bookkeeping, recordkeeping, or such other activities determined by the code enforcement officer to be in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(4)  A home occupation shall not be conducted in the garage or in any accessory building. 
(5)  There shall be no signs other than those permitted by the zone regulations. 
(6)  There shall be no outdoor storage of materials or equipment associated with the home occupation, nor shall materials or equipment be visible from outside the house. 
(7)  There shall be no exterior evidence of the conduct of a home occupation, including, but not limited to, noise, odor, color, materials, lighting, signs, and vibrations. 
(8)  No vehicular or pedestrian traffic related to this home occupation shall be allowed. 
(9)  A home occupation shall not be conducted on any site unless the issuance of a revocable business license has been approved by the code enforcement department and planning department. 
(10)  Home occupations which do not meet the criteria set forth in subsections (a) through (h) of this section may be permitted subject to the approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 19.30. A conditional use permit will not be granted if the planning commission finds that the proposed use is objectionable or incompatible with the character of the neighborhood due to noise, dust, odors, traffic congestion or other undesirable characteristics. If a conditional use permit is granted, the planning commission may waive or modify any of the requirements of subsections (a) through (h) of this section and the planning commission may impose such other conditions as it deems necessary or proper to implement the purposes of this chapter. 
(e)  Uses not permitted. The following uses, because of their nature, shall be listed as not being provided for in any event: 
(1)  Animal hospitals. 
(2)  Barbershops. 
(3)  Beauty parlors. 
(4)  Clinics or hospitals. 
(5)  Dancing schools. 
(6)  Mortuary. 
(7)  Nurseries or day care centers. 
(8)  Private clubs. 
(9)  Rental of trailers or any other equipment requiring outdoor storage. 
(10)  Repair shops or service establishments, except repair of small electrical appliances, typewriters, cameras, or other similar items. 
(11)  Restaurants. 
(12)  Sale and/or repair of firearms. 
(13)  Stables or kennels. 
(f)  Revocation of home occupation permit. A home occupation permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may be terminated if any of the following are found: 
(1)  That any requirement or criterion set forth in section 19.10.080(D) is being violated; 
(2)  That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud; 
(3)  That the use has become detrimental to the public health or safety, has become a public nuisance, or has grown to be a use that no longer can be conducted within the dwelling unit; 
(4)  That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased or has been suspended for six calendar months; 
(5)  That conditions of the premises or the surrounding district or areas have changed so that the use may no longer be justified under the meaning and intent of this section. 
(g)  Nontransferable. A home occupation permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferred, assigned, or used by a person other than the permittee, nor be transferred to any location other than the one for which the permit was granted. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.10.080, 7-20-2015; Ord. No. 953-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 19.10.090. - Density bonus. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an ordinance that specifies how compliance with California Government Code Section 65915 ("State Density Bonus Law") will be implemented in an effort to encourage the production of low income housing units in developments proposed within the city. 
(b)  Definitions. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the definitions found in state density bonus law shall apply to the terms contained herein. 
(c)  Applicability . This chapter shall apply to all residential zoning districts, including diverse use zoning districts, where residential developments of five or more dwelling units are proposed and where the applicant seeks and agrees to provide low, very low, senior or moderate income housing units in the threshold amounts specified in state density bonus law such that the resulting density is beyond that which is permitted by the applicable zoning. This chapter and state density bonus law shall apply only to the residential component of a diverse use project and shall not operate to increase the allowable density of the nonresidential component of any proposed project. 
(d)  Application requirements. 
(1)  Any applicant requesting a density bonus, incentive(s) and/or waiver(s) pursuant to state density bonus law shall provide the city with a written proposal. The proposal shall be submitted prior to or concurrently with filing the planning application for the housing development and shall be processed in conjunction with the underlying application. 
(2)  The proposal for a density bonus, incentive(s) and/or waiver(s) pursuant to state density bonus law shall include the following information: 
a.  Requested density bonus. The specific requested density bonus proposal shall evidence that the project meets the thresholds for state density bonus law. The proposal shall also include calculations showing the maximum base density, the number/percentage of affordable units and identification of the income level at which such units will be restricted, additional market rate units resulting from the density bonus allowable under state density bonus law and the resulting unit per acre density. The density bonus units shall not be included in determining the percentage of base units that qualify a project for a density bonus pursuant to state density bonus law. 
b.  Requested incentive(s). The request for particular incentive(s) shall include a pro forma or other report evidencing that the requested incentive(s) results in identifiable, financially sufficient and actual cost reductions that are necessary to make the housing units economically feasible. The report shall be sufficiently detailed to allow the city to verify its conclusions. If the city requires the services of specialized financial consultants to review and corroborate the analysis, the applicant will be liable for all costs incurred in reviewing the documentation. 
c.  Requested waiver(s). The written proposal shall include an explanation of the waiver(s) of development standards requested and why they are necessary to make the construction of the project physically possible. Any requested waiver(s) shall not exceed the limitations provided by section 19.10.090(h)(4) and to the extent such limitations are exceeded will be considered as a request for an incentive. 
d.  Fee. Payment of the fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council to reimburse the city for staff time spent reviewing and processing the state density bonus law application submitted pursuant to this chapter. 
(e)  Density bonus. 
1.  A density bonus for a housing development means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning and land use designation on the date the application is deemed complete. The amount of the allowable density bonus shall be calculated as provided in state density bonus law. The applicant may select from only one of the income categories identified in state density bonus law and may not combine density bonuses from different income categories to achieve a larger density bonus. 
2.  In the sole discretion of the city council, the city council may approve a density bonus and/or incentive(s) in accordance with state density bonus law for a project that does not maximize the underlying base zoning density. Additionally, nothing herein prevents the city from granting a greater density bonus and additional incentives or waivers than that provided for herein, or from providing a lesser density bonus and fewer incentives and waivers than that provided for herein, when the housing development does not meet the minimum thresholds. 
3.  The density bonus and incentive provisions do not apply to new construction on an existing property if it will result in the reduction of affordable housing units on the site. Instead, the project only qualifies for a density bonus and incentives if it maintains the existing number and proportion of onsite affordable housing units serving low- and very-low income households. Replacement units must also be made affordable for 55 years to the same income category, or a lower category, as the units to be replaced. If the incomes of the former residents are unknown to the developer, then one-half of the replacement units must be affordable to very low-income households and the other half to low-income households. 
(f)  Incentives. 
(1)  The number of incentives granted shall be based upon the number the applicant is entitled to pursuant to state density bonus law. 
(2)  An incentive includes a reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural requirements that result in identifiable, financially sufficient and actual cost reductions. An incentive may be the approval of diverse use zoning (e.g., commercial) in conjunction with a housing project if the diverse use will reduce the cost of the housing development and is compatible with the housing project. An incentive may, but need not be, the provision of a direct financial incentive, such as the waiver of fees. 
(3)  A requested incentive may be denied only for those reasons provided in state density bonus law. Denial of an incentive is a separate and distinct act from a decision to deny or approve the entirety of the project. 
(g)  Discretionary approval authority retained. The granting of a density bonus or incentive(s) shall not be interpreted in and of itself to require a general plan amendment, zoning change or other discretionary approval. If an incentive would otherwise trigger one of these approvals, when it is granted as an incentive, no general plan amendment, zoning change or other discretionary approval is required. However, if the base project without the incentive requires a general plan amendment, zoning change or other discretionary approval, the city retains discretion to make or not make the required findings for approval of the base project. 
(h)  Waivers. A waiver is a modification to a development standard such that construction at the increased density would be physically possible. Modifications to floor area ratio in an amount equivalent to the percentage density bonus utilized shall be allowable as a waiver. Requests for an increase in floor area ratio above that equivalent percentage shall be considered a request for an incentive. Other development standards include, but are not limited to, a height limitation, a setback requirement, an on-site open space requirement, or a parking ratio that applies to a residential development. An applicant may request a waiver of any development standard to make the project physically possible to construct at the increased density. To be entitled to the requested waiver, the applicant must show that without the waiver, the project would be physically impossible to construct. There is no limit on the number of waivers. 
(i)  Specific plan exemptions. The following requirements, when established in any approved specific plan with a residential allowance, shall not be modified as either an incentive or waiver pursuant to this chapter: 
A.  The maximum FAR shall be limited to the public benefit levels. 
B.  The front and side setbacks facing a public right-of-way. 
C.  Building facade height. 
D.  Massing and modulation standards including major portions of a building facing a street should be parallel to the street, building breaks, building facade modulation and building profile, and upper story facade length. 
(j)  Affordable housing agreement. Prior to project approval, the applicant shall enter into an affordable housing agreement with the city, to be executed by the city manager without review by the housing commission, planning commission or city council if the underlying application does not require review and/or approval by those bodies, to the satisfaction of the city attorney guaranteeing the affordability of the rental or ownership units for a minimum of 55 years and identifying the type, size and location of each affordable unit. Such affordable housing agreement shall be recorded in the San Bernardino County recorder's office. Said recorded agreement shall include a statement that the agreement can only be rescinded prior to the expiration date with the written agreement from the City of Barstow. In order to rescind a recorded agreement, the applicant shall contribute to the city the cost towards replacement affordable housing, pro-rated based upon the term of the remaining years of the agreement and current cost of replacement affordable housing. 
(k)  Design and quality. 
(1)  Affordable units must be constructed concurrently with market rate units and shall be integrated into the project. Affordable units shall be of equal design and quality as the market rate units. Exteriors, including architecture and elevations, and floor plans of the affordable units shall be similar to the market rate units. Interior finishes and amenities may differ from those provided in the market rate units, but neither the workmanship nor the products may be of substandard or inferior quality as determined by the building official. The number of bedrooms in the affordable units shall be consistent with the mix of market rate units. 
(2)  Parking standards shall be modified as allowable under state density bonus law and anything beyond those standards shall be considered a request for an incentive. 
(l)  Preservation of affordable housing. Affordable housing may be sold at any price to any buyer but must repay to the local government the initial price break received plus a proportionate share of appreciation. In turn, the local government must reuse its share of the proceeds from the sale of the unit to assist other buyers eligible for affordable housing. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.10.090, 7-20-2015; Ord. No. 953-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 19.10.100. - Transitional and supportive housing. 
    Pursuant to Government Code Section 65583(a)(5), transitional and supportive housing shall be considered as a residential use of the property, subject only to restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone. 
( Ord. No. 953-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-17-2017) 
CHAPTER 19.12. - DU DIVERSE USE 

Sec. 19.12.010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the DU diverse use district is to implement the policies of the general plan, to encourage a harmonious intermingling of business and residential structures, to provide for an increased variety and intermixture of residential, commercial, and office activities, and to enhance the pedestrian usage and character of this district. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.12.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.12.020. - Permitted uses. 
    Diverse use district is intended to offer a mix of residential, professional, administrative and commercial uses. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any building or structure in the diverse use district shall be only in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(1)  Any use permitted in the SFR district. Those uses subject to a conditional use permit under the SFR district shall be subject to a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 19.30. 
(2)  Any use permitted in the MDR district. Those uses subject to a conditional use permit under the MDR district shall be subject to a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 19.30. 
(3)  Any use permitted in the C district pursuant to section 19.16.020. Uses identified under section 19.12.030 below shall require a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 19.30. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.12.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.12.030. - Uses requiring a permit. 
    In this district, the following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit (chapter 19.30): 
(1)  Any use permitted in the C district pursuant to section 19.16.030. 
(2)  Any other commercial or office use not listed within section 19.16.020 and 19.16.030 which the planning commission finds to be consistent with the purpose of the article and which will not impair the present or potential use of adjacent properties. 
(3)  Nursery schools or day care centers above the limits of state regulations requiring approval of a use permit. 
(4)  Public and quasi-public buildings and uses of a recreational, educational, religious, or public service type. 
(5)  Towing and auto repair, not including storage yard. 
(6)  Truck repair and service centers. 
(7)  Light industrial uses with ten or fewer employees. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.12.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.12.040. - Lot development standards. 
    The diverse use district lot development standards are intended as a guide to establish the lot size, configuration, setbacks and building heights. 
(1)  Setbacks for the diverse use district shall be as follows: 
a.  Front/street side: 15 feet. 
b.  Interior side: five feet. 
c.  Rear: five feet. 
d.  Garage or carport: 20 feet. 
(2)  Building height. Buildings constructed in the diverse use district shall be within the reasonable height limitations of the adjacent zoning districts in order to preserve the building scale of the adjacent structures. Building height construction shall be as follows: 
a.  When located adjacent to single-family residential the maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
b.  When located along a collector or arterial street, highway or interstate, or next to multiple-family residential, the maximum building height shall be 45 feet. 
c.  Shopping centers located on collector or arterial streets, highway or interstate, may step the building height provided the structures immediately adjacent to single-family residential uses or zones is a maximum of 35 feet in height. 
(3)  Lot area. A minimum of 6,000 square feet. 
(4)  Lot configuration. The lot shall be square or rectangular in shape whenever possible. Except for existing lots, the lot shall have a dimension of not less than 50 feet for any property line. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.12.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.12.050. - Coverage by structure. 
    Structures permitted in the DU district shall not exceed lot coverage as follows: 
(1)  For diverse use including commercial and/or office combined with residential structures, 50 percent. 
(2)  For commercial and office uses not combined with residential uses, 45 percent. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.12.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.12.060. - Floor area ratio. 
    The floor area ratio shall be as follows: 
(1)  For diverse use and residential structures, 150 percent (11/2 times) the total lot area, up to a maximum of 10,000 square feet in a single structure. 
(2)  For commercial and office uses not combined with residential uses, 90 percent (nine-tenths) of the total lot area. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.12.060, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.12.070. - Open space. 
    For mixed use or single use buildings, the total usable open space shall equal 25 percent of gross floor area for any residential units. Such open space may be above the ground level in the form of decks, balconies, or similar features. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.12.070, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.12.080. - Parking. 
    For parking regulations, see section 19.06.050. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.12.080, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.12.090. - Loading area. 
    In this district, all commercial, office, and professional uses shall provide loading spaces not less than ten feet in width, 20 feet in length, and 14 feet in height as follows: 
(1)  In a diverse use building: 
a.  Residential, no loading area required; 
b.  Three thousand to 20,000 square feet of commercial or office-professional floor area, one loading space; 
c.  Over 20,000 square feet of commercial or office-professional floor area, two loading spaces. 
(2)  In a single-use building or development: 
a.  Residential, no loading area required; 
b.  Commercial or office-professional, see section 19.16.120. 
(3)  The loading space shall not occupy any portion of the required yard area. 
(4)  Where the loading space is adjacent to a street, any required yard adjacent to the street shall not be used for loading space and there shall be no more than one entry or exit for each 60 feet of lot frontage facing a street. 
(5)  When the lot upon which the loading space abuts upon an alley, loading space may adjoin and have access from the alley. The length of the loading space may be parallel with the centerline of the alley. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.12.090, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.12.100. - Signs. 
    For sign regulations, see section 19.06.060. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.12.100, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.14. - HS HUMAN SERVICES 

Sec. 19.14.010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the HS human services district is to implement the policies of the General Plan, and to identify sites within the city that are suitable for the provision of human services. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.14.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.14.020. - Permitted uses. 
    The human services district is intended to offer a mix of residential, professional, administrative and commercial uses. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any building or structure in the human services district shall be only in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(1)  Any use permitted in the SFR district provided the standards of the SFR district are followed. Those uses subject to a conditional use permit under the SFR district shall be subject to a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 19.30. 
(2)  Any use permitted in the MDR district provided the applicable standards of the MDR districts are followed. Those uses subject to a conditional use permit under the MDR district shall be subject to a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 19.30. 
(3)  Any use permitted in the C district pursuant to section 19.16.020 with the exception of bars and liquor stores. Uses identified under section 19.14.030 shall require a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 19.30. 
(4)  Emergency shelters providing temporary shelter for homeless populations. 
(5)  Nursery schools or day care centers. 
(6)  Sober living facilities. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.14.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.14.030. - Uses requiring a permit. 
    In this district, the following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit (chapter 19.30): 
(1)  Any use permitted in the C district pursuant to section 19.16.030. 
(2)  Any other commercial or office use not listed within section 19.16.020 and 19.16.030 which the planning commission finds to be consistent with the purpose of the article and which will not impair the present or potential use of adjacent properties. 
(3)  Public and quasi-public buildings and uses of a recreational, educational, religious, or public service type. 
(4)  Single-room occupancy facilities pursuant to the development standards in section 19.14.110. 
(5)  Towing and auto repair, not including storage yard. 
(6)  Truck repair and service centers. 
(7)  Shelters and provision of services for homeless, at-risk and special needs populations. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.14.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.14.040. - Lot development standards. 
    The human services district lot development standards are intended as a guide to establish the lot size, configuration, setbacks and building heights. 
(1)  Setbacks for the human services district shall be as follows: 
a.  Front/street side: 15 feet. 
b.  Interior side: ten feet. 
c.  Rear: five feet. 
d.  Garage or carport: 20 feet. 
(2)  Building height. 
a.  Buildings constructed in the human services district shall be within the reasonable height limitations of the adjacent zoning districts in order to preserve the building scale of the adjacent structures. 
b.  Building height construction shall be as follows: 
1.  When located adjacent to single-family residential the maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
2.  When located along a collector or arterial street, highway or interstate, or next to multiple-family residential, the maximum building height shall be 45 feet. 
3.  Shopping centers located on a collector or arterial streets, highway or interstate may step the building height provided the structures immediately adjacent to single-family residential uses or zones is a maximum of thirty-five feet in height. 
(3)  Lot area: A minimum of 6,000 square feet. 
(4)  Lot configuration. The lot shall be square or rectangular in shape whenever possible. Except for existing lots, the lot shall have a dimension of not less than 50 feet for any property line. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.14.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.14.050. - Coverage by structure. 
    Structures permitted in the HS district shall not exceed lot coverage as follows: 
(1)  For uses with commercial and/or office combined with residential structures, 50 percent. 
(2)  For commercial and office uses not combined with residential uses, 45 percent. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.14.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.14.060. - Floor area ratio. 
    The floor area ratio shall be as follows: 
(1)  For uses combined with residential uses, 150 percent (11/2 times) the total lot area, up to a maximum of 10,000 square feet in a single structure. 
(2)  For commercial and office uses not combined with residential uses, 90 percent (nine-tenths) of the total lot area. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.14.060, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.14.070. - Open space. 
    For multiple or single use buildings, the total usable open space shall equal 25 percent of gross floor area. Such open space may be above the ground level in the form of decks, balconies, or similar features. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.14.070, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.14.080. - Parking. 
    For parking regulations, see section 19.06.050. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.14.080, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.14.090. - Loading area. 
    In this district, all commercial, office, and professional uses shall provide loading spaces not less than ten feet in width, 20 feet in length, and 14 feet in height as follows: 
(1)  In a multiple use building: 
a.  Residential, no loading area required; 
b.  Three thousand to 20,000 square feet of commercial or office-professional floor area, one loading space; 
c.  Over 20,000 square feet of commercial or office-professional floor area, two loading spaces. 
(2)  In a single-use building or development: 
a.  Residential, no loading area required; 
b.  Commercial or office-professional, see section 19.16.120; 
(3)  The loading space shall not occupy any portion of the required yard area. 
(4)  Where the loading space is adjacent to a street, any required yard adjacent to the street shall not be used for loading space and there shall be no more than one entry or exit for each 60 feet of lot frontage facing a street. 
(5)  When the lot upon which the loading space abuts upon an alley, loading space may adjoin and have access from the alley. The length of the loading space may be parallel with the centerline of the alley. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.14.090, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.14.100. - Signs. 
    For sign regulations, see section 19.06.060. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.14.100, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.14.110. - Single-room occupancy facility development standards. 
    A single room occupancy (SRO) facility shall comply with the requirements of this section, where allowed by this title 19 (Zoning districts and allowable land uses). 
(1)  Purpose. The provisions of this section are intended to provide opportunities for the development of permanent, affordable housing for small households and for people with special needs in proximity to transit and services, and to establish standards for these small units. 
(2)  Development standards. 
a.  Density. A single room occupancy facility shall be consistent with the density of the human services land use identified in the General Plan. 
b.  Common area. Four square feet per living unit shall be provided, with at least 200 square feet in area of interior common space, excluding janitorial storage, laundry facilities, and common hallways. 
c.  Laundry facilities. Laundry facilities must be provided in a separate room at a ratio of one washer and one dryer for every 20 units or a fraction thereof, with at least one washer and dryer per floor. 
d.  Cleaning supply room. A cleaning supply room or utility closet with a wash tub with hot and cold running water shall be provided on each floor of the SRO facility. 
(3)  Single room occupancy units. 
a.  Unit size. An SRO unit shall have a minimum of 150 square feet and a maximum of 400 square feet. 
b.  Occupancy. An SRO unit shall accommodate a maximum of two persons. 
c.  Bathroom. An SRO unit is not required to but may contain partial or full bathroom facilities. A partial bathroom facility shall have at least a toilet and sink, a full facility shall have a toilet, sink and bathtub, shower or bathtub/shower combination. If a full bathroom facility is not provided, common bathroom facilities shall be provided in accordance with the California Building Code for congregate residences with at least one full bathroom per floor. 
d.  Kitchen. An SRO unit is not required to but may contain partial or full kitchen facilities. A full kitchen includes a sink, a refrigerator and a stove, range top or oven. A partial kitchen is missing at least one of these appliances. If a kitchen is not provided, common kitchen facilities shall be provided with at least one full kitchen per floor. 
e.  Closet. Each SRO unit shall have a separate closet. 
f.  Code compliance. SRO units shall comply with all requirements of the California Building Code. 
(4)  Accessibility. All SRO units shall comply with all applicable accessibility and adaptability requirements. All common areas shall be fully accessible. 
(5)  Management. 
a.  Facility management. An SRO with ten or more units shall provide on-site management. An SRO facility with less than ten units shall provide a management office on-site. 
b.  Management plan. A management plan shall be submitted with the development application for an SRO facility and shall be approved by the city. The management plan must address management and operation of the facility, rental procedures, safety and security of residents and building maintenance. 
(6)  Parking. Off-street parking shall be consistent with section 19.06.050. Secure bicycle parking shall be provided at a ratio of one per five rooms. 
(7)  Tenancy. Tenancy of SRO units shall be limited to 30 or more days. 
(8)  Existing structures. An existing structure may be converted to an SRO facility, consistent with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.14.110, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.16. - C COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 19.16.010. - Purpose. 
    The commercial district is intended to serve the many uses in the commercial classification. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any building or premises in the commercial district used or occupied and every building erected, constructed, or established within said commercial district shall be only in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.16.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.16.020. - Permitted uses. 
    Commercial district is intended for professional, administrative, and commercial uses. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any building or structure in the commercial district used or occupied and every building erected, constructed or established within the commercial district shall be only in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(1)  Office and professional uses, including: 
a.  Architects, engineers, draftsmen. 
b.  Art galleries; exhibit halls for commercial and industrial exhibits; provided, that there shall be no sale of stock or material; and provided, that there be no warehousing or storage either within or on the premises. 
c.  Attorneys at law, paralegal personnel. 
d.  Biological and medical laboratories, provided the floor space does not exceed 2,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
e.  Chiropractors, chiropodists, optometrists, dentists. 
f.  Data retrieval firms. 
g.  Insurance agencies. 
h.  Medical offices, physicians, osteopaths. 
i.  Opticians, optical laboratories related and incidental to a professional building and occupying no more than 1,000 square feet of floor space; provided, that no stock shall be visible from the street. 
j.  Phone answering services. 
k.  Photography studio and digital photography printing. 
l.  Prescription pharmacies; no stock shall be visible from the street. 
m.  Private security and investigative firms. 
n.  Public accountants, bookkeepers. 
o.  Realtors, brokers. 
p.  Tattoo/body art studios within an enclosed building and subject to the requirements of section 119300 et seq. of the San Bernardino County Health and Safety Code. 
q.  Travel agencies. 
(2)  Commercial uses, including: 
a.  Animal hospitals and animal hotels that are at least 500 feet from residential uses or zoning districts. 
b.  Apparels and accessories, including, but not limited to clothing stores, custom dressmaking and tailors, furriers, millinery shops and dry goods, bakery goods shop. 
c.  Bar or tavern, excluding dancing. 
d.  Barber or beauty shop. 
e.  Bicycle stores. 
f.  Blueprinting, photo-stating and photocopying. 
g.  Bookstores and stationers. 
h.  Building materials and hardware stores, including, but not limited to glass or mirror shops, paint store, and plumbing supply stores. 
i.  Cafe, restaurant, with or without on-sale liquor. Outdoor seating is permitted for up to ten percent of total indoor seating. Any additional outdoor seating above ten percent shall require additional parking. 
j.  Camera and photographic supply stores. 
k.  Cleaning and pressing establishment; laundry, coin-operated or self-service. 
l.  Clothes cleaning pickup agencies (cleaning and pressing plant located elsewhere). 
m.  Delicatessen. 
n.  Department stores. 
o.  Drugstore. 
p.  Feed store. 
q.  Financial institutions. 
r.  Florist shop. 
s.  Frozen food lockers. 
t.  Furniture, floor coverings, drapery, furniture upholstery stores, miscellaneous home furnishing stores, household appliance stores and equipment stores including but not limited to new furniture (not over 25 percent floor space used for stocking and displaying used furniture), floor coverings, and radio, television and music stores. 
u.  Gift, novelty and souvenir shops. 
v.  Grocery store. 
w.  Jewelry stores. 
x.  Laundry agency (self-service only) 
y.  Liquor store (off-sale only) 
z.  Mail order house, retail. 
aa.  Massage therapy conforming to the provisions set forth in section 19.06.020. 
bb.  Motel and hotels. 
cc.  Museums and galleries. 
dd.  Nonprofit club or lodge; fraternal or religious association. 
ee.  Pet shops and taxidermy. 
ff.  Photographer. 
gg.  Post office. 
hh.  Printing, lithographing, publishing, reproduction, newspaper distributorship, including binding. 
ii.  Public utility offices, fire, police. 
jj.  Radio, television, and music stores. 
kk.  Retail sales of parts or goods, no installation. 
ll.  Secondhand, used merchandise and antique stores; no outside storage or display shall be permitted. 
mm.  Sporting goods stores and bicycle shops. 
nn.  Studio, music and/or dance. Studio-music, dance stores. 
oo.  Supermarket and specialty markets. 
pp.  Theaters, excluding drive-ins. 
qq.  Ticket or travel agencies. 
rr.  Tobacco stores and newsstands. 
ss.  Trunk and leather goods stores. 
tt.  Telephone exchanges. 
uu.  Trade schools. 
vv.  Video/pinball arcade not including adult arcades identified in chapter 19.26 (pertaining to sexually oriented businesses) and chapter 9.24 (Gambling) of this Code. 
ww.  Veterinarians (See Animal hospitals). 
xx.  Wedding chapels. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.16.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.16.030. - Uses requiring a permit. 
    In the commercial district, the following uses may be permitted, subject to chapter 19.30: 
(1)  Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, and massage parlors. 
(2)  Animal hospitals and animal hotels that are less than 500 feet from residential uses or zoning districts. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Automobile service/fueling stations conforming to provisions set forth in section 19.06.070. 
(5)  Bar or tavern, dancing permitted. 
(6)  Biological and medical laboratories in excess of two thousand square feet in gross floor area. 
(7)  Commercial greenhouses. 
(8)  Commercial laundry, rug cleaning, dyeing, etc. 
(9)  Commercial recreation and amusements, such as pitch and putt golf, golf courses, athletic fields, gymnasiums, commercial swimming pools, stadiums, skating rinks (ice and roller), arenas, auditoriums, public dance halls or ballrooms, amusement parks, pool halls, billiards. 
(10)  Drive-in restaurant. 
(11)  Equipment rental yards, outside storage of rental equipment permitted. 
(12)  Furniture storage. 
(13)  Heating and plumbing equipment dealers, paint, glass, wallpaper, and electrical supply store (outside storage enclosed by solid fence or wall, six feet in height) 
(14)  Ice storage, retail, not more than five-ton capacity. 
(15)  Lumberyards and builders' supply yard, outside storage of lumber and building materials permitted. 
(16)  Mechanical auto wash. 
(17)  Mini-warehouses. 
(18)  Mortuaries and funeral parlors. 
(19)  Public garage, auto repair shop, body shop, auto painting, providing all operations are conducted wholly within an enclosed building. If more than five vehicles are on the premises at any one time, they shall be enclosed by a six-foot fence or wall 80 percent opaque. 
(20)  Residential dwelling, to be limited to lot or parcel on which permitted uses are located and used exclusively by the operator of the business when approved by site review. If a separate building is used for dwelling purposes, the setback requirement of the MDR district shall apply. 
(21)  Tattoo studio conforming to the provisions set forth in Health and Safety Code § 119300 et seq. 
(22)  Utility substations. 
(23)  Vehicle sales, including trailers (automobile, motorcycle, farm machinery, equipment dealers, truck or semitrailer, house trailer, boat, camper or marine sales and supplies and trailer sales lot), outside display of new and used vehicles and trailers permitted. 
(24)  Other uses similar to the above if it can be demonstrated that the uses are of the same general character as the above permitted uses as determined by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.16.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.16.040. - Lot area. 
    No building or part of buildings hereafter erected in this district shall be on a lot less than 8,000 square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.16.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.16.050. - Building height. 
(a)  Buildings constructed in the commercial district shall be within the reasonable height limitations of the adjacent zoning districts in order to preserve the building scale of the adjacent structures. 
(b)  Building height construction shall be as follows: 
(1)  When located adjacent to single-family residential the maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
(2)  When located along a collector or arterial street, highway or interstate, or next to multiple-family residential, the maximum building height shall be 45 feet. 
(3)  Shopping centers located on collector or arterial streets, highway or interstate, may step the building height provided the structures immediately adjacent single-family residential uses or zones is a maximum of 35 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.16.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.16.060. - Front yard. 
    Except when Barstow Fire Protection District access is necessary, the front yard of a commercial district that abuts any residential district, there shall be a front yard of at least 15 feet that extends the full width of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.16.060, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.16.070. - Rear yard. 
    Except when Barstow Fire Protection District access is necessary, the rear yard of a commercial district that abuts any residential district, there shall be a rear yard of at least 15 feet that extends the full width of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.16.070, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.16.080. - Side yard. 
    Except when Barstow Fire Protection District access is necessary, the side yard of a commercial district that abuts any residential district, there shall be a side yard of at least ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.16.080, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.16.090. - Conditions of use. 
(a)  All lots in this district, in order to be used for the purpose set forth in this chapter, shall have their main buildings facing upon the street where the district classification is established. 
(b)  No business or building shall be erected, constructed, or established on the same lot together with a building originally designed and used as a residence unless the residential structure is completely removed. 
(c)  All stores, shops or businesses shall be operated wholly within an enclosed building with no outside storage or display except as provided for in this chapter and the supplying of petroleum products (i.e., gasoline/diesel) in service stations and electric vehicle charging stations. 
(d)  Enterprises which produce or cause dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors or vibrations detrimental to the surrounding area are prohibited. 
(e)  Any use servicing vehicles shall be oriented so that the vehicle service bays are not directly facing any street or residential property. Exceptions include existing buildings and corner lots. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.16.090, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.16.100. - Landscaping. 
(a)  The minimum yard size requirements as defined in sections 19.16.060, 19.16.070 and 19.16.080 shall be landscaped and continuously maintained. 
(b)  An area of not less than four percent of the total lot area, in addition to landscaping as required by subsection (a) of this section, shall be landscaped and continuously maintained. 
(c)  Landscaping shall comply with section 19.06.040 to maintain clear sight for intersections and property access. 
(d)  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained pursuant to section 19.06.080. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.16.100, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.16.110. - Parking. 
    For parking regulations, see section 19.06.050. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.16.110, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.16.120. - Loading area. 
(a)  All uses authorized by this chapter shall provide loading spaces not less than ten feet in width, 20 feet in length, and 14 feet in height, as follows: 
(1)  Three thousand to 20,000 square feet floor area, one loading space; 
(2)  For each 20,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof, one loading space up to a maximum of six. 
(b)  The loading space shall not occupy any portion of the required yard area. 
(c)  Where the loading area is adjacent to a street; any required yard adjacent to the street shall not be used for loading space and there shall be no more than one entry or exit to each 60 feet of lot frontage facing a street. 
(d)  When the lot upon which the loading space abuts upon an alley, loading space may adjoin and have access from the alleys. The length of the loading space may be parallel with the center line of the alley. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.16.120, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.16.130. - Signs. 
    For sign regulations, see section 19.06.060. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.16.130, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.18. - I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 19.18.010. - Purpose. 
    In addition to the objectives prescribed in chapter 19.00, the industrial district is established in order to achieve the following purposes: 
(1)  To reserve appropriately located areas consistent with the General Plan for a full range of industrial uses grouped in such a manner as to achieve maximum compatibility with respect to the characteristics of the various types of industrial activities and processes; 
(2)  To encourage the development of all types of industrial establishments in a manner that is consistent with sound standards of public health and safety; 
(3)  To allow certain types of light industrial uses which are relatively free of nuisance or hazardous features to locate in areas nearest to the city's residential, office and commercial districts; 
(4)  To protect areas appropriate for industrial development from intrusion by residences and other inharmonious uses while providing opportunities for various types of industrial establishments to concentrate in mutually beneficial relationship to each other; 
(5)  To create a suitable environment for various types of industrial uses and to protect them from adverse impacts incidental to certain other industrial uses; 
(6)  To ensure the provision of adequate space to meet the needs of industrial development, including off-street parking and truck loading areas; 
(7)  To strengthen the city's economic base and to increase employment opportunities close to home for residents of the city and surrounding area; 
(8)  To ensure that the appearance of industrial buildings and uses is harmonious with the visual character of the area in which they are located; and 
(9)  To achieve these purposes, the industrial district is designed to be applied as follows: to accommodate a full range of industrial, manufacturing, and related establishments of types which may have operational characteristics or features making their location near residential areas inappropriate because of potential adverse impacts but not to allow establishments with nuisance features which cannot be mitigated or which pose a threat to the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.020. - Permitted uses. 
    Industrial district is intended for industrial oriented uses including but not limited to the manufacture and storage of products, assembly, dismantling and salvage, as well as operations that may be incompatible to more sensitive uses (such as the use of hazardous materials). Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title, any building or structure in the industrial district used or occupied and every building erected, constructed or established within the industrial district shall be only in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. In the industrial district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Administrative offices of any business or industry, provided not more than 25 percent of the floor area is devoted to office use. 
(2)  Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, and massage parlors. 
(3)  Advertising display manufacture. 
(4)  Agricultural uses of any kind. 
(5)  Animal hospitals. 
(6)  Antique sales and refinishing. 
(7)  Assembly of electrical equipment, such as stereo, and television receivers, phonographs, other types of sound equipment, and motion picture cameras and projectors. 
(8)  Assembly of small electric appliances such as lighting fixtures, irons, fans, toasters, and electric toys. 
(9)  Bakeries, wholesale, and distribution. 
(10)  Bicycle assembly plants. 
(11)  Canvas products manufacture. 
(12)  Catering businesses. 
(13)  Ceramic products manufacture using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired by electricity or gas. 
(14)  Cleaning and dyeing plants. 
(15)  Cold storage plants. 
(16)  Electrical equipment sales and repair shops. 
(17)  Equipment rental agencies. 
(18)  Freight forwarding terminals. 
(19)  Frozen food distributors. 
(20)  Garment manufacture. 
(21)  Glass and glass products manufacture. 
(22)  Heating and ventilating shops. 
(23)  Household appliance sales and repair shops. 
(24)  Ice manufacture. 
(25)  Laundries, commercial. 
(26)  Lumber and building materials yards. 
(27)  Machinery sales and rentals. 
(28)  Machine shops up to five thousand square feet in floor area with no outside work or storage permitted. 
(29)  Mail order and mail-out businesses. 
(30)  Manufacture and assembly of business machines including electronic data equipment, accounting machines, calculators, typewriters, communications and testing equipment and related equipment. 
(31)  Manufacture and assembly of electrical supplies such as coils, condensers, crystal holders solid-state circuitry, lamps, switches and wire and cable assembles. 
(32)  Manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs, commercial advertising structures, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating ducts and equipment, and similar uses. 
(33)  Manufacture of cutlery, hardware and hand tools, die and pattern making, metal stamping and extrusion of small products, such as costume jewelry, pins and needles, razor blades, bottle-caps, buttons, kitchen utensils, and similar uses. 
(34)  Manufacture of leather and leather accessories (tanning requires a conditional use permit). 
(35)  Manufacture of scientific, medical, dental and dieting instruments, orthopedic and medical appliances, optical goods, watches and clocks, electronics equipment, precision instruments and musical instruments. 
(36)  Manufacturing, assembling, compounding, packaging, and processing of cosmetics, drugs and pharmaceuticals. 
(37)  Moving agencies and storage warehouses. 
(38)  Packing and crating services. 
(39)  Parcel delivery terminals. 
(40)  Photographic processing. 
(41)  Plumbing shops. 
(42)  Printing, lithography and engraving. 
(43)  Public utility and public service pumping stations, equipment buildings and installations, service yards, power stations, drainage ways and structures, reservoirs, well fields, storage tanks, transmission lines, and offices. 
(44)  Publishing. 
(45)  Railroad freight stations, repair shops, and yards. 
(46)  Refrigeration equipment sales and repair shops. 
(47)  Rug and carpet cleaning plants. 
(48)  Sheet metal shops. 
(49)  Tattoo/body art studios within an enclosed building and subject to the requirements of section 119300 et seq. of the San Bernardino County Health and Safety Code. 
(50)  Technical and industrial training schools. 
(51)  Toys and novelties manufacture. 
(52)  Trucking yards and terminals. 
(53)  Warehousing, not including the storage of fuel or flammable liquids. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.030. - Uses requiring a permit. 
    In the industrial district, the following uses may be permitted, subject to chapter 19.30: 
(1)  Aircraft and aircraft accessories and parts manufacture. 
(2)  Airports. 
(3)  Automobile and horse racing tracks. 
(4)  Automobile dismantling, junk, rag, metal salvage, scrap processing, and recycling operations. 
(5)  Automobile rental agencies. 
(6)  Automobile repair or painting. 
(7)  Automobile storage lots. 
(8)  Automobile, truck, farm equipment, motorcycle and trailer accessories and parts manufacture and assembly. 
(9)  Batch plants. 
(10)  Bottling plants. 
(11)  Boat building and maintenance. 
(12)  Box factories and cooperage. 
(13)  Brick, tile, and clay products manufacture. 
(14)  Building materials manufacture and assembly including composition wallboards, partitions, panels, and prefabricated structures. 
(15)  Cabinet shops and furniture manufacture. 
(16)  Can and metal container manufacture. 
(17)  Carpets and rug manufacture. 
(18)  Contractors' storage yards. 
(19)  Creameries and dairy products plants. 
(20)  Day nurseries or centers. 
(21)  Electroplating. 
(22)  Extermination business. 
(23)  Flammable liquid or gas. 
(24)  Food and food products manufacture and processing, not including slaughterhouses. 
(25)  House moving business. 
(26)  Laboratories, commercial, testing, research, experimental or other, including pilot plants. 
(27)  Landscape and gardening services. 
(28)  Machinery manufacture, including heavy electrical, agricultural and construction machinery, and light machinery and equipment such as air conditioning, dishwashers, dryers, furnaces, heaters, refrigerators, ranges, stoves, ovens, and washing machines. 
(29)  Machine shops more than 5,000 square feet in floor area, no outside work permitted, any outdoor storage to be screened. 
(30)  Machine tools manufacture, including metal lathes, metal presses, metal stamping machines, and woodworking machines. 
(31)  Manufacture of burial vaults and caskets. 
(32)  Manufacture of furnaces and accessories. 
(33)  Manufacture of pipe and plumbing materials. 
(34)  Metal products manufacture and assembly, including metal extrusion, steel cabinets, lockers, doors, fencing, and furniture. 
(35)  Mobile home manufacture. 
(36)  Motion picture studio. 
(37)  Motor and generator manufacture. 
(38)  Paint manufacture not employing a boiling process. 
(39)  Paper products manufacture, including shipping containers, pulp goods, coated paper stencils and similar uses. 
(40)  Penal institutions, jail farms, honor farms and juvenile halls when publicly owned. 
(41)  Porcelain products manufacture, including bathroom and kitchen fixtures and equipment. 
(42)  Private or public dumps and disposal areas. 
(43)  Public or private recreation center. 
(44)  Recreational vehicle parks. 
(45)  Restaurants. 
(46)  Retail sale of products produced. 
(47)  Sandblasting establishments. 
(48)  Sanitary fill operations. 
(49)  Service stations. 
(50)  Sewage disposal plants (private). 
(51)  Storage buildings for household goods and mini-warehouses. 
(52)  Storage garages. 
(53)  Storage yards for commercial and recreational vehicles. 
(54)  Tire retreading and recapping. 
(55)  Truck stops/service stations. 
(56)  Wholesale business establishments. 
(57)  Welding shops. 
(58)  Wood and lumber processing and woodworking, including planning mills, sawmills, plywood veneer, and wood preserving treatment. 
(59)  Incidental and accessory structures and uses on the same site with and necessary for the operation of a permitted or conditional use. 
(60)  Other uses which, in the judgment of the planning commission, as evidenced by a resolution in writing, are similar to and no more objectionable than any of the uses set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.040. - Prohibited uses. 
    The following uses shall be prohibited in the industrial districts: any use which, on the basis of an environmental assessment, is found to be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried wastes, noise, vibration, glare, electromagnetic interference, unsightliness, or other objectionable feature or to involve a hazard of fire or explosion, unless the city council has adopted a statement of overriding considerations pursuant to the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.050. - Caretaker's quarters. 
(a)  A dwelling or mobile home unit shall be permitted only when the planning commission finds that the nature of the business or industrial activity requires continuous supervision by a caretaker, guard, watchman or superintendent. 
(b)  The dwelling or mobile home unit shall be located no closer than 15 feet from any other building or storage area on the site and no closer than six feet from any perimeter wall or fence. 
(c)  The dwelling or mobile home unit shall comply with all setback requirements of the zoning district, as well as applicable building and fire codes. 
(d)  A minimum of 300 square feet of private outdoor living and service space suitably screened for privacy shall be provided for each unit. 
(e)  Each unit shall be provided with all necessary utility hookups. 
(f)  A dwelling shall be mounted on a conventional foundation, and a mobile home unit shall be placed on a concrete or asphalt slab of sufficient thickness to support its weight. 
(g)  The tongue or hitch of a mobile home unit shall be removed, and the support structure shall be enclosed with a material or a texture and color compatible with the exterior surfaces of the unit. Where the tongue or hitch is not removable, it shall be screened by landscaping or other suitable materials. 
(h)  The conditional use permit for the dwelling or mobile home unit shall be subject to annual review by the planning commission at its discretion and shall be revocable upon a finding of a violation of the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.060. - General provisions applicable. 
(a)  The following regulations shall apply in all industrial districts: 
(1)  Use of required yards adjoining streets. Except as otherwise provided in the district regulations, required landscape setback areas adjoining streets may be used only for landscaping, access drives, walkways, lighting standards and signs. Any areas behind the required landscape setback may be used for off-street parking. 
(2)  Outdoor storage of materials. The outdoor storage of materials and equipment shall be permitted only within an area surrounded by a masonry wall or fence with screening (a minimum of 80 percent opaque) a minimum of six feet and a maximum of eight feet in height with gates capable of being locked. Within such area, except for trucks or other vehicles necessary for the operation, no materials or equipment shall be stored to a height greater than eight feet. In all industrial districts, where the storage area is visible from a public street or from adjoining properties in residential, office, public or institutional use, the storage area shall be screened by a wall or fence along the side of the storage area facing the street or use. The wall or fence shall be located behind any required landscape setback. When fencing is used as a method of screening, the screening material shall be a minimum of 80 percent opaque. 
(3)  Security fencing for uses employing toxic substances. For any use in which a toxic substance of any kind is employed in a process or activity, a security fence or wall at least eight feet in height with gates capable of being locked shall be provided at the perimeter of the area within which the process or activity is conducted, and the gates shall be kept closed and locked at all times when not in use or under direct supervision. 
(4)  Processes and activities except for the outdoor storage of materials and finished products. All processes and activities related to a permitted or conditional use shall be conducted within a completely enclosed structure. 
(5)  Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall be arranged or shielded in such a manner as to contain the direct illumination on the site and avoid glare in nearby residential areas pursuant to section 19.06.010. 
(6)  Signs. No sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any type shall be permitted, except as prescribed in section 19.06.060. 
(7)  Exterior mechanical equipment. All mechanical, heating, and air conditioning equipment shall be screened when visible from a public street or from adjoining properties in residential, office, public or institutional use. Screening method shall be integrated into the design of the building such as an increase in the height of the parapet. 
(8)  Vibration. No machine, process or operation shall produce a vibration discernible without instruments at or beyond the property line of the operation and pursuant to the goals and policies of the General Plan noise element, unless the city council has adopted a statement of overriding considerations applicable to the proposed use. 
(9)  Phased developments. If a project is to be phased, a phasing plan must be submitted to and approved by the planning commission, showing each phase and general time frames for development. Such project shall be designed so that utility extensions, street construction, off-site improvements and site improvements can be carried out in a reasonable manner as determined by the city engineer. In addition, temporary improvements to facilitate public safety, convenience and maintenance may be required by the city engineer, building official or fire department. 
(b)  A parking and improvement agreement shall be approved by the city council, detailing extent and time frames for all public improvements, landscaping, off-street parking and building areas. Dedication shall be provided for all future rights-of-way and easements. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.060, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.070. - Off-street parking. 
    For parking regulations, see section 19.06.050. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.070, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.080. - Loading area. 
(a)  All industrial uses shall provide spaces not less than 12 feet in width, 20 feet in length, and 14 feet in height, as follows: 
(1)  Three thousand to 20,000 square feet gross floor area, one loading space; 
(2)  For each additional 40,000 square feet of gross floor area, one loading space. 
(b)  The loading space shall not occupy any portion of the required yard areas. 
(c)  Where the loading area is not adjacent to a street, any required yard adjacent to the street shall not be used for loading spaces and there shall be no more than one entry or exit to each 60 feet of lot frontage facing a street. 
(d)  When the lot upon which the loading space abuts upon any alleys, loading spaces may adjoin and have access from the alley. 
(e)  Loading spaces shall be adjacent to an overhead door, loading dock, or other door used for delivery purposes. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.080, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.090. - Safety features for parking and loading areas. 
    Bumper guards, wheelstops, pavement markings and other vehicular control devices shall be provided as necessary to ensure the safe and efficient operation of off-street parking and loading facilities. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.090, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.100. - Site area. 
    The minimum lot size for all new lots to be created in the industrial zone shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.100, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.110. - Front yards. 
(a)  Building setback. 
(1)  Adjacent to local streets, the minimum building setback shall be ten feet. 
(2)  Adjacent to any arterial or collector street shown on the circulation element of the General Plan, the minimum building setback shall be 50 feet. 
(b)  Landscape setback. 
(1)  Adjacent to local streets, ten feet. 
(2)  Adjacent to arterial or collector streets shown on the circulation element of the General Plan, an average of 20 feet measured along the entire street frontage. In no event shall the landscaping be less than ten feet in depth. Upon approval of a phasing plan and improvement agreement, as noted in section 19.18.060, portions of the landscaping may be phased and deferred. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.110, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.120. - Side yards. 
(a)  Corner lots. Buildings and landscape setbacks shall be the same requirements as for front yards. 
(b)  Interior lot lines. Zero setback required, except: 
(1)  Where the side property line of a site adjoins a residential district, the minimum side yard shall be 50 feet, and a six-foot solid wall or a six-foot chain link fence with screening (minimum 80 percent opaque) shall be required at the side property line. 
(2)  Where the side property line of a site adjoins any other district in which a setback from the same property line is required, the minimum side yard shall be the same as the setback required in the adjoining district, and a six-foot solid wall or a six-foot chain link fence with screening (minimum 80 percent opaque) shall be required at the side property line. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.120, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.130. - Rear yards. 
(a)  The minimum rear yard shall be not less than ten feet. 
(b)  Where the rear property line of a site adjoins a residential district, the minimum rear yard shall be 50 feet, and a six-foot solid wall or a six-foot chain link fence with screening (minimum 80 percent opaque) shall be required at the rear property line. 
(c)  Where the rear property line of a site adjoins any other district in which a setback from the property line is required, the minimum rear yard shall be the same as the setback required in the adjoining district, and a six-foot solid wall or a six-foot chain link fence with screening (minimum 80 percent opaque) shall be required at the rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.130, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.140. - Maximum building coverage. 
    The maximum coverage of any building site by building and structure shall be 50 percent. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.140, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.150. - Landscaping. 
    All landscape setback areas adjoining a street as noted in this chapter shall be landscaped and permanently maintained. Off-street parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with section 19.06.080. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.150, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.160. - Building height. 
    The maximum building height in the industrial district shall not exceed 35 feet when adjacent to residential districts and 55 feet adjacent to all other districts. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.160, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.18.170. - Other requirements. 
    The following additional requirements shall apply in the industrial district: 
(1)  Uses in the industrial district shall be planned, developed, conducted and operated so that smoke, fumes, dust, odors, liquids and other waste of any kind is confined and purified to control pollution of air, soil or water to meet the standards and requirements of the city or other applicable rules or regulations and in such manner as to provide no threat to public health and welfare. 
(2)  Uses in the industrial district shall be planned, developed, conducted and operated so that noise and vibration do not impact adjacent properties pursuant to section 19.18.060(h) and the noise element of the Barstow General Plan. Noise levels shall be no more than 65 dBA when measured at the property line when adjacent to residential or other sensitive uses, or as approved by the city for other uses. 
(c)  Section 19.06.110 (Special provisions) shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.18.170, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.20. - OPEN SPACE AND GOVERNMENT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 19.20.010. - O Open Space. 
(a)  Purpose. The O Open Space District is intended to provide for permanent open space in the community and to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the people by limiting developments in the areas. Open space, pursuant to California Government Code § 65560, maybe so designated for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  Open space for the preservation of natural resources. 
(2)  Open space used for the managed production of resources. 
(3)  Open space for outdoor recreation, including, but not limited to, areas of outstanding scenic, historic and cultural value. 
(4)  Open space for public health and safety including, but not limited to, areas which require special management or regulation because of hazardous or special conditions. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses may be permitted provided, that all buildings, structures and uses shall be only in accordance with the requirements of this section: 
(1)  Boulevard and parkway development along arterials. 
(2)  Community entrance roads. 
(3)  Flood control channels, spreading grounds, settling basins, rivers, creeks and wildlife preserves. 
(4)  Freeways. 
(5)  Park and recreational facilities. 
(6)  Pedestrian, bicycle and bridle paths. 
(7)  Planting of shrubbery, trees and similar materials for the purpose of minimizing windstorm, sandstorm and flood damage. 
(8)  Railroad and power line rights-of-way. 
(c)  Uses requiring a permit. The following uses may be permitted, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 19.30; provided, that all buildings, structures and uses shall be only in accordance with the requirements of this section: 
(1)  Agricultural uses; provided, that there shall be no permanent dwellings on the property. 
(2)  Public and semipublic agricultural and exhibition grounds and related commercial uses normally associated with such uses. 
(3)  Other uses which the commission determines to be similar to the above uses. 
(d)  Property development standards. The following property development standards shall apply to all lots: 
(1)  Maximum population density: no dwellings permitted in the O district, except a watchman or caretaker and his family. 
(2)  No building or structure shall be erected, enlarged or altered in the O district, except for those uses related to those permitted in accordance with chapter 19.30 or section 19.20.010(b). Maximum building height, two stories in height. 
(e)  Parking. For parking regulations, see section 19.06.050. 
(f)  Signs. For sign regulations, see section 19.06.060. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.20.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.20.020. - MZ Military zone. 
(a)  Purpose. The MZ military zone district is intended for the property under control of the Marine Corps Logistic Base, Nebo (Logistics Base), or any other United States Department of Defense or directly associated organization established for national defense purposes. It is the expressed intent of the city under this district not to interfere with the military missions or national security interests of the Logistics Base. The MZ military zone district classification shall identify on the zoning map those properties within the city under federal control for military and national security operational, housing, personnel, recreation and similar ancillary military facilities. 
(b)  Policies and standards. The policies and standards of the MZ district shall be as follows: 
(1)  All land uses and activities conducted in the MZ district shall be under the jurisdiction of the Department of Defense or its subordinate and directly associated agencies. 
(2)  Other than authority which may be voluntarily negotiated between the Logistics Base and the city, the city shall confine its governing authority for properties within the city limits within the MZ district to that which is legally required by state or federal law, but only per a predicate and appropriate waiver of federal supremacy. In no event will the city take any actions which the Logistics Base and any state and/or federal authority; 
(3)  Any land use necessary to carry out the Logistics Base military and national security is permitted in the MZ district and is deemed compatible and corresponds with the public/quasi-public land use category of the General Plan. No other zone district is operative or adds any requirements on properties classified MZ. 
(c)  Administration. Properties owned by, and for the use by, the United States government are not subject to local land use control. Properties that are owned by, and then transferred into private ownership shall be rezoned to an appropriate zoning district as recommended by the planning commission, and approved by the city council through a zone change application process, with costs borne by the private property owner. Said zoning shall be consistent with the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.20.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.20.030. - PF Public facilities. 
(a)  Public facilities district. The public facilities (PF) district is established by this section in order to reserve appropriately located sites consistent with the General Plan for necessary public facilities and public service installations and to provide procedure for their establishment and for the expansion of their operations. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the public facilities district: 
(1)  Public schools, colleges, universities and other types of public educational facilities; 
(2)  All facilities, including buildings and grounds, owned by the city, the county, the state, the United States government, a school district, library district, water district, sanitary district, or other type of public service district; 
(3)  Concessionaire commercial establishments ancillary to a permitted use; 
(4)  Public utility or public service structures and installations; and 
(5)  Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site with and necessary for the operation of a permitted use. 
(c)  Existing public facilities. All public uses and structures existing in the PF district on August 1, 1988, are declared to be conforming uses and structures. All city-owned public facilities are under a transition plan to meet current Americans with Disabilities Act requirements. 
(d)  Site area. The site area in the PF district shall be large enough to accommodate the proposed use and shall be as specified in the approved development plan. No lot upon the effective date of this section shall be subdivided that is less than 6,000 square feet in area, with a minimum width of 60 feet and a minimum depth of 100 feet. 
(e)  Yard requirements. The minimum front, side and rear yards in the PF district shall be at least equivalent to those required in the district that adjoins the site at the front, side or rear, or is located across a public street from the site. Where the site adjoins or faces more than one district, the district regulations prescribing the greater setback shall govern. Where the side or rear property line of a site adjoins an R (residential) district, a six foot high solid wall or fence may be required at the side or rear property line. Screening (no less than 80 percent opaque) shall be provided when the yard area is used for storage. 
(f)  Landscaping. In the PF district, the full depth of all required setback areas adjoining a street shall be landscaped or permanently maintained. Off-street parking lots shall be landscaped as prescribed in section 19.06.080 of the Landscape Manual. Except for existing building setbacks, in no case shall the minimum landscaping be less than ten feet. 
(g)  Building height. The maximum building height in the PF district shall not exceed 35 feet, subject to the following exception: Where the site is completely surrounded by nonresidential districts, a building height not exceeding 55 feet may be permitted. Measurement of building height is defined in section 19.02. 
(h)  Special requirements. The following special requirements shall apply to all uses in the PF district 
(1)  Objectionable uses and processes prohibited. No use shall be permitted, and no process, equipment or materials shall be employed which, on the basis of an environmental assessment, are found to be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried wastes, noise, vibration, glare, electromagnetic interference, unsightliness, or other objectionable feature or to involve a hazard of fire or explosion. 
(2)  Outdoor storage of materials. The outdoor storage of materials and equipment shall be permitted only within an area surrounded by a security fence or wall at least six feet in height, capable of being locked; provided, however, the storage area shall not be located in any required front setback area. Within such storage area, except for trucks or other vehicles necessary for the operation, no materials or equipment shall be stored to a height greater than six feet. Where the storage area is visible from a public street or from adjoining properties in residential, office or institutional use, the storage area shall be screened by a six-foot sight-obscuring wall or fence along the side of the storage area facing the street or use. Any accessory structures for storage purposes, such as transportation containers, must be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residential zone and shall be subject to review by the planning commission for compatible architectural treatment pursuant to section 19.24.035. 
(3)  Processes and activities. Any process or activity deemed by the planning commission to be unsightly may be required to be screened from view by use of a solid wall or fence at least six feet in height. 
(i)  Other requirements. The following additional requirements shall apply to all uses in the PF district: 
(1)  For parking regulations see section 19.06.050. 
(2)  Signs. Subject to section 19.06.060. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.20.030, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.22. - SP SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICT 

Sec. 19.22.010. - Purposes. 
    The SP specific plan district is established in order to enable land to be planned and developed as coordinated, comprehensive projects that will provide for the systematic implementation of the General Plan. Regulations for specific plans contained in this chapter and in resolutions adopted pursuant hereto are intended to provide for the classification and development of land as a specific plan land use designation. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.22.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.22.020. - Adoption of specific plans. 
(a)  Procedures for adoption of a specific plan shall be as provided in Government Code § 65450 et seq. The city council may, by resolution, provide guidelines for the format and content of specific plans. The specific plan shall be adopted/amended by mechanism of a zone change application and fee, and, where applicable, General Plan amendment application. 
(b)  Minimum requirements of a specific plan shall conform to Government Code § 65451, as follows: 
(1)  A specific plan shall include a text and a diagram or diagrams which specify all of the following in detail: 
a.  The distribution, location, and extent of the uses of land, including open space, within the area covered by the plan. 
b.  The proposed distribution, location, and extent and intensity of major components of public and private transportation, sewage, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy, and other essential facilities proposed to be located within the area covered by the plan and needed to support the land uses described in the plan. 
c.  Standards and criteria by which development will proceed, and standards for the conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources, where applicable. 
d.  A program of implementation measures including regulations, programs, public works projects, and financing measures necessary to carry out paragraphs a, b, and c above. 
(2)  The specific plan shall include a statement of the relationship of the specific plan to the General Plan. 
(c)  Pursuant to Government Code § 65451(a)(2), specific plans are required to identify proposed major components of infrastructure needed to support planned land uses, as well as financing mechanisms. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.22.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.22.030. - Administration of specific plans. 
    The development standards and regulations contained in a specific plan shall replace and supplement the development standards contained elsewhere in title 19, except where specifically provided in the specific plan. Upon adoption of a specific plan the zoning designation of all lands within the specific plan area will be changed to SP. Any matters not specifically addressed in the specific plan will be governed by other applicable regulations and standards of the city. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.22.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.22.040. - Reimbursement and payment of fees. 
    Reimbursement of the costs of preparation of specific plans may be required in accordance with Government Code § 65456. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.22.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.22.050. - Permitted uses. 
    Land uses shown on the specific plan map are permitted, provided that they are similar in size and location to those shown on the specific plan map. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.22.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.22.060. - Uses requiring a permit. 
    Proposed land uses not shown on the specific plan map shall require a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 19.30. Additionally, proposed land uses that differ significantly in size, scope, location or anticipated environmental impacts from the uses shown on the specific plan map shall require a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.22.060, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.24. - OTHER USES 

Sec. 19.24.010. - Determination by the commission. 
    When the term "other uses which the commission determines to be similar" is used, it shall mean those other uses which in the judgment of the commission are similar to and not more objectionable to the health, safety and general welfare than the uses listed in the same section and which shall be adopted by resolution by the commission and approved by resolution of the city council. (Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.24.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.24.020. - Lots in hilly areas. 
(a)  On property located on downhill slopes having a 15 percent or greater slope (measured in the general direction of the side lot lines) an additional story may be constructed below the main building; provided, however, that the ceiling of the lower story shall be not more than two feet above the curb level, measured at the center of the lot frontage. 
(b)  A private garage, located on property on both uphill and downhill slopes, having a 15 percent or greater slope may be constructed in the required front yard; provided, however, that every portion of the garage shall be at least five feet from the front lot line for uphill or downhill lots. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.24.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.24.030. - Location of house trailers. 
    It is unlawful within the limits of the city for any person to park a house trailer, trailer coach, mobile home, or trailer on any premises other than within an authorized trailer park except as follows: 
(1)  The parking of no more than one trailer in an accessory building or immediately at the rear or side of a dwelling, garage, commercial building or similar structure and upon the same lot or at such other location as is specifically designated and approved by the planning commission; and provided further, however, that the trailer so parked or stored shall be kept vacant and unoccupied at all times, and shall not be used for storage of material of any kind. 
(2)  Trailers for residential purposes shall be pursuant to chapter 9.45 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.24.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.24.035. - Location of transportation containers. 
(a)  Purpose. The intent and purpose of this section is to protect the aesthetics and general welfare of the public by limiting the installation of transportation containers to appropriate land uses and require compatible architectural treatments of such installations. 
(b)  Location. It is unlawful within the city for any person to park, store, install or allow transportation containers on any premises except as follows: 
(1)  Temporary parking of transportation containers may be allowed during the delivery or exchange of goods or materials subject to meeting all other provisions of law. Transportation containers may also be used for storage at a construction site, provided the property owner has a valid building permit, and shall be removed at the completion of construction. No final certificate of occupancy shall be granted until the transportation container has been removed. 
(2)  Transportation containers may be allowed in commercial, industrial and public facility zoned properties, subject to the provision, procedures and approvals of chapter 19.30, conditional uses, and subject to the following: 
a.  Transportation containers shall be located at the rear of the site and where it is least visible from public view. 
b.  Screening shall be provided from adjacent properties to buffer the visual appearance. 
c.  Containers that are purchased for on-site storage shall be painted to match the base color of the main building on site. 
d.  Transportation containers shall not be permitted on vacant property. 
e.  Transportation containers legally placed prior to the ordinance from which this section is derived, but not meeting the above standards, shall be deemed conforming, but must be painted to match the main building on site. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.24.035, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.24.040. - Exceptions of structures permitted above height limit. 
    Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, wireless and television masts, water tanks, silos, church steeples or similar structures may be erected above the maximum height permitted in each district. No structure or penthouse shall be allowed for purposes of providing additional floor space for other than the preceding items. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.24.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.24.050. - Exceptions; projections into yards. 
(a)  Any structure erected for the purpose of providing shade in rear yards may be attached to an existing main building and when so attached will not be construed to be an extension of the main building when such shelter is entirely open on three sides. 
(b)  Fireplace structures may be located in a required side yard provided they do not project into the yard by more than four feet nor create any side yard less than three feet in width. 
(c)  Fire escapes may extend into any required side yard two feet or rear yard not more than four feet when required by law. 
(d)  Open, unenclosed stairways or balconies may extend into a rear yard not more than four feet and into a required front yard not more than 30 inches. 
(e)  Open, unenclosed and uncovered porches, platforms or landing platforms which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend or project into the front yard a distance of not more than five feet. 
(f)  Planters to a height of 31/2 feet may be permitted in a required front yard. 
(g)  Roof projections may extend into a required side yard for interior lots no closer than three feet to the side property line. 
(h)  Roof projections may extend into a required front or rear yard three feet. 
(i)  Open, unenclosed detached porches, gazebos, pergolas and other shade structures may encroach into a street side yard setback provided a minimum of ten feet remains clear of any structure from the street side yard property line. Location shall be consistent with section 19.06.040 (Clear-sight/sight distance-triangle). 
(j)  Nothing in this title shall be construed to limit projections into any yard area for the purpose of reasonable accommodations pursuant to Government Code § 65583(a)(4) and as contained in section 19.10.060. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.24.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.24.060. - Accessory building setbacks. 
(a)  An accessory building in the rear yard shall be no more than one story in height. 
(b)  No accessory building or structure requiring a permit shall be erected in any required yard setback, except as noted above under section 19.24.050(i). 
(c)  Garages shall not be permitted closer than 24 feet to side street property line for corner or reverse corner lots when the garage faces a side street property line. 
(d)  No accessory building, whether requiring a building permit or not, shall be erected or placed such that it causes property damage to adjacent properties, whether it is from concentrated rain run-off, diverting drainage, etc. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.24.060, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.24.070. - Front and side yard storage. 
    No portion of any front yard or side yard adjacent to a street shall be used for the storage of motor vehicles, trailers, airplanes, boats, junk or rubbish. Storage as used in this chapter shall mean and constitute the presence for a period of 48 or more hours in any seven-day period of the above described material. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.24.070, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.24.080. - Commercial vehicle parking. 
    No portion of any lot in a residential district classification shall be used for the parking of any commercial vehicle. The term "commercial vehicle" as used in this chapter shall mean any vehicle over one ton. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.24.080, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.24.090. - Motor vehicle sales on private property. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to sell, offer for sale, or allow to be sold at any time more than one motor vehicle without first obtaining a conditional use permit from the city. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner of the property where said vehicles are located to remove or cause to be removed, the vehicles violating this section. It is no defense to this section that the property owner did not own or have the right to possession of said vehicles or that the person had no control over the owner of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.24.090, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.24.100. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where any provision of this title imposes greater requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this title shall govern. The city, including its officials, departments, commissions, or employees, shall have no responsibility to administrate or enforce the provisions of private deed restrictions but shall give due consideration to restrictions when advised of them at a public hearing on a change of zone, variance or similar matter. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.24.100, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.24.110. - Public utility lines. 
    The provisions of this title shall not be so construed as to limit or interfere with the use of property in any land use district for installation, maintenance and operation of public utility pipelines and under aerial transmission and supply lines, when located in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California within rights-of-way, easements, franchises or other ownerships of such public utilities. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.24.110, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.26. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local authority to regulate the time, place, and manner of operation of sexually oriented businesses, Government Code § 65850.4, Penal Code § 318.6; Quimby-Walsh Act, Penal Code § 318.5. 

Sec. 19.26.010. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to prevent communitywide adverse secondary effects which can be brought about by: 
(1)  The concentration of adult entertainment businesses; 
(2)  The close proximity of adult entertainment businesses to incompatible uses such as schools for minors, religious institutions, parks and residential uses; and 
(3)  The unregulated operation of adult entertainment businesses. 
(b)  These adverse secondary effects include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Depreciation in property values; 
(2)  Increased vacancy rates in residential and commercial areas; 
(3)  Increased criminal activity; 
(4)  Increased litter, noise, and vandalism; and 
(5)  Interference with the enjoyment of residential property in the vicinity of such businesses. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.020. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Adult entertainment business means any of the following: 
(1)  Adult entertainment arcade. The term "adult entertainment arcade" means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, one or more still or motion picture projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Adult entertainment bookstore, adult entertainment novelty store, adult entertainment video store. The term "adult entertainment bookstore, adult entertainment novelty store or adult entertainment video store" means an establishment which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers for sale, rent, or viewing for any form of consideration either adult entertainment material, adult entertainment merchandise or both. 
(3)  Adult entertainment cabaret. The term "adult entertainment cabaret" means an establishment which serves food or beverages and which, for any form of consideration as a regular and substantial course of conduct presents live performances that either: 
a.  Are characterized by specified sexual activities; or 
b.  Feature any semi-nude person. 
(4)  Adult entertainment hotel/motel. The term "adult entertainment hotel/motel" means a hotel, motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which either: 
a.  Provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videos, slides or other photographic or electronic reproductions that are characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas; and advertises the availability of such material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising including but not limited to newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, leaflets, radio or television; 
b.  Rents, leases or lets any single guestroom for less than any ten-hour period; 
c.  Rents, leases or lets any single guestroom more than twice in any 24-hour period; 
d.  Allows a tenant or occupant to subrent a guestroom for a time period of less than ten hours. 
(5)  Adult entertainment motion picture theater. The term "adult entertainment motion picture theater" means an establishment which, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers to show films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  Adult entertainment theater. The term "adult entertainment theater" means an establishment which, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct presents live performances that either: 
a.  Are characterized by specified sexual activities; or 
b.  Feature any semi-nude person. 
(7)  Modeling studio. The term "modeling studio" means an establishment which provides, for any form of consideration, semi-nude figure models who expose specified anatomical areas for the purpose of observation, sketching, photography, painting, sculpting or other depiction by persons paying such considerations. This definition shall not include the following: 
a.  Schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education; and 
b.  Schools maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which do not provide, permit, or make available specified sexual activities. 
(8)  Sexual encounter center. The term "sexual encounter center" means a business, agency or person that, for any consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons (not members of the same family) may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
(9)  Any establishment which, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial portion of business offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services or entertainment that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult entertainment material means any book, periodical, magazine, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion-picture film, videotape recording, or other visual representation, which is characterized by specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult entertainment merchandise means adult entertainment implements or paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos; auto sucks; adult entertainment vibrators; edible underwear; benwa balls; inflatable orifices; anatomical balloons with orifices; simulated vaginas and similar adult entertainment devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity. 
    Characterized by an emphasis upon means the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. 
    Director means the economic development and planning manager of the city of Barstow, or his appointed designee. 
    Entertainer. Entertainer means a person who, for any form of consideration, performs at an adult entertainment business. Such persons shall constitute "entertainers" regardless of their legal relationship (e.g., employee, owner or independent contractor) with the adult entertainment business. 
    Owner means the following: 
(1)  The sole proprietor of an adult entertainment business; 
(2)  Any general partner of a partnership which owns and operates an adult entertainment business; 
(3)  The owner of a controlling interest in a corporation which owns and operates an adult entertainment business; and 
(4)  The person designated by the officers of a corporation to be the permit holder for an adult entertainment business owned and operated by the corporation. 
    Park or sports facilities means a park, playground, swimming pool, golf course, recreational complex or athletic field within the city which is under the control, operation or management of the city or other public agency. 
    Peace officer has the meaning set forth in the California Penal Code. 
    Perform at an adult entertainment business means to engage in or participate in any live performance at an adult entertainment business that either: 
(1)  Is characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities; or 
(2)  Features any semi-nude person. 
    Permittee means either of the following as appropriate to the context: 
(1)  Any person who has been issued an adult entertainment business permit; 
(2)  Any person who has been issued an adult entertainment business entertainer permit. 
    Person means, for the purpose of this chapter, any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form or character. 
    Regular and substantial course of conduct and regular and substantial portion of business means that any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  At least 20 percent of the stock-in-trade is devoted to adult entertainment material, adult entertainment merchandise, or both; provided, however, that this criteria shall not apply to mail order businesses or wholesale business with no patrons on the premises. 
(2)  At least 20 percent of the total display area is devoted to adult entertainment material, adult entertainment merchandise, or both; provided, however, that this criteria shall not apply to mail order business or wholesale business with no patrons on the premises. 
(3)  The business presents any type of entertainment (live or otherwise) characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or featuring any semi-nude person on any four or more separate days within any 30-day period. 
(4)  At least 20 percent of the gross receipts of the business are derived from the sale, trade, rental, display or presentation of services, products, materials or entertainment which is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
    Religious institution means a structure which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
    Residence or residential means a residential zoning district, home, abode or place where an individual is actually living at a specified point in time. 
    School means (i) any child or day care facility; and (ii) any institution of learning for minors (whether public or private) offering instruction in the courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school or any special institution of education. However, it does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college or university. 
    Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola and nipple of the female breast, as well as, portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    Specified anatomical areas means the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human: 
a.  Genitals or pubic region; 
b.  Buttocks; and 
c.  Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; 
(3)  Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsections (1) or (2) of this definition. 
    Specified sexual activities means the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering; 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast; 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the other activities described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
    Substantially enlarged means the increase in floor area occupied by an adult entertainment business by more than ten percent of its floor area as it existed at the time an adult entertainment business permit was issued for the business. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.020, 7-20-2015) 
Cross reference- § 5.50.040, Specific regulations, sidewalk vending, adult entertainment material. 
Sec. 19.26.030. - Adult entertainment business permit. 
(a)  Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment business unless the owner of such business first obtains from the director, and continues to maintain in full force and effect, an adult entertainment business permit for such business. 
(b)  Persons eligible. The owner of a proposed adult entertainment business shall be the only person eligible to obtain an adult entertainment business permit for such business. The owner shall not be eligible to obtain an adult entertainment business permit unless the owner is at least 18 years of age. 
(c)  Application requirements. The following shall be submitted to the director at the time of application for an adult entertainment business permit. 
(1)  A completed application form signed by: (i) the applicant; and (ii) either the record owner of the property or the lessor of the premises (if the business premises are leased to the applicant business) where the adult entertainment business is to be conducted; 
(2)  The applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the Barstow police department and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant's face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. The fingerprints and photograph shall be taken by the Barstow police department; 
(3)  A letter of justification which describes the proposed adult entertainment business and how it will satisfy the requirements of this chapter; 
(4)  A site plan designating the building and/or unit proposed for the adult entertainment business. The site plan shall include a dimensional interior floor plan which depicts how the business will comply with the requirements of this chapter. The site plan shall also include a diagram of the off-street parking areas required by section 19.06.050; 
(5)  The names of all owners, employees, contract and freelance entertainers, independent contractors, and other persons who will perform at the adult entertainment business and who are required by this chapter to obtain an adult entertainment business entertainer permit; 
(6)  A statement signed by the applicant certifying under penalty of perjury that all of the information submitted in connection with the application is true and correct to the best of the applicant's information and belief; 
(7)  A nonrefundable application fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.040. - Approval or denial of permit. 
    The director shall, within 20 city business days of the filing of a complete application, approve and issue the adult entertainment business permit if the requirements of this chapter have been met, or deny the application. Failure of the director to approve or deny the application in 30 days of the applicant or license submittal shall result in the application or license being granted. Notice of the approval or denial of the permit shall be given to the applicant in writing by first class mail, postage prepaid, deposited in the course of transmission with the United States Postal Service within three city business days of the date of such decision. If the application is denied, the director shall attach to the notice a statement of the reasons for the denial. The times set forth in this section shall not be extended except upon the written consent of the applicant. Any interested persons may appeal the decision of the director to the city council in accordance with section 19.26.220. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.050. - Nontransferable. 
(a)  No person shall operate an adult entertainment business under the authority of an adult entertainment business permit at any place other than the address of the adult entertainment business stated in the application for the permit. 
(b)  No adult entertainment business permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable. 
(c)  Any attempts to transfer an adult entertainment business permit is declared invalid and the permit shall automatically become void effective the date of such attempted transfer. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.060. - Location criteria. 
(a)  A adult entertainment business may be located in the industrial zoning district provided such business complies with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The adult entertainment business is not within 1,000 feet of any existing adult entertainment business located within or outside of the city; 
(2)  The adult entertainment business is not within 1,000 feet of any residential zoning district or existing residence located within or outside of the city; 
(3)  The adult entertainment business is not within 1,000 feet of any existing park or sport facility, religious institution, residentially zoned area or school located within or outside of the city; and 
(4)  The adult entertainment business is not located within an area that is subject to a specific plan. 
(b)  The distances set forth above shall be measured as a straight line from the primary entrance of the adult entertainment business to the property line of the property so used without regard to intervening structures. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.060, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.070. - Design standards. 
(a)  No adult entertainment business shall be located in any temporary or portable structure. 
(b)  Placement and construction of all trash enclosures shall be consistent with chapter 6.21 (Refuse and recycling enclosures) of this Code. 
(c)  Installation of all landscaping and irrigation shall comply with all of the requirements identified under section 12.12.020 (Sight distance and height clearance), section 19.06.040 (Clear-sight/sight distance and height clearance) and section 19.06.080 (Landscaping) of the Barstow Municipal Code, City of Barstow Landscape Manual, Drought Tolerant Materials list and adopted irrigation details. 
(d)  All exterior lighting shall be consistent with section 19.06.010 (Outdoor lighting). All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult entertainment business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation. The lighting shall be shown on the site plan required by section 19.26.030(c)(4). 
(e)  The premises within which the adult entertainment business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside the premises shall not be audible anywhere on adjacent property, public rights-of-way or within any separate unit within the same building. All sound-absorbing insulation shall be installed per requirements identified in the current edition of the Uniform Building Code. 
(f)  The building entrance to the adult entertainment business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under 18 years of age are precluded from entering the premises. 
(g)  Restrooms shall be provided based upon requirements contained within the current edition of the Uniform Building Code. All indoor areas of the adult entertainment business within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view by the management at all times. 
(h)  All areas of the adult entertainment business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following footcandles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level and shall be consistent with requirements identified within the current edition of the Uniform Building Code: 
Area Footcandles Bookstores and novelty stores 20 Video stores, theaters and cabarets 5 
(except during performances at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 footcandles) Arcades 10 Motels/hotels 20 
(in public areas) Modeling studios 20  
(i)  The adult entertainment business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using restrooms for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restrooms for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be free from adult entertainment material and adult entertainment merchandise. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a adult entertainment business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult entertainment material or adult entertainment merchandise which is not used or consumed on the premises. 
(j)  All signs located upon the exterior of an adult entertainment business shall comply with section 19.06.060 (Signs) and any adopted sign policies. 
(k)  Adult arcades shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
(l)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that from a manager's station there is an unobstructed view of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. If the premises has two or more designated manager's stations, then the interior shall be configured in such a manner that from at least one of the manager's stations there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the designated manager's station. 
(m)  The view specified in subsection (l) of this section shall at all times remain unobstructed by doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials. 
(n)  The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times. The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall not contain holes between any two such rooms or booths such as would allow either (i) viewing from one room or booth into another; or (ii) physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such rooms or booths. 
(o)  Adult cabarets and adult theaters, except for businesses regulated by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission, shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
(1)  Separate dressing room facilities for entertainers (exclusively dedicated to the entertainers' use) shall be provided. 
(2)  An entrance/exit for entertainers, separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons, shall be provided. 
(3)  Access between the stage and the entertainers' dressing room facilities, completely separated from the patrons, shall be provided. If such separate access is not physically feasible, a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle between the entertainers' dressing room facilities and the stage shall be provided. Such walk aisle shall contain a railing, fence or other barrier shall be at least 30 inches in height and shall be sufficient to prevent any physical contact between patrons and entertainers. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.070, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.080. - Performance standards. 
(a)  No adult entertainment business shall be operated in a manner that permits the observation, from public rights-of-way or locations outside the establishment, of either: 
(1)  Adult entertainment material; 
(2)  Adult entertainment merchandise; 
(3)  Specified sexual activities; or 
(4)  Any semi-nude person. 
This provision shall apply to any display, decoration sign, show window or other opening. 
(b)  Exterior doors and windows of the adult entertainment business shall not be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open. 
(c)  Exterior windows of the adult entertainment business shall be covered with opaque covering at all times. 
(d)  Patrons shall not be permitted access to any area of the adult entertainment business which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted within the adult entertainment business at any time. 
(f)  The adult entertainment business shall maintain a security system that visually monitors and records all parking surfaces serving the business. 
(g)  Security guards shall be employed in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards: 
(1)  One security guard shall be on duty at all times while the business is open; provided, however, that an additional security guard shall be on duty if the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 35 persons. 
(2)  Security guards shall be: (i) certified by the state commission on peace officer standards and training; (ii) currently employed, off-duty peace officers; and (iii) uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public. 
(3)  The security guards shall be charged with preventing violations of law, enforcing patron compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and with notifying the Barstow police department of any violations of law observed. 
(4)  No security guard required pursuant to this subsection (g) shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard. 
(h)  No adult entertainment business shall operate between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. on any day, except that this provision does not apply to businesses also regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
(i)  No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult entertainment business shall permit any person on the premises of the adult entertainment business to engage in a live showing of specified anatomical areas. 
(j)  Adult arcades shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
(1)  No viewing room or video booth may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. 
(2)  At least one employee shall be on-duty and stationed at each manager's station at all times that a patron is present inside the premises. 
(3)  Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to loiter in either: (i) the vicinity of viewing rooms or booths; or (ii) the common area of the business. 
(4)  Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near viewing rooms and booths. 
(5)  The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of viewing rooms and booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any viewing rooms or booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls. 
(k)  Adult cabarets and adult theaters, except for businesses regulated by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission, shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
(1)  No entertainer shall perform except upon a stage which is both: (i) at least 18 inches above the level of the floor; and (ii) separated by a distance of at least ten feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons. 
(2)  No patron shall be permitted within ten feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. 
(3)  No entertainer shall have physical contact with a patron before, during or after performances. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the business. 
(4)  No patron shall have physical contact with an entertainer before, during or after performances. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the business. 
(5)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to an entertainer. 
(6)  No entertainer shall solicit any gratuity from a patron. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.080, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.090. - Gross receipt records. 
(a)  Maintenance. The owner of an adult entertainment business shall maintain complete records which can be segregated with regard to all transactions involving products, merchandise, services or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or exposure of specified anatomical areas. Such records shall be sufficient to establish the percentage of gross receipts of the business which is derived from such transactions. Such records shall be maintained for at least three years after the end of the calendar year for which the records were created. 
(b)  Exemption. This section shall not be applicable to an adult entertainment business for which such transactions constitute less than 15 percent of the gross receipts of the business. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.090, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.100. - Register and permit number of entertainers. 
(a)  Maintenance. Every owner of an adult cabaret and every owner of an adult theater shall maintain on the premises of such business a register of all entertainers who perform at the business. Such register shall list each entertainer's legal name, stage names, and adult entertainment business permit number. 
(b)  Annual filing. Every owner of an adult cabaret and every owner of an adult theater shall annually file with the director a copy of the register of entertainers who perform at the business. Such filing shall be accompanied by a statement, signed by the owner, that all of the information in the register is true and correct to the best of the owner's information and belief. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.100, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.110. - Employment of person without permits. 
    No permittee, owner, operator or other person in charge of an adult entertainment business shall allow any person to perform at the business unless such person is in possession of a valid adult entertainment business entertainer permit. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.110, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.120. - Display of permit. 
    Every adult entertainment business shall display at all times during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for such business. The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult entertainment business. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.120, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.130. - Inspections. 
    The owner, operator, or other person in charge of an adult entertainment business shall allow city officers and their authorized representatives to conduct unscheduled inspections of the premises of the adult entertainment business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time the adult entertainment business is open for business or occupied. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.130, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.140. - Conditions. 
    The requirements of this chapter shall be deemed conditions of adult entertainment business permit approvals. Failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of an adult entertainment business permit. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.140, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.150. - Adult entertainment business entertainer permit. 
(a)  Permits required. It is unlawful for any person to perform at an adult entertainment business unless such person first obtains from the director, and continues to maintain in full force and effect, an adult entertainment business entertainer permit. 
(b)  Persons eligible. No person less than 18 years of age shall be eligible for an adult entertainment business permit. 
(c)  Application requirements. The following shall be submitted to the director at the time of application for an adult entertainment business entertainer permit: 
(1)  A completed application form signed by: (i) the applicant; and (ii) the owner of the adult entertainment business in which the applicant intends to perform; 
(2)  The applicant's legal name and any other names (including stage names and aliases) used by the applicant; 
(3)  Age, date and place of birth; 
(4)  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
(5)  Present residence address and telephone number; 
(6)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of: 
a.  Any of the offenses set forth in California Penal Code §§ 315, 316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, 311.1, 311.2, 311.3, 311.4, 311.6, 311.10, 311.11, 313.1, 314, 647(a), 647(b) and 647(d), as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered; 
b.  The equivalent of any of the aforesaid offenses if committed outside the State of California; 
c.  Any offenses which would require the individual to register as a sex offender pursuant to California Penal Code § 290; 
(7)  Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in this subsection has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered, or authorized to engage in prostitution; 
(8)  State driver's license or identification number; 
(9)  Satisfactory written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(10)  The applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the Barstow police department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant's face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. The fingerprints and photograph shall be taken by the Barstow police department. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.150, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.160. - Grounds for denial. 
(a)  The director shall deny an application for an adult entertainment business entertainer permit for any of the following causes: 
(1)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application or in any report or document required to be filed with the application; 
(2)  The applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(3)  The adult entertainment business entertainer permit is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by state or city law; 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in section 19.26.150(c)(6)a or an equivalent offence committed outside the State of California; provided, however, that such conviction shall not be grounds for denial if the conviction occurred more than five years prior to the date of the application. 
(b)  Only felony convictions for items noted under this section would result in denial of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.160, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.170. - Approval or denial of permit. 
(a)  The director shall, within three city business days of the filing of a complete application, approve and issue the adult entertainment business permit if there are no grounds for denial; otherwise, the permit shall be denied. Notice of the approval or denial of the permit shall be given to the applicant in writing by first class mail, postage prepaid, deposited in the course of transmission with the United States Postal Service within three city business days of the date of such decision. 
(b)  If the application is denied, the director shall attach to the notice a statement for the reasons for the denial. The times set forth in this section shall not be extended except upon the written consent of the applicant. Any interested person may appeal the decision of the director to the city council in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.170, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.180. - Nontransferable. 
(a)  No adult entertainment business entertainer permit shall authorize the permittee to perform at a adult entertainment business other than the business stated in the application for the permit. 
(b)  No adult entertainment business entertainer permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable. 
(c)  Any attempt to transfer an adult entertainment business entertainer permit is declared invalid and the permit shall automatically become void effective the date of such attempted transfer. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.180, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.190. - Display of permit. 
    Every entertainer shall have his adult entertainment business entertainer permit available for inspection at all times during which such entertainer is on the premises of the adult entertainment business at which the entertainer performs. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.190, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.200. - Grounds for suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The director shall suspend or revoke an adult entertainment business permit for the following causes: 
(1)  The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city; 
(2)  The permittee, or an employee, owner, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult entertainment business has knowingly failed to comply with any of the requirements of this section; 
(3)  The permittee, or an employee, owner, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult entertainment business has knowingly allowed or permitted the occurrence of criminal activity on the premises of the adult entertainment business; 
(4)  The permittee, or an employee, owner, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult entertainment business has committed a misdemeanor or felony in the conduct of the business; 
(5)  The permittee, or an employee, owner, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult entertainment business has failed to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed by an authorized city official; 
(6)  The approved use has been substantially enlarged without city approval. 
(b)  The director shall suspend or revoke an adult entertainment business entertainer permit for the following causes: 
(1)  The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city; 
(2)  The permittee has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult entertainment business: 
a.  Unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation; 
b.  Unlawful solicitation of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation; 
c.  Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under California Penal Code § 290; 
d.  Lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of California Penal Code §§ 315, 316, or 318 or subdivision b of § 647. 
e.  An act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including but not limited to Penal Code §§ 311 through 313.4. 
f.  Any conduct prohibited by this section; 
(3)  Failure to abide by an disciplinary action previously imposed by an authorized city official. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.200, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.210. - Procedure for suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Notice. On determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, the director shall furnish written notice of the proposal suspension or revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the grounds upon which the propose suspension or revocation is based. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be personally delivered to the permittee, at least ten days prior to the hearing date. 
(b)  Hearing. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the director. All parties involved shall have a right to: (i) offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; (ii) be represented by counsel; and (iii) confront and cross examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. 
(c)  Penalty. After holding the hearing in accordance with this section, upon determination that there are sufficient grounds for disciplinary action, the director shall impose one of the following penalties: 
(1)  A warning; 
(2)  Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six months; 
(3)  Revocation of the permit. 
The director may, in conjunction with the issuance of a warning or the suspension of a permit, order the permittee to take appropriate corrective action. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.210, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.220. - Appeals. 
(a)  Who may appeal. Any interested person may appeal the director's issuance, denial of issuance, suspension or revocation of an adult entertainment business entertainer permit to the city council in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Appeal period. A written appeal petition must be filed with the city clerk within five working days after the decision of the director, provided, however, that if the five days expires on a date that city hall is not open for business, then the appeal period shall be extended to the next city business day. Failure to file a timely appeal petition deprives the city council of jurisdiction to hear the appeal. 
(c)  Form of appeal petition. The appeal petition must indicate in what way the appellant contends the director's decision was incorrect or must provide extenuating circumstances which the appellant contends would justify reversal or modification of the director's decision. 
(d)  Director's decision stayed. The effectiveness of any decision of the director to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment business permit or adult entertainment business entertainer permit shall be stayed during: (i) the appeal period set forth in subsection (b) of this section; and (ii) the pendency of any appeal. 
(e)  City council consideration. The city council shall set the appeal for hearing and give notice of the date, time and place thereof in accordance with section 19.44.050(a). 
(f)  City council decision. The city council shall render a decision on the appeal in accordance with section 19.44.050(b). No later than three city business days after the city council's decision, notice of the decision and a copy of the resolution shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the appellant. Such notice shall contain the substance of the following statement: "You are hereby notified that the time within which judicial review of this decision may be sought is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6." 
(g)  Judicial review. The appellant may seek judicial review of the city council's decision in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.5 et seq. or as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.220, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.230. - Existing adult businesses. 
(a)  Any adult entertainment business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived in violation hereof shall be deemed a nonconforming use. 
(b)  Any adult entertainment business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which becomes nonconforming due to the location criteria enumerated in section 19.26.060 shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with the location criteria of this chapter, not later than 20 years following the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(c)  Any adult entertainment business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which becomes nonconforming due to either the design standards enumerated in section 19.26.070 or the performance standards enumerated in section 19.26.080 shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with the design standards and performance standards of this chapter, not later than one year following the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(d)  Any adult entertainment business lawfully operating on the date of being annexed by the city which becomes nonconforming due to the location criteria enumerated in section 19.26.060 shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with the location criteria of this chapter, not later than 20 years following the date of annexation. 
(e)  Any adult entertainment business lawfully operating on the date of being annexed by the city which becomes nonconforming due to either the design standards enumerated in section 19.26.070 or the performance standards enumerated in section 19.26.080 shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with the design standards and performance standards of this chapter, not later than one year following the date of annexation. 
(f)  An adult entertainment business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of: (i) a residential use within 1,000 feet of the adult entertainment business; or (ii) a park or sports facility, religious institution or school within 1,000 feet of the adult entertainment business. This exemption shall only apply if the adult entertainment business is continuous, which means that interruptions in use cannot exceed six months. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.230, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.240. - Employment of and services to minors. 
    No permittee, operator or other person in charge of an adult entertainment business shall hire or allow any person who is not at least 18 years of age to enter or remain within the adult entertainment business. Any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of a business who allows any person who is not at least 18 years of age to enter or remain within the adult entertainment business shall be subject to civil fine not to exceed $10,000.00 per violation, suspension or revocation of the adult entertainment business permit, or both such fine and suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.240, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.250. - Number of businesses. 
    No building, structure or other facility shall contain more than one type of adult entertainment business, as such types of adult entertainment businesses are defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.250, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.260. - Regulations nonexclusive. 
    The provisions of this chapter regulating adult entertainment businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other applicable provisions of this Code or other law. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.260, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.26.270. - Conflicts. 
    If the provisions of this chapter conflict with or contravene any other provisions of this Code, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.26.270, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.27. - USES RELATED TO MARIJUANA 

Sec. 19.27.010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate personal, medical, and commercial marijuana uses. Nothing in this chapter shall preempt or make inapplicable any provision of state or federal law. 
( Ord. No. 949-2016, § 2, 11-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 19.27.020. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Commercial marijuana activity includes cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, distribution, delivery, or sale of marijuana, marijuana accessories, or marijuana products. 
    Cultivation means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana. 
    Delivery means the commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently licensed under California law, that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of marijuana or marijuana products. 
    Distribution means the procurement, sale, and transport of marijuana or marijuana products between entities for commercial use purposes. 
    Licensee means the holder of any state-issued license related to marijuana activities. 
    Manufacture means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product. 
    Marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part thereof; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Marijuana" does not include: 
(1)  Industrial hemp, as defined in Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code; or 
(2)  The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other products. 
    Marijuana accessories means any equipment, products, or materials of any kind that are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana or marijuana products into the human body. 
    Marijuana products means marijuana that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including but not limited to concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing marijuana or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. 
    Medical marijuana dispensary means any collective, cooperative, dispensary, or association of any kind that distributes, dispenses, stores, exchanges, processes, delivers, makes available, transmits, or gives away marijuana for medicinal purposes pursuant to the California Health and Safety Code. 
    Person includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. 
    Private residence means a house, apartment unit, mobile home, or other similar dwelling. 
    Sale includes any transaction whereby, for any consideration, title to marijuana is transferred from one person to another, and includes the delivery of marijuana or marijuana products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return of marijuana or marijuana products to the licensee from whom such marijuana or marijuana product was purchased. 
    Any term defined in this section also means the very term as defined in the California Business and Professions Code or the California Health and Safety Code, unless otherwise specified. 
( Ord. No. 949-2016, § 2, 11-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 19.27.030. - Personal use. 
(a)  Personal recreational use, possession, purchase, transport, or dissemination of marijuana or marijuana products is unlawful in all areas of the city to the extent it is unlawful under California law. 
(b)  Outdoor cultivation. No person may cultivate marijuana outdoors in any zoning district of the city. No use permit, building permit, variance, or any other permit of entitlement, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for any such use or activity. 
(c)  Indoor cultivation. 
(1)  No person may cultivate marijuana indoors in any zoning district of the city to the extent such a complete prohibition is permitted under California law. No use permit, building permit, variance, or any other permit of entitlement, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for any such use or activity. 
(2)  To the extent California law does not permit a complete prohibition on indoor cultivation of marijuana, no person may cultivate marijuana inside any structure in any zoning district of the city, unless that structure is a private residence or an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secure. 
(d)  Nothing in this code shall limit the right of an owner of a private residence to restrict the use or cultivation of marijuana or marijuana products within that private residence, or on the grounds thereof, by tenants, licensees, or any other person with lawful access to that private residence. 
( Ord. No. 949-2016, § 2, 11-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 19.27.040. - Medical use. 
(a)  Within the city's limits, cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes under California law is subject to all of the cultivation requirements set forth in section 19.27.030 of this chapter. 
(b)  The establishment or operation of a medical marijuana dispensary is a prohibited use in all zoning districts of the city. No use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for the establishment of any medical marijuana dispensary in any zoning district, and no person shall otherwise establish or operate a medical marijuana dispensary in any zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 949-2016, § 2, 11-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 19.27.050. - Commercial use. 
(a)  The establishment or operation of any business which is engaged in any commercial marijuana activity, or which provides a space for the use of marijuana or marijuana products in any place other than a private residence, is a prohibited use in all zoning districts of the city. No use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for the establishment or operation of any such business. Businesses subject to this section include, but are not limited to, businesses licensed by any government entity under Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code, as that division is proposed to the voters for the November 2016 election and, if approved, as that division may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  To the extent such a prohibition is permitted under California law, delivery of marijuana or marijuana products within the city is prohibited, regardless of any license or other authorization a person may have to engage in any commercial marijuana activity outside of the city. 
( Ord. No. 949-2016, § 2, 11-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 19.27.060. - Violations. 
    Every act prohibited or declared unlawful by this chapter, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction at the discretion of the city attorney or the district attorney. In addition, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a public nuisance subject to abatement as provided in this Code or under California law. 
( Ord. No. 949-2016, § 2, 11-7-2016 ) 
CHAPTER 19.28. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 19.28.010. - Purpose. 
(a)  When, because of special circumstances applicable to property, including size, shaped topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification, the commission upon verified application by a property owner, agent, or by a lessee shall initiate proceedings for the granting of a variance from the provisions of this title under such conditions as may be deemed necessary to ensure that the intent and purpose of this title and the General Plan upon which it is based will be observed; and that the health, safety, and public welfare be secured; that substantial justice be done, not only to the applicant, but to the applicant who might be affected by the variance. 
(b)  A variance shall not be construed as an amendment to this title or cause the maps which are part of this title to be changed. 
(c)  Variances may not be granted to allow for nonpermitted land uses. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.28.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.28.020. - Filing of application. 
(a)  Application for variances shall be made to the commission in writing on forms approved by the commission for this purpose. 
(b)  (1)  All applications must be determined to be complete by the planning department prior to being set for public hearing. 
(2)  In all cases, statutory time-frames imposed by the Government Code and California Environmental Quality Act apply. 
(c)  The commission may, along with the submittal of an application for variance, require the following materials: 
(1)  Site plan to scale, showing parcel dimensions, distance and bearings, all existing and proposed structures, and off-street parking locations; 
(2)  Elevations to scale, showing typical unit or units, balconies, porches and overhangs; 
(3)  Topography maps; 
(4)  Landscaping plans. 
(d)  The commission shall cause to be made such investigation of facts bearing on the application for variance as will provide necessary information to ensure that the action on each application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this title. 
(e)  In cases where the authorized planning personnel find the conditions set forth on the application are not within the scope of the variance procedure, the applicant shall be so informed. Whereupon, if the application is submitted, it shall be signed by the applicant to the effect that he was so informed. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.28.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.28.030. - Conditions for granting. 
    The applicant shall set forth in detail on forms provided by the commission the reasons for the requested variance, show thereon how the conditions set forth in this section are satisfied, and all other information as may be required by the commission. The commission, before it may grant a variance, must make a finding in writing that, on the evidence presented, all of the following conditions exist in reference to the property being considered: 
(1)  That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved, or to the intended use of the property, which do not apply generally to other property in the same district classification and neighborhood; 
(2)  That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant, which right is possessed by other property owners under like conditions in the same district classification and neighborhood; 
(3)  That the granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property and improvements in the district classification and neighbor-hood in which the property is located; and 
(4)  That the granting of the variance will not be contrary to the objectives of the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.28.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.28.040. - Voiding. 
    Each variance granted under the provisions of this chapter shall become null and void 12 months after the date of action approving such variance unless: 
(1)  The construction authorized by such variance permit has commenced within 12 months after granting of the variance and diligently advanced to completion; 
(2)  The occupancy of land or buildings authorized by the variance has taken place within 12 months after granting the variance; 
(3)  The decision approving a variance contains in its findings and conditions specific authority for extending the time limit herein; or 
(4)  Where circumstances beyond the control of the applicant cause delays which do not permit compliance with the time limits established herein, the commission may grant, upon written request from the property owner, applicant, or representative, one extension of time, not to exceed 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.28.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.28.050. - Conditions of approval. 
    For conditions of approval, see chapter 19.36. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.28.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.28.060. - Publication, mailing of notices. 
    For publication and mailing of notices, see chapter 19.40. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.28.060, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.28.070. - Commission hearings. 
    For commission hearings see section 19.42.010. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.28.070, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.28.080. - Notice of decisions. 
    For notice of decisions, see section 19.42.020. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.28.080, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.28.090. - Refiling time limit. 
    For refiling time limit, see section 19.42.030. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.28.090, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.28.100. - Appeals. 
    For appeals, see chapter 19.44. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.28.100, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.30. - CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 19.30.010. - Purpose. 
    The intent of this chapter is to provide for certain uses in the several land use districts of this title subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. The commission may, in accordance with the several provisions set forth in this chapter, grant a conditional use permit for uses listed herein when it is found that the proposed development will meet the requirements of the General Plan and the several chapters of this title. Special consideration given for conditional uses involves, among other things, the size of the area required for the proper development of certain uses, the nature of traffic generated by the operation of such uses, and the effect which such uses may have on adjoining land uses or on the growth or development of the community as a whole. In granting a conditional use permit, the commission may recommend and require such conditions as it may determine necessary in order to safeguard and protect the public health, safety and general welfare and to ensure that such development permitted will be completed in accordance with the plans and an orderly developmental period which the commission may determine. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.30.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.30.020. - Conditions required for permit and site approval. 
    The applicant shall set forth in detail, on forms provided by the commission, the reasons for the requested conditional use permit citing that the intended use is authorized by this chapter. The commission may approve a request, provided the commission makes a finding that all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  That the use applied for at the location set forth in the application is properly one for which a conditional use permit is authorized by this title. 
(2)  That the use is necessary or desirable for the development of the community and is not detrimental to existing uses or uses specifically permitted in the district classification as per this title. 
(3)  That the site for the intended use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the use and that all of the yards, setbacks, walls or fences, landscaping, and other features required in order to adjust the use to existing uses or possible future uses on adjoining land in the neighborhood be compatible with one another. 
(4)  That the site for the proposed use conforms to streets and highways properly designed and improved so as to carry the type and quantity of traffic generated or to be generated by the proposed use. 
(5)  City sewer service shall not be provided to any parcel not meeting the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.30.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.30.030. - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
    Notwithstanding the uses or conditional uses permitted in the several land use districts of this title, the following, additional uses may be permitted in any district classification (except as noted) subject to the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Airports and heliports, public or private. 
(2)  Churches and other religious institutions, tent revivals, rescue missions and enterprises involving large assemblages of people, or automobiles, including planned amusement parks, fairgrounds, race track, open air theater, picnic grounds, recreational or sports centers, baseball and football arenas. 
(3)  Cemeteries, mausoleums, crematories, columbariums, and other uses customarily incidental to these permitted uses. 
(4)  Hospitals and emergency care facilities, provided that one loading space per 30,000 square feet of gross floor area is provided up to a maximum of four. 
(5)  Institutions for the care of the aged, or for the care and cure of mental, drug and alcohol related addictions. 
(6)  Educational facilities, libraries, museums and art galleries. 
(7)  Playgrounds, parks, community center, and governmental or public buildings. 
(8)  Radio and television transmitter or towers. 
(9)  Rifle, pistol, trap or skeet range (limited to the DU, HS, C and I districts). 
(10)  Public utilities and public service uses or structures such as reservoirs, pumping plants, electrical substations, filtration plants, sewer plants, communication substations, microwave stations and towers. 
(11)  Golf courses and driving ranges in conjunction with a golf course. 
(12)  Condominium conversions. 
(13)  Except where permitted elsewhere in this title, the development of natural resources together with necessary buildings, apparatus, or appurtenances incidental thereto. 
(14)  Other special or unusual uses for which no provision is made in this title or which provide an unusual combination of uses on a large scale as determined by the planning commission. 
(15)  Auction yards. 
(16)  Recreational trailer parks and campgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.30.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.30.040. - Use permit application. 
(a)  The planning commission shall fix the form and extent of information required for a use permit application. All applications must be determined to be complete by the planning department prior to being set for public hearing. 
(b)  In all cases, statutory time-frames imposed by the Government Code and California Environmental Quality Act apply. 
(c)  An application form provided by the planning department plus a fee as determined by resolution of the city council shall be required of all applicants. In addition, any or all of the following materials may be required of the applicant: 
(1)  Site plan to scale: 
a.  Parcel dimensions; 
b.  All existing and proposed buildings and structures, location and number of units on the property and existing development on abutting properties; 
c.  Off-street parking; location and number of spaces, dimensions of parking areas, circulation and wheel guards; 
d.  Vehicular and pedestrian ways with grades, widths and types of improvements, access points providing ingress to and egress from the site; service points; 
e.  Topography; surface drainage conditions and outlets; 
f.  Existing and proposed utilities, poles and hydrants; 
g.  Street dedications and improvements; 
(2)  Elevations to scale of all structures including architectural type, overhang, openings, balconies, decks and signs (in the case of existing structures and provided that no exterior elevation changes are proposed, photographs of each side of the structures may be submitted in lieu of elevations); 
(3)  Typical unit or units; 
(4)  Floor plans may be required for building and safety, and fire prevention review. 
(d)  Procedure. No application shall be reviewed by the planning commission or accepted by the staff until the materials requested of the applicant are presented. 
(e)  Applications submitted without the required submittals shall be deemed incomplete and, pursuant to the Permit Streamlining Act, a notice shall be sent to the applicant within 30 days of submittal indicating why the submittal is incomplete. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.30.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.30.050. - Enforcement of conditions of approval. 
    Failure to comply with the approved conditions of approval shall be considered a violation of this chapter and therefore shall result in the issuance of administrative citations as identified under chapter 6.30. The city planner or his designee may set the conditional use permit approval for review hearing before the planning commission for consideration of modification, discontinuance or revocation after the issuance of the third administrative citation. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.30.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.30.060. - Revocation or voiding of a conditional use permit. 
(a)  Each conditional use permit granted under the provisions of this chapter shall contain in its findings and conditions of approval specific instructions as to the length of time for authorized construction or establishment of use. When construction or establishment of use has not been diligently advanced to completion or occupancy of the buildings or land within six months of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
(b)  When an applicant submits a master plan of development or use and it is approved, and such ultimate development or uses will be completed over a number of years, the commission shall require the following: 
(1)  Time limit for construction or use of first buildings or areas to be utilized; 
(2)  At the time of construction or use of facilities proposed as future development on the approved master plan of development, the commission will require submittal of plans for the proposed development for plan review by the city planner or his designee. If proposed construction or use is substantially the same as indicated on the approved master plan of ultimate development the city planner may permit the proposed construction or use without a further public hearing. 
(3)  If the time for construction between phases exceeds five years, a subsequent conditional use permit shall be submitted to and approved by the planning commission. 
(c)  A conditional use permit shall become null and void if an approved use is discontinued for a period of 12 months or longer. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary, the city planner or planning commission may require modifications, discontinuances or revocation of any conditional use permit approval if it is found that the conditional use permit approval as operated or maintained: 
(1)  Jeopardizes or adversely affects the public health, peace, or safety of persons residing or working on the premises or surrounding area; or 
(2)  Constitutes a public nuisance; 
(3)  Has resulted in repeated nuisance activities, including but not limited to, disturbances of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, loitering, excessive littering, illegal parking, excessive loud noises (especially after 11:00 p.m. or before 8:00 a.m.), traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, or police detentions and arrests; 
(4)  Adversely impacts nearby uses; 
(5)  Violates any provisions of this chapter, or any other city, state, or federal regulation, ordinance, or statute; 
(6)  Violates any condition imposed by a prior discretionary land use approval including approvals granted pursuant to this chapter or this title; or an approval initiated by applicants of a property owner or owner's representative related to the use of land including, but not limited to, parcel map, tentative tract map, development agreement, etc. pursuant to a moratorium or an interim control ordinance; or 
(7)  Information contained on the application is false or incorrect at the time of the submittal. 
(e)  Procedures. The planning division shall give notice to the record owners and lessees of the real property affected to appear at a review hearing at a time and place fixed by the city planner or his designee, at a time and place fixed by the city planner or his designee and show cause before the planning commission why the conditional use permit approval should not be modified, discontinued or revoked. Upon the conclusion of the review hearing, the planning commission may request the city planner or his designee to set a public hearing for modification, discontinuance or revocation of the conditional use permit approval. 
(1)  Hearing notice. The planning division shall give notice of such review hearing to the property owner or lessee not less than 15 days prior to the proposed review hearing. Said notice shall indicate the reasons why the conditional use permit is being considered for modification, discontinuance or revocation. Public hearings requested by the planning commission as a result of a review hearing shall be noticed pursuant to chapter 19.40. 
(2)  Hearing and decision. 
a.  The matter may be set for public hearing before the planning commission. After the conclusion of the public hearing, the planning commission may require the modifications, discontinuance or revocation of the conditional use permit. As part of the action, the planning commission may impose conditions of operations as they deem appropriate, including those necessary to protect the best interest of the surrounding properties or neighborhood; to eliminate, lessen, or prevent any detrimental effect on the surrounding properties or neighborhood; or to ensure compliance with other applicable provisions of law or conditions of an earlier discretionary approval. Conditions imposed may include the establishment of amortization schedules, the closure or removal of buildings or structures, and affect the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the subject use, and related land uses, buildings, or structures. 
b.  Any determination shall be supported by written findings, including a finding that the planning commission's determination does not impair the constitutional rights of any person. The written determination shall also state that failure to comply with any or all conditions imposed may result in the issuance of an order to discontinue or revoke the conditional use permit approval. The planning commission may require the discontinuance or revocation of a conditional use permit only upon finding that: 
1.  Prior government efforts to cause the owner or operator to eliminate the problems associated with the conditional use permit approval have failed (examples include formal action, such as citations, orders or hearings by the police department, fire department, building and safety division, planning division, code compliance division, the city planning commission, or any other governmental agency); and 
2.  The owner or operator has failed to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the planning commission, the willingness or ability to eliminate the problems associated with the conditional use permit approval. 
(3)  Any modification, discontinuance or revocation shall be adopted by resolution. 
(f)  Appeals. The planning commission's action to modify, discontinue or revoke a conditional use permit approval may be appealed pursuant to chapter 19.44. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.30.060, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.30.070. - Revisions, modifications and extensions. 
    Revisions or modifications of conditional use permits can be requested by the applicant. 
(1)  Revisions/modifications by applicant. 
a.  Major revisions. A major revision or modification to an approved conditional use permit such as, but not limited to, change in conditions, expansions, intensification, location or hours of operation, may be requested by the applicant. Such request shall be processed through application of a new conditional use permit, pursuant to the provisions contained in this section. The applicant shall supply necessary information as determined by the city, to indicate reasons for the requested change. 
b.  Minor revisions. A revision or modification to an approved conditional use permit such as, but not limited to, minor changes in the site design, parking or building placement, which will not increase or change the use or intensity of the site, may be acted on by the planning director through the administrative review without notice procedure, pursuant to section 19.30.110(2). The applicant shall supply necessary information as determined by the planning director to indicate reasons for the requested change. 
(2)  Review by planning commission. The planning commission may periodically review any conditional use permit to ensure that it is being operated in a manner consistent with conditions of approval or in a manner which is not detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties in the vicinity. If, after review, the commission deems that there is sufficient evidence to warrant a full examination, then a public hearing date shall be set. 
(3)  Modification or revocation by the planning commission. 
a.  After setting a date for public hearing, the planning director, or his designee, shall notify the applicant and owners of the conditional use permit in question. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail and shall state that the commission will be reviewing the conditional use permit for possible modification or revocation. It shall also state the date, time and place of hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted and notice given in accordance with chapter 19.40. 
b.  The planning director, or his designee, shall fully investigate the evidence and prepare a report for the commission's consideration. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the commission shall render a decision to do one of the following measures: 
1.  Find that the conditional use permit is being conducted in an appropriate manner and that no action to modify or revoke is necessary; 
2.  Find that the conditional use permit is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and that modifications to conditions are necessary; or 
3.  Find that the conditional use permit is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and that modifications are not available to mitigate the impacts and therefore revoke the permit which requires the operation to cease and desist in the time allotted by the commission. 
c.  If the planning commission either modifies or revokes a conditional use permit, then they shall state reasons for such action within the resolution. 
(4)  Extensions may be approved by the economic development and planning manager, or his designee, upon receiving a written request from the property owner, applicant, or representative. The request shall explain the reasons and necessity for granting the extension. An extension may be granted for up to one year. Subsequent extensions may be requested provided that the extensions total no more than two years. 
(5)  New applications following denial or revocation. Following the denial or revocation of a conditional use permit application, no application for a conditional use permit for the same or substantially the same use or the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one year from the date of denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.30.070, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.30.080. - Publication, mailing of notices. 
    For publication and mailing of notices, see chapter 19.40. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.30.080, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.30.090. - Commission hearings. 
    For commission hearings, see section 19.42.010. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.30.090, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.30.100. - Appeals. 
    For appeals, see chapter 19.44. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.30.100, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.30.110. - Development review procedures. 
    Land use applications will be reviewed and approved in accordance with two basic procedures: 
(1)  Noticed public hearing by the planning commission, in which the planning commission hears public testimony for and against the land use proposal, reviews evidence and renders its decision; 
(2)  Administrative review without notice, used when land use decisions made by the reviewing authority are based upon standards that have been adopted by the city as law or policy, and the reviewing authority is allowed to render a decision without giving notice to surrounding property owners and other parties. The reviewing authority shall be the economic development and planning division. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.30.110, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.30.120. - Term of conditional use permit. 
    Each conditional use permit lawfully existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance amending this section and those conditional use permits granted in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall remain in effect for the effective life of the business service, or use authorized by such permit, subject to any conditions of approval or operating standards imposed by the planning commission or city council. Such permit shall remain in effect upon a change of business or property ownership. To allow for minor deviations in operating standards and conditions, the development services director may make an administrative determination that a use is in substantial compliance with an approved conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.30.120, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.32. - ZONING AND ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 19.32.010. - Purpose. 
(a)  A zoning ordinance amendment to this title or zoned district classification change on the zoning ordinance map may, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter, be made whenever the public necessity, general welfare, consistency with the General Plan, or good planning practice justifies such action. 
(b)  A proceeding for a rezoning or amendment to the text of the zoning ordinance may be initiated: 
(1)  By the council through the adoption of a motion, describing the proposed zoning ordinance amendment or zoned district classification change and directing the commission, to hold a public hearing thereon; 
(2)  By the commission on its own through the adoption of a motion by at least three of the authorized number of the commission; or 
(3)  By the filing with the commission of a zoning district classification change application. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.32.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.32.020. - Filing procedure. 
    An application for a zoning ordinance amendment or zoned district change (rezoning) shall be made to the commission in writing on forms for such action; furthermore: 
(1)  a.  All applications must be determined to be complete by the planning department prior to being set for public hearing. 
b.  In all cases, statutory time-frames imposed by the Government Code and California Environmental Quality Act apply. 
(2)  The commission shall cause to be made such investigation of facts bearing on the application that will provide the necessary information to ensure that the action requested on each application is consistent with the intent and purposes of this title. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.32.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.32.030. - Commission findings. 
(a)  The commission shall make a finding and determine if the proposed zoning ordinance or zoned district classification change is in conformance with the land use designation, policies, and standards of the General Plan. 
(b)  No zoning ordinance amendments or zoned district change shall be heard by the commission, nor any application filed unless such change is consistent with the adopted land use element of the General Plan. If an application for a zoning ordinance amendment or zoned district change is not consistent with the General Plan as determined by the director of community development, the applicant shall first file an application for a General Plan amendment, subject to the provisions of chapter 19.34 in order that such consistency would be achieved if the zoning ordinance amendment or zoned district change were to be approved by commission action. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.32.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.32.040. - Publication, mailing of notices. 
    For publication and mailing of notices, see chapter 19.40. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.32.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.32.050. - Commission hearings. 
    For commission hearings, see section 19.42.010. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.32.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.32.060. - Commission action. 
    Any recommendation by the commission for a zoning ordinance amendment or zoned district reclassification shall require the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the total voting members of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.32.060, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.32.070. - Commission decisions. 
    For commission decisions, see section 19.42.020. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.32.070, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.32.080. - Council action. 
(a)  If the commission recommends the approval or denial of the proposed change or amendment, or any portion thereof, it shall transmit the application, together with its report and recommendations to the council for its action. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the application, together with the commission's report and recommendations relative thereto, the council may: 
(1)  Confirm the recommendations of the commission for change or amendment; 
(2)  Conduct a public hearing and accept or reject the proposed change or amendment; or 
(3)  If the council does not agree with, or modifies part of the commission's recommendation, it shall refer the matter back to the commission for a report on the parts in question. Failure of the planning commission to report within 40 days after the reference, or such longer period as the council may designate, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed modification. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.32.080, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.32.090. - Refiling time limit. 
    For refiling time limit, see section 19.42.030. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.32.090, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.32.100. - Appeals. 
    For appeals, see chapter 19.44. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.32.100, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.34. - GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 19.34.010. - Purpose. 
(a)  An amendment to any element of the General Plan may, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter, be made whenever the public necessity, general welfare, changing urban socio-economic development, or good planning practice justifies such action. 
(b)  A proceeding for a General Plan amendment may be initiated: 
(1)  By the council through the adoption of a motion, describing the General Plan element affected and the nature of the amendment proposed, directing the commission to hold a public hearing thereon; 
(2)  By the commission on its own through the adoption of a motion describing the General Plan element affected and the nature of the amendment proposed by at least three of the authorized number of the commission; or 
(3)  By filing with the commission a General Plan amendment application. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.34.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.34.020. - Initial request by applicant. 
(a)  Prior to the filing of an application for an amendment to any element of the General Plan, the applicant shall forward a letter, together with applicable fees, to the planning department with the following information: 
(1)  Specific General Plan element to be changed; 
(2)  Nature of the change for the specific element; 
(3)  Reason for the General Plan change; 
(4)  Area of land involved in change and location; 
(5)  Signature of applicant and date of request, 
(b)  The planning commission shall, by majority vote, and within 40 days after receipt of the letter requesting change, either approve the request in principle or deny the request in principle. Approval or denial in principle does not constitute approval of a General Plan amendment, but only determines if further action shall be taken on the request. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.34.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.34.030. - Filing procedure. 
    If an applicant has received an approval, in principle, by the planning commission on a General Plan amendment, he may within 40 days file an application for a General Plan amendment, 
(1)  Applications submitted shall be set for public hearing on the nearest General Plan amendment commission hearing listed in section 19.34.040, excepting those applications that are received less than 30 days from the next regularly scheduled General Plan amendment hearing, in which case they shall be heard at the following regularly scheduled General Plan amendment hearing. 
(2)  The commission shall cause to be made such investigation of facts bearing on the application that will provide necessary information to ensure that the action on each application is consistent with the intent and purposes of this title. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.34.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.34.040. - General plan amendment commission hearing. 
(a)  All General Plan amendments shall be processed in accordance with the Government Code. 
(b)  All applications must be determined to be complete by the planning department prior to being set for public hearing. 
(c)  In all cases, statutory time-frames imposed by the Government Code and California Environmental Quality Act apply. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.34.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.34.050. - Publication, mailing of notices. 
    For publication and mailing of notices, see chapter 19.40. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.34.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.34.060. - Commission hearings. 
    For commission hearings, see section 19.42.010 and Government Code § 65353. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.34.060, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.34.070. - Commission action. 
    Any recommendation by the commission for a General Plan amendment shall require the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the total membership of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.34.070, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.34.080. - Council action. 
(a)  When the commission recommends the approval or denial of the proposed General Plan amendment, it shall transmit the application, together with its report and recommendations to the council for its action. 
(b)  (1)  All General Plan amendments shall be processed in accordance with the Government Code. 
(2)  Pursuant to Government Code § 65355, the council shall conduct at least one public hearing. 
(3)  In all cases, statutory time-frames imposed by the Government Code and California Environmental Quality Act apply. 
(c)  The council may, upon receipt of the application and report and recommendations of the commission: 
(1)  Approve the General Plan amendment; 
(2)  Deny the General Plan amendment; 
(3)  Modify the action proposed for a General Plan amendment, in which case it shall be referred back to the planning commission for its report and recommendation on such modification. 
(d)  Pursuant to Government Code § 65355, the council must have at least one public hearing prior to approving a General Plan amendment. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.34.080, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.34.090. - Refiling time limit. 
    For refiling time limit, see section 19.42.030. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.34.090, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.34.100. - Appeals. 
    For appeals, see chapter 19.44. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.34.100, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.36. - APPROVAL CONDITIONS 

Sec. 19.36.010. - Designation. 
    The commission in approving variances, conditional use permits, site approvals or planned unit developments may designate such lawful conditions in connection therewith as will, in its opinion, secure substantial protection for the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.36.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.36.020. - Designated. 
    Approval conditions may include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Special setbacks, yards, open spaces and buffers. 
(2)  Fences and walls. 
(3)  Lighting. 
(4)  Requiring street dedications and street improvement (or the posting of bonds or other financial mechanism as approved by the city engineer) to conform to the master plan of streets and highways or future street development, including service roads and alleys when necessary. 
(5)  Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress. 
(6)  Regulation of permitted signs. 
(7)  Regulation of time of certain activities. 
(8)  Requiring landscaping and maintenance thereof. 
(9)  Requiring maintenance of grounds. 
(10)  Regulation of noise, vibration, odors, dust and other nuisances. 
(11)  Time period within which proposed use shall be developed and minimum size of structure for first stage of development 
(12)  A request for a detailed plan for purpose of review, the site plan to be submitted by the applicant. 
(13)  Regulation of type of architecture. 
(14)  Regulation of height of buildings. 
(15)  Regulation and requirement for easements. 
(16)  Special site improvements. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.36.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.36.030. - Applicant agreement. 
    The commission may require that the applicant agree in writing to fulfill the required conditions as set forth herein and post within the city a faithful performance bond in an amount equal to the estimated cost of improvements plus ten percent. This bond may be furnished by a qualified surety company satisfactory to the finance director, except in cases where a cash deposit is accepted. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.36.030, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.38. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 19.38.010. - Purpose. 
(a)  A nonconforming use is a use of a structure or land which was lawfully established and maintained prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter or any prior nonconforming use ordinances of this city but which, under this title, does not conform with the use regulations for the district in which it is located. This chapter is intended to limit the number and extent of nonconforming uses by prohibiting their enlargement and their re-establishment after alteration of the structure they occupy and their restoration after destruction. Eventually nonconforming uses are to be eliminated. 
(b)  A nonconforming structure is a structure which was lawfully erected prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title or any prior nonconforming use ordinance of this city, but which, under this title, does not conform with the standards of coverage, yard spaces, height of structures or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located. While permitting the use and maintenance of nonconforming structures, this chapter is intended to limit the number and extent of nonconforming structures by prohibiting their being moved, altered or enlarged so as to increase any discrepancy between existing conditions and the standards prescribed in this title and by prohibiting their restoration after destruction. Eventually all nonconforming structures of nominal value are to be eliminated or altered to conform. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.38.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.38.020. - Continuation and maintenance. 
(a)  A use lawfully occupying a structure or a site on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or of amendments thereto which does not conform with the use regulations for the district in which the use is located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  A structure lawfully occupying a site on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or of amendments thereto which does not conform with the standards of coverage, front yard, side yards, rear yards, height of structures or distances between structures and/or other or additional development standards prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and may be used and maintained except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on a structure or site, the use of which is nonconforming, and on a nonconforming structure. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.38.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.38.030. - Alterations and additions; uses. 
(a)  No structure, the use of which is nonconforming, shall be moved, altered, or enlarged unless required by law, or unless the moving, alteration or enlargement will result in the elimination of the nonconforming use. 
(b)  No structure partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be moved, altered or enlarged in such a way as to permit the enlargement of the space occupied by the nonconforming use. No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or extended in such a way as to occupy any part of the structure or site or another structure or site which it did not occupy on the effective date of any ordinance codified in this title or of the amendment thereto which caused it to become a nonconforming use, or in such a way as to displace any conforming use occupying a structure or site. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.38.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.38.040. - Alterations and additions; structures. 
    No nonconforming structure shall be moved, altered, enlarged or reconstructed so as to increase any discrepancy between existing conditions and the standards of coverage, front yard, side yards, rear yard, height of structures or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.38.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.38.050. - Changes of use. 
    If no alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building or site may be changed to permit a similar or more restrictive type nonconforming use, subject to the provisions of chapter 19.30 (conditional uses). 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.38.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.38.060. - Abandonment or cessation. 
    Any cessation of or abandonment of use for a period of six months or more shall require termination of such nonconforming use. Such cessation or abandonment shall be determined by factors, specifically including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Lapse of business license. 
(2)  Field observance by inspection personnel regarding any use of the premises. 
(3)  The physical condition of the premises. 
(4)  Lack of utilities. 
(5)  Building official determines the structure unsafe or uninhabitable. 
(6)  Any other objective facts evidencing an abandonment or cessation of use. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.38.060, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.38.070. - Restoration of a damaged structure. 
    The restoration of a nonconforming building that is damaged or partially destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God, or of the public enemy to the extent of 50 percent or less shall be permitted; provided, that such restoration is permitted by the building code of the city and is started within one year and diligently pursued to completion. A nonconforming building that is damaged in excess of 50 percent of the building valuation shall not be restored except in full conformity with all the regulations of this title. The proportion of damage or partial destruction shall be based upon the ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the building to its prior condition and to the estimated cost of duplicating the entire structure as it existed prior thereto. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.38.070, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.38.080. - Nonconforming buildings-Changes. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this title, no nonconforming building shall be enlarged, remodeled or structurally altered unless the entire building is so changed as to be conforming. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.38.080, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.38.090. - Same-Nonresidential alterations. 
    Any nonresidential use in an appropriate district which is nonconforming only with respect to a deficiency in yard dimensions or in parking spaces may be structurally altered or enlarged; provided, that any addition or enlargement shall itself be fully conforming. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.38.090, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.38.100. - Same-Dwelling alterations. 
    A dwelling in any residential district which is nonconforming only with respect to a deficiency in yard dimensions or in parking spaces may be structurally altered or enlarged; provided, that any addition or enlargement shall itself be fully conforming and that the number of dwelling units in the structure shall not be increased. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.38.100, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.38.110. - Same-Maintenance. 
    Ordinary maintenance and minor repair of a nonconforming building (excluding structural remodeling) is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.38.110, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.38.120. - Annexation of nonconforming uses/structures. 
    All property which contains nonconforming uses/structures which are annexed to the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be subject to all provisions as listed in this chapter. Any additions or alterations to such nonconforming uses or structures shall comply with section 19.38.040. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.38.120, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.38.130. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  All signs located upon a site which no longer advertise an existing business conducted or product sold on the premises or any signs located upon a site where the business has been discontinued or abandoned for a period of six months shall be considered nonconforming. Said sign copy shall be removed or caused to be removed by the owner of the site within 30 days of discontinuance of the business advertised thereon and/or notification by the city. Any site containing nonconforming signs may not be expanded, altered or enlarged until such time as the nonconforming signs have been removed or reconstructed so as to bring them into conformity. 
(b)  Antique, vintage or locally significant signs may remain provided they are structurally sound and pose no safety concerns and are maintained in a good quality condition. Should an antique, vintage or locally significant sign be removed, it is encouraged that the owner to contact a local museum or collector in lieu of destroying and/or disposing of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.38.130, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.40. - NOTICES 

Sec. 19.40.010. - Publication; mailings. 
(a)  General projects. Publication and mailing of notices for public hearings as required in the several chapters of this title shall be required as follows using combination of no less than two of the following methods as required by state law. 
(1)  Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation not less than ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(2)  Notices shall be mailed not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing to owners of property within a radius of 300 feet of the external boundaries of the property described in the application, using for this purpose the last known name and address of owners shown on the latest tax roll of San Bernardino County. 
(3)  Notice shall be posted at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing within a radius of 300 feet of the property described in the application, and not less than three such notices shall be posted for any required public hearing. 
(b)  Citywide projects. Publication and mailing of notices for public hearings for citywide projects, including but not limited to ordinance amendments, shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation not less than ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(2)  Notices shall be mailed not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing to persons who file a written request for notice. 
(c)  Notices for land use matters (excluding subdivisions) shall be subject to California Government Code §§ 65355, 65853, 65854, 65858, 65867, 65090, 65091, 65092, 65094, and 65905. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.40.010, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.42. - COMMISSION 

Sec. 19.42.010. - Hearings. 
(a)  Commission hearings as provided in this title shall be conducted before the commission. The commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of public hearings and the members of the commission presiding at the hearing are empowered to administer oaths to any person testifying before it. 
(b)  Summary of all pertinent testimony offered at public hearings and the names of persons testifying shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent minutes of the commission. 
(c)  If, for any reason, testimony on any item set for a public hearing cannot be completed on the day set for the hearing, the commissioner presiding at the public hearing may, before the adjournment or recess thereof, publicly announce the time and place at which the hearing will be continued and the announcement shall serve as sufficient notice of the continuance and without further recourse to the form of public notice as provided for in this title. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.42.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.42.020. - Notice of decisions. 
    A written report of the decision of the planning commission for any order, requirement, decision, determination, interpretation, ruling or application shall be mailed to the applicant not later than five days after commission decision. The decisions of the commission under this chapter shall become effective five working days after the date of the decision. In the case of tentative parcel maps, the decision of the commission under this chapter shall become effective ten calendar days after the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.42.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.42.030. - Refiling time limit. 
    Any variance, site approval, conditional use permit, land use district classification change, General Plan amendment, home occupation permit, or other decision made by the commission or council on any application for the same property for the same general purpose which has been denied by the commission or council shall not be received or processed by the commission until 12 months after denial except by a simple majority of the members of the commission or council present at a regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.42.030, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.44. - APPEALS AND CALLS FOR REVIEW 

Sec. 19.44.010. - Generally. 
(a)  Appeals. To avoid results that are inconsistent with the purposes of this Code, any order, requirement, decision, determination, interpretation or ruling of the community development director in administration of this title or of the planning commission on any application filed pursuant to this title may be appealed. Action of the community development director shall be appealed to the planning commission, and action of the planning commission shall be appealed to the city council. Unless otherwise prescribed in the individual chapters of this code, any person aggrieved by, or alleging such error may initiate an appeal. 
(b)  Calls for review. Unless precluded by state law, as an additional safeguard to avoid results inconsistent with the purposes of this Code, the mayor and one council member, or any two city council members may call up any order, requirement, decision, determination, interpretation or ruling of the planning commission for city council review. If only the mayor, or only one council member wishes to call up a decision, the process shall be consistent with the appeal provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.44.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.44.020. - Form and content. 
(a)  Filing of appeals. Appeals shall be in writing and shall be filed in the office of the planning department for community development director decisions, and in the office of city clerk for planning commission decisions upon forms provided by the city. An appeal from any order, requirement, decision, determination, or interpretation must set forth specifically where there was an error or abuse of discretion or where an application did meet or fail to meet, as the case may be, those qualifications or standards set forth in this title as being prerequisite in the granting of any application. 
(b)  Calls for review. A call for city council review may be initiated by the mayor or any member of the city council with concurrence of another city council member and shall be filed in writing with the city clerk and should not state the reasons or justification for the review. 
(c)  Effect on decisions. Decisions that are appealed or called for review shall not become effective until the appeal or review is resolved. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.44.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.44.030. - Time for filing. 
(a)  Appeals. Appeals shall be filed within five working days after community development director or planning commission action, except in the case of subdivisions, which shall be filed within ten calendar days after action. 
(b)  Calls for review. Calls for review shall be initiated within five working days after commission action. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.44.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.44.040. - Filing fees. 
(a)  Appeals. An appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount determined by city council resolution. 
(b)  Calls for review. No fee shall be required for a call for review. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.44.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.44.050. - Procedures for appeals and calls for review. 
(a)  Scheduling. 
(1)  Within 30 days after the appeal of a community development director's decision, the planning commission shall hear the appeal, and give prior notice of the date, time and place thereof to the appellant. Prior to such hearing, the community development director shall transmit to the planning commission secretary a report of the community development director's decision, including all exhibits, notices, petitions and other papers and documents pertinent to the matter. The community development director, or the director's designee shall be represented in order to make known the reasons for the director's decision. 
(2)  Within 40 days after the appeal or call for review of a planning commission decision is filed, the city council shall hear the appeal or call for review, and give prior notice of the date, time and place thereof to the applicant, the commission and the appellant, if any. Prior to such hearing, the planning commission secretary shall transmit to the city clerk a report of the findings of the commission and shall present at the hearing all exhibits, notices, petitions and other papers and documents on file in order to make known the reasons for the commission's decision. 
(b)  Hearing and notice. An appeal or call for review shall be a public hearing if the decision being appealed or reviewed required a public hearing pursuant to chapter 19.40. Notice shall be given in the manner required for the decision being appealed or reviewed. All other appeals or calls for review shall be a hearing only, and shall not be subject to the public hearing requirements. 
(c)  Evidence. At the hearing, the planning commission (in the case of a director's decision) or city council (in the case of a commission decision) shall only consider all pertinent material and documents constituting the administrative record upon which the decision being appealed or reviewed is based. Introduction of new information during the hearing shall cause the matter and that new information to be remanded back to the community development director (in the case of a director's decision) or the planning commission (in the case of a commission decision) for consideration. 
(d)  Hearing. At the hearing, any party or person may appear in person or by agent or attorney to provide testimony. 
(e)  Required findings, decision and notice. 
(1)  Following a planning commission appeal hearing, the planning commission may remand the matter to the director for further consideration or may affirm (in whole or in part), modify, or reverse the decision appealed. The planning commission decision shall be made within 30 days of the hearing date. The secretary of the planning commission shall mail notice of the planning commission decision to the appellant within five working days after the date of the decision. 
(2)  Following a city council appeal or review hearing, the city council may remand the matter to the planning commission for further consideration or may affirm (in whole or in part), modify, or reverse the decision appealed or reviewed. If the city council does not remand the matter to the planning commission, it shall make the findings prescribed by this Code for the matter in issue. The city council decision shall be made within 30 days of the hearing date. The city clerk shall mail notice of the city council decision to the applicant and to the appellant, if any, within five working days after the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.44.050, 7-20-2015) 
CHAPTER 19.46. - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 19.46.010. - Intent. 
    The city council finds and declares that development agreements further the health, safety and welfare interests of the citizens of the city and the interest of developers. Development agreements promote the orderly development of real property within the city by ensuring compliance with the General Plan, zoning and code requirements. Development agreements will further address concerns that ensure adequate infrastructure will be available for any proposed project. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.46.010, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.46.020. - Applications. 
(a)  Authority for adoption. These regulations are adopted under the authority of Government Code §§ 65864 through 65869.5. 
(b)  Forms and information. 
(1)  The city planner shall prescribe the form for each application, notice and document provided for or required under these regulations for the preparation and implementation of development agreements. 
(2)  The city planner may require an applicant to submit such information and supporting data as the city planner considers necessary to process the application. 
(c)  Fees. The city council shall, by separate resolution, fix the schedule of fees and charges imposed for the filing and processing of each application and document provided for or required under these regulations. 
(d)  Qualification as an applicant. Only a qualified applicant may file an application to enter into a development agreement. A qualified applicant is a person who has legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of the development agreement. Applicant includes authorized agent. The city planner shall require an applicant to submit proof of this interest in the real property and of the authority of the agent to act for the applicant. The applicant shall submit original, signed, notarized documents from the property owner identifying the applicant as the authorized agent for proposed project developments and agreements. 
(e)  Proposed form of agreement. Each application shall be accompanied by the form of development agreement approved by the city. This requirement may be met by designating the city's standard form of development agreement, or as approved by the city, and including specific proposals for changes in or additions to the language of the standard form. 
(f)  Review of application. The city planner shall endorse on the application the date it is received. The city planner shall review the application and may reject it if it is incomplete or inaccurate for processing. If the city planner finds that the application is complete, the city planner shall accept it for filing. The city planner shall review the application and determine the additional requirements necessary to complete the agreement. After receiving the required information, the city planner shall prepare a staff report and recommendation and shall state whether or not the agreement proposed would be consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.46.020, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.46.030. - Notices and public hearing. 
    Notices and hearings for development agreements shall be in accordance with terms as specified pursuant to chapter 19.40, "Notices." 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.46.030, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.46.040. - Standards of review, findings and decision. 
(a)  Determination by planning commission. 
(1)  After the public hearing by the planning commission, the planning commission shall make its recommendation in writing to the city council. The recommendation shall include the planning commission's determination as to whether or not the development agreement proposed: 
a.  Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the General Plan and any applicable specific plan; 
b.  Is compatible with the uses authorized in, and the regulations prescribed for, the land use district in which the real property is located; 
c.  Is in conformity with public convenience, general welfare and good land use practice; 
d.  Will be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare; and 
e.  Will adversely affect the orderly development of property. 
(2)  The recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation. 
(b)  Decision by city council. 
(1)  After the city council completes the public hearing, it may accept, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the planning commission. It shall refer matters not previously considered by the planning commission during its hearing back to the planning commission for report and recommendation. 
(2)  The city council may not approve the development agreement unless it finds that the provisions of the agreement are consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan. 
(3)  Approval of the development agreement. If the city council approves the development agreement, it shall do so by the adoption of a resolution. 
(4)  After the resolution approving the development agreement takes effect, the city council may enter into the agreement. 
(c)  Approval of the development agreement. If the city council approves the development agreement, it shall do so by the adoption of a resolution. After the resolution approving the development agreement takes effect, the city council may enter into the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.46.040, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.46.050. - Amendment and cancellation of agreement by mutual consent. 
(a)  Initiation of amendment or cancellation. Either party may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement previously entered into. Said amendments to a development agreement, or cancellation of same, shall occur only by mutual consent. 
(b)  Procedure. The procedure for proposing an adoption of an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement is the same as the procedure for entering into agreement in the first instance. However, where the city initiates the proposed amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement, it shall first give notice to the developer of its intention to initiate such proceedings at least 15 days in advance of the giving of notice or intention to consider the amendment or cancellation required by section 19.46.030. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.46.050, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.46.060. - Recordation of development agreement, amendment or cancellation. 
(a)  Within ten days after the city enters into the development agreement, the city clerk shall have the agreement recorded with the county recorder. 
(b)  If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the agreement as provided in Government Code § 68868, or if the city terminates or modifies the agreement as provided in Government Code § 65865.1 for failure of the applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the city clerk shall have notice of such action recorded with the county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.46.060, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.46.070. - Periodic review. 
(a)  Time for and initiation of review. The city may review the development agreement every 12 months from the date the agreement is entered into. The time for review may be modified either by agreement between the parties or by initiation in one or more of the following ways: 
(1)  Recommendation of the planning staff; 
(2)  Affirmative vote of at least three members of the planning commission; 
(3)  Affirmative vote of at least three members of the city council. 
(b)  Notice of periodic review. The city planner may initiate the review proceedings by giving notice that the city intends to undertake a periodic review of the development agreement to the developer. The city planner shall give the notice at least 15 days in advance of the time at which the matter will be considered by the planning commission. 
(c)  Delegation to the city planner. Review shall be conducted by the city planner. 
(d)  Public hearing. The planning commission may conduct a public hearing at which the developer must demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. The burden of proof on this issue is upon the developer. 
(e)  Findings upon public hearing. The planning commission shall determine, upon the basis of substantial evidence, whether or not the developer has, for the period under review, complied in good faith with the terms and condition of the agreement. 
(f)  Procedure upon findings. 
(1)  If the planning commission finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the property owner has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the review for that period is concluded, and a notice of that determination shall be published and mailed as provided in section 19.46.030. 
(2)  If the planning commission finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the property owner has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the planning commission shall forward its recommendation to the city council and the city council may modify or terminate the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.46.070, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 19.46.080. - Modification or termination. 
(a)  Proceedings upon modification or termination. 
(1)  If, upon a finding under section 19.46.070, the city determines to proceed with modification or termination of the agreement, the city shall give notice to the developer of its intention to do so. The notice shall contain: 
a.  The time and place of the public hearing, which shall be conducted by the city council; 
b.  A statement as to the proposed action to either terminate or modify the development agreement; and 
c.  Other information which the city considers necessary to inform the developer of the nature of the proceeding. 
(2)  The proceeding shall be conducted in compliance with chapter 19.40 entitled "Notices." Nothing in this section shall prevent a request by the developer for modification or termination of the development agreement. However, said proceedings shall also be conducted in compliance with this section. 
(b)  Hearing on modification or termination. At the time and place set for the public hearing on modification or termination, the developer shall be given an opportunity to be heard. If the request for modification or termination is received from the developer, the city council may refer the matter back to the planning commission for review and written recommendation. The city council may impose those conditions to the action it takes as it considers necessary to protect the interests of the city. The decision of the city council is final. 
(Ord. No. 934-2015, § 19.46.080, 7-20-2015) 
APPENDIX A. - CITY OF BARSTOW ZONING MAP 

(Ord. No. 934-2015, exh. B, 7-20-2015) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1969 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1969 Code, as supplemented and updated through February 2, 2015, which are included herein. Sections of the 1969 Code, as supplemented and updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1969 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1.01.020 1.01.020 1.01.030 1.01.030 1.01.040 1.01.040 1.01.050 1.01.060 1.01.060 1.01.070 1.01.070 1.01.090 1.01.080 1.01.110 1.01.090 1.01.130 1.01.100 1.01.140 1.01.110 1.01.150 1.01.120 1.01.160 1.01.130 1.01.170 1.01.140 1.01.180 1.02.010 1.02.010 1.02.020 1.02.020 1.02.030 1.02.030 1.05.010 1.05.010 1.05.020 1.05.020 2.04.010 2.04.010 2.04.011 2.04.012 2.04.020 2.04.020 2.08.010 2.08.010 2.08.020 2.08.020 2.08.030 2.08.030 2.08.040 2.08.040 2.08.050 2.08.050 2.08.060 2.08.060 2.08.070 2.08.070 2.10.100 2.16.100 2.12.010 2.12.010 2.12.020 2.12.020 2.16.010 2.16.010 2.16.020 2.16.020 2.16.030 2.16.030 2.16.040 2.16.040 2.16.050 2.16.050 2.16.060 2.16.060 2.16.070 2.16.070 2.16.080 2.16.080 2.16.085 2.16.085 2.16.090 2.16.090 2.20.010 2.20.010 2.20.020 2.20.020 2.20.030 2.20.030 2.24.010 2.24.010 2.24.020 2.24.020 2.24.030 2.24.030 2.24.035 2.24.035 2.24.040 2.24.040 2.24.050 2.24.050 2.24.060 2.24.060 2.24.070 2.24.070 2.24.080 2.24.080 2.24.090 2.24.090 2.28.010 2.28.010 2.28.020 2.28.020 2.28.030 2.28.030 2.28.040 2.28.040 2.42.010 2.42.010 2.42.020 2.42.020 2.42.030 2.42.030 2.42.040 2.42.040 2.42.050 2.42.050 2.42.060 2.42.060 2.42.070 2.42.070 2.48.010 2.48.010 2.48.020 2.48.020 2.48.030 2.48.030 2.48.040 2.48.040 2.48.050 2.48.050 2.48.060 2.48.060 2.48.070 2.48.070 2.48.080 2.48.080 2.48.090 2.48.090 2.48.100 2.48.100 2.48.110 2.48.110 2.48.120 2.48.120 2.48.130 2.48.130 2.48.140 2.48.140 2.52.010 2.52.010 2.52.020 2.52.020 3.04.010 3.04.010 3.04.020 3.04.020 3.08.010 3.08.010 3.08.020 3.08.020 3.08.030 3.08.030 3.08.040 3.08.040 3.08.050 3.08.050 3.08.060 3.08.060 3.08.070 3.08.070 3.08.075 3.08.075 3.08.080 3.08.080 3.08.090 3.08.100 3.08.100 3.08.110 3.08.110 3.08.120 3.08.120 3.08.130 3.08.130 3.08.140 3.08.140 3.08.150 3.08.150 3.08.160 3.12.010 3.12.010 3.12.020 3.12.020 3.12.040 3.12.040 3.12.050 3.12.050 3.12.060 3.12.060 3.12.070 3.12.070 3.12.080 3.12.080 3.12.090 3.12.090 3.12.100 3.12.100 3.12.110 3.12.110 3.12.120 3.12.120 3.12.130 3.12.130 3.12.140 3.12.140 3.12.150 3.12.150 3.16.010 3.16.010 3.16.020 3.16.020 3.16.030 3.16.030 3.16.040 3.16.040 3.16.050 3.16.050 3.16.060 3.16.060 3.16.070 3.16.070 3.16.080 3.16.080 3.16.090 3.16.090 3.16.100 3.16.100 3.16.110 3.16.110 3.16.120 3.16.120 3.16.130 3.16.130 3.16.140 3.16.140 3.16.150 3.16.150 3.20.010 3.20.010 3.20.020 3.20.020 3.24.010 3.24.010 3.24.020 3.24.020 3.24.030 3.24.030 3.29.010 3.29.010 3.29.020 3.29.020 3.29.030 3.29.030 5.04.010 5.04.010 5.04.020 5.04.020 5.04.030 5.04.030 5.04.040 5.04.040 5.04.050 5.04.050 5.04.060 5.04.060 5.04.070 5.04.070 5.04.080 5.04.080 5.04.090 5.04.090 5.04.100 5.04.100 5.04.110 5.04.110 5.04.120 5.04.120 5.04.130 5.04.130 5.04.140 5.04.140 5.08.010 5.08.010 5.08.020 5.08.020 5.08.030 5.08.030 5.08.040 5.08.040 5.08.050 5.08.050 5.08.060 5.08.060 5.08.070 5.08.070 5.08.080 5.08.080 5.08.090 5.08.090 5.08.100 5.08.100 5.08.110 5.08.110 5.08.120 5.08.120 5.08.130 5.08.130 5.08.140 5.08.140 5.08.150 5.08.150 5.08.160 5.08.160 5.08.170 5.08.170 5.08.180 5.08.180 5.08.190 5.08.190 5.08.200 5.08.200 5.08.210 5.08.210 5.08.220 5.08.220 5.08.230 5.08.230 5.08.240 5.08.240 5.08.250 5.08.250 5.12.010 5.12.010 5.12.020 5.12.020 5.24.010 5.24.010 5.27.010 5.27.010 5.27.020 5.27.020 5.27.030 5.27.030 5.27.040 5.27.040 5.27.050 5.27.050 5.27.060 5.27.060 5.27.070 5.27.070 5.27.080 5.27.080 5.36.010 5.36.010 5.36.020 5.36.020 5.36.030 5.36.030 5.36.040 5.36.040 5.36.050 5.36.050 5.36.060 5.36.060 5.36.070 5.36.070 5.36.080 5.36.080 5.60.010 5.60.010 5.60.020 5.60.020 5.60.030 5.60.030 5.60.040 5.60.040 5.60.080 5.60.080 5.60.130 5.60.130 5.60.140 5.60.140 5.60.150 5.60.150 5.60.160 5.60.160 5.60.170 5.60.170 5.60.180 5.60.180 5.70.010 5.70.010 5.70.020 5.70.020 5.70.030 5.70.030 5.70.040 5.70.040 5.70.050 5.70.050 5.70.060 5.70.060 5.70.070 5.70.070 5.70.080 5.70.080 5.70.090 5.70.090 5.80.010 5.80.010 5.80.020 5.80.020 5.80.030 5.80.030 5.80.040 5.80.040 5.80.050 5.80.050 5.80.060 5.80.060 5.80.070 5.80.070 5.80.080 5.80.080 5.80.090 5.80.090 5.80.100 5.80.100 5.84.010 5.84.010 5.84.020 5.84.020 5.84.030 5.84.030 5.90.010 5.90.010 5.90.020 5.90.020 5.90.030 5.90.030 5.90.040 5.90.040 5.92.010 5.92.010 5.92.020 5.92.020 5.92.030 5.92.030 5.92.040 5.92.040 5.92.050 5.92.050 5.92.060 5.92.060 5.92.070 5.92.070 5.92.080 5.92.080 5.92.090 5.92.090 5.92.100 5.92.100 5.92.110 5.92.110 5.92.120 5.92.120 6.20.010 6.20.010 6.20.020 6.20.020 6.20.030 6.20.030 6.20.040 6.20.040 6.20.050 6.20.050 6.20.060 6.20.060 6.20.070 6.20.070 6.20.080 6.20.080 6.20.090 6.20.090 6.20.100 6.20.100 6.20.110 6.20.110 6.20.120 6.20.120 6.20.130 6.20.130 6.20.140 6.20.140 6.20.150 6.20.150 6.20.160 6.20.160 6.20.180 6.20.180 6.20.190 6.20.190 6.20.200 6.20.200 6.20.210 6.20.210 6.20.220 6.20.220 6.20.230 6.20.230 6.20.240 6.20.240 6.20.250 6.20.250 6.20.260 6.20.260 6.20.270 6.20.270 6.20.280 6.20.280 6.20.290 6.20.290 6.20.300 6.20.300 6.20.310 6.20.310 6.20.320 6.20.320 6.20.330 6.20.330 6.20.340 6.20.340 6.20.350 6.20.350 6.20.360 6.20.360 6.20.370 6.20.370 6.20.380 6.20.380 6.20.390 6.20.390 6.20.400 6.20.400 6.20.410 6.20.410 6.20.420 6.20.420 6.20.430 6.20.430 6.20.440 6.20.440 6.20.450 6.20.450 6.20.460 6.20.460 6.20.470 6.20.470 6.20.480 6.20.480 6.20.490 6.20.490 6.20.500 6.20.500 6.20.510 6.20.510 6.20.520 6.20.520 6.20.530 6.20.530 6.20.540 6.20.540 6.20.550 6.20.550 6.20.560 6.20.560 6.20.570 6.20.570 6.20.580 6.20.580 6.20.590 6.20.590 6.20.600 6.20.600 6.20.610 6.20.610 6.20.620 6.20.620 6.20.630 6.20.630 6.20.640 6.20.640 6.20.650 6.20.650 6.20.660 6.20.660 6.20.665 6.20.665 6.20.670 6.20.670 6.21.010 6.21.010 6.21.020 6.21.020 6.21.030 6.21.030 6.21.040 6.21.040 6.21.050 6.21.050 6.21.060 6.21.060 6.21.070 6.21.070 6.21.080 6.21.080 6.22.010 6.22.010 6.22.020 6.22.020 6.22.030 6.22.030 6.22.040 6.22.040 6.22.050 6.22.050 6.22.060 6.22.060 6.22.070 6.22.070 6.22.080 6.22.080 6.22.090 6.22.090 6.22.100 6.22.100 6.22.110 6.22.110 6.22.120 6.22.120 6.22.130 6.22.130 6.22.140 6.22.140 6.22.150 6.22.150 6.24.010 6.24.010 6.24.020 6.24.020 6.24.030 6.24.030 6.24.040 6.24.040 6.24.050 6.24.050 6.30.010 6.30.010 6.30.020 6.30.020 6.30.030 6.30.030 6.30.040 6.30.040 6.30.050 6.30.050 6.30.060 6.30.060 6.30.070 6.30.070 6.30.080 6.30.080 6.30.090 6.30.090 6.30.100 6.30.100 6.30.110 6.30.110 6.30.120 6.30.120 6.30.130 6.30.130 6.30.140 6.30.140 6.32.010 6.32.010 6.32.020 6.32.020 6.32.030 6.32.030 6.32.040 6.32.040 6.32.050 6.32.050 6.32.060 6.32.060 6.32.070 6.32.070 6.32.080 6.32.080 6.32.100 6.32.100 6.34.010 6.34.010 6.34.020 6.34.020 6.36.010 6.36.010 6.36.020 6.36.020 6.36.030 6.36.030 6.36.040 6.36.040 6.36.050 6.36.050 6.36.060 6.36.060 6.36.070 6.36.070 6.36.080 6.36.080 6.36.090 6.36.090 6.36.100 6.36.100 7.04.010 7.04.010 7.04.020 7.04.020 7.04.030 7.04.030 7.04.040 7.04.040 7.04.050 7.04.050 7.08.010 7.08.010 7.08.020 7.08.020 7.08.030 7.08.030 7.12.010 7.12.010 7.16.010 7.16.010 7.20.010 7.20.010 8.04.010 8.04.010 8.04.020 8.04.020 8.04.050 8.04.050 8.04.060 8.04.060 8.04.070 8.04.070 8.08.010 8.08.010 8.08.020 8.08.020 8.08.040 8.08.040 8.08.050 8.08.050 8.08.060 8.08.060 8.08.070 8.08.070 8.08.080 8.08.080 8.08.090 8.08.090 8.08.100 8.08.100 8.08.110 8.08.110 8.08.120 8.08.120 8.08.130 8.08.130 8.08.140 8.08.140 8.12.010 8.12.010 8.12.020 8.12.020 8.12.030 8.12.030 8.12.040 8.12.040 8.12.050 8.12.050 8.12.060 8.12.060 8.12.070 8.12.070 8.12.080 8.12.080 8.12.090 8.12.090 8.12.100 8.12.100 8.12.110 8.12.110 8.12.120 8.12.120 8.12.130 8.12.130 8.12.140 8.12.140 8.12.150 8.12.150 8.12.160 8.12.160 8.12.170 8.12.170 8.12.180 8.12.180 8.12.190 8.12.190 8.12.200 8.12.200 8.12.210 8.12.210 8.12.220 8.12.220 8.12.230 8.12.230 8.14.010 8.14.010 8.14.020 8.14.020 8.14.030 8.14.030 8.16.010 8.16.010 8.16.020 8.16.020 8.16.030 8.16.030 8.18.010 8.18.010 8.18.020 8.18.020 8.18.030 8.18.030 8.20.010 8.20.010 8.20.020 8.20.020 8.20.030 8.20.030 8.20.040 8.20.040 8.20.050 8.20.050 9.04.010 9.04.010 9.04.020 9.04.020 9.04.030 9.04.030 9.04.040 9.04.040 9.04.050 9.04.050 9.04.060 9.04.060 9.04.070 9.04.070 9.04.080 9.04.080 9.04.090 9.04.090 9.04.100 9.04.100 9.12.010 9.12.010 9.12.020 9.12.020 9.16.010 9.16.010 9.16.020 9.16.020 9.20.060 9.25.060 9.24.040 9.24.040 9.24.050 9.24.050 9.24.060 9.24.070 9.25.010 9.25.010 9.25.020 9.25.020 9.25.030 9.25.030 9.25.040 9.25.040 9.25.050 9.25.050 9.25.070 9.25.070 9.25.080 9.25.080 9.25.090 9.25.090 9.25.100 9.25.100 9.25.110 9.25.110 9.25.120 9.25.120 9.25.130 9.25.130 9.25.140 9.25.140 9.25.150 9.25.150 9.25.160 9.25.160 9.25.170 9.25.170 9.25.180 9.25.180 9.25.190 9.25.190 9.25.200 9.25.200 9.25.210 9.25.210 9.25.220 9.25.220 9.25.230 9.25.230 9.25.240 9.25.240 9.25.250 9.25.250 9.28.010 9.28.010 9.28.020 9.28.020 9.28.030 9.28.030 9.28.040 9.28.040 9.28.050 9.28.050 9.28.060 9.28.060 9.28.070 9.28.070 9.28.080 9.28.080 9.32.010 9.32.010 9.32.020 9.32.020 9.32.030 9.32.030 9.32.040 9.32.040 9.32.045 9.32.045 9.32.050 9.32.050 9.32.060 9.32.060 9.32.070 9.32.070 9.32.080 9.32.080 9.32.090 9.32.090 9.33.010 9.33.010 9.33.020 9.33.020 9.33.030 9.33.030 9.33.040 9.33.040 9.33.050 9.33.050 9.34.010 9.34.010 9.34.020 9.34.020 9.34.030 9.34.030 9.34.040 9.34.040 9.34.050 9.34.050 9.36.010 9.36.010 9.36.020 9.36.020 9.36.030 9.36.030 9.36.040 9.36.040 9.42.010 9.42.010 9.45.010 9.45.010 9.45.020 9.45.020 9.45.030 9.45.030 9.45.040 9.45.040 9.45.050 9.45.050 9.45.060 9.45.060 9.45.070 9.45.070 9.45.080 9.45.080 9.45.090 9.45.090 9.48.010 9.48.010 9.48.020 9.48.020 9.50.010 9.50.010 9.50.020 9.50.020 9.50.030 9.50.030 9.52.010 9.52.010 9.52.020 9.52.020 9.52.030 9.52.030 9.60.010 9.60.010 9.60.020 9.60.020 9.60.030 9.60.030 9.60.040 9.60.040 9.60.050 9.60.050 9.60.060 9.60.060 9.60.070 9.60.070 9.62.010 9.62.010 9.62.020 9.62.020 9.62.030 9.62.030 9.62.040 9.62.040 9.62.050 9.62.050 9.62.060 9.62.060 9.62.070 9.62.070 9.62.080 9.62.080 9.62.090 9.62.090 9.62.100 9.62.100 9.62.110 9.62.110 9.62.120 9.62.120 9.62.130 9.62.130 9.64.010 9.64.010 9.64.020 9.64.020 9.64.030 9.64.030 9.64.040 9.64.040 10.04.010 10.04.010 10.04.020 10.04.020 10.04.030 10.04.030 10.04.040 10.04.040 10.04.060 10.04.060 10.04.070 10.04.070 10.04.080 10.04.080 10.04.085 10.04.085 10.04.090 10.04.090 10.04.100 10.04.100 10.04.110 10.04.110 10.04.120 10.04.120 10.04.130 10.04.130 10.04.140 10.04.140 10.04.150 10.04.150 10.04.155 10.04.155 10.09.010 10.09.010 10.09.020 10.09.020 10.09.030 10.09.030 10.09.040 10.09.040 10.12.010 10.12.010 10.12.020 10.12.020 10.12.030 10.12.030 10.12.040 10.12.040 10.12.050 10.12.050 10.12.060 10.12.060 10.12.070 10.12.070 10.12.080 10.12.080 10.16.010 10.16.010 10.16.020 10.16.020 10.16.030 10.16.030 10.16.040 10.16.040 10.16.050 10.16.050 10.16.060 10.16.060 10.16.070 10.16.070 10.16.080 10.16.080 10.18.010 10.18.010 10.20.010 10.20.010 10.20.020 10.20.020 10.20.030 10.20.030 10.24.010 10.24.010 10.28.010 10.28.010 10.28.020 10.28.020 10.28.030 10.28.030 10.32.010 10.32.010 10.32.020 10.32.020 10.32.030 10.32.030 10.32.040 10.32.040 10.32.050 10.32.050 10.32.060 10.32.060 10.32.070 10.32.070 10.32.080 10.32.080 10.32.090 10.32.090 10.36.010 10.36.010 10.36.020 10.36.020 10.36.030 10.36.030 10.40.010 10.40.010 10.40.020 10.40.020 10.40.030 10.40.030 10.40.040 10.40.040 10.40.050 10.40.050 10.40.060 10.40.060 10.40.070 10.40.070 10.40.080 10.40.080 10.40.090 10.40.090 10.40.100 10.40.100 10.40.110 10.40.110 10.40.115 10.40.115 10.40.120 10.40.120 10.40.130 10.40.130 10.40.140 10.40.140 10.40.150 10.40.150 10.40.160 10.40.160 10.40.170 10.40.170 10.40.180 10.40.180 10.40.190 10.40.190 10.40.200 10.40.200 10.40.210 10.40.210 10.40.220 10.40.220 10.40.230 10.40.230 10.44.010 10.44.010 10.44.020 10.44.020 10.44.030 10.44.030 10.44.040 10.44.040 10.44.050 10.44.050 10.44.060 10.44.060 10.44.070 10.44.070 10.48.020 10.48.020 10.48.030 10.48.030 10.48.040 10.48.040 10.56.010 10.56.010 10.64.060 10.64.060 10.64.070 10.64.070 10.64.080 10.64.080 10.64.100 10.64.100 10.64.110 10.64.110 10.64.120 10.64.120 10.64.130 10.64.130 10.64.140 10.64.140 10.64.150 10.64.150 12.04.010 12.04.010 12.04.020 12.04.020 12.08.010 12.08.010 12.08.020 12.08.020 12.08.030 12.08.030 12.08.040 12.08.040 12.08.050 12.08.050 12.08.060 12.08.060 12.08.070 12.08.070 12.08.080 12.08.080 12.08.090 12.08.090 12.12.010 12.12.010 12.12.020 12.12.020 12.12.030 12.12.030 12.12.040 12.12.040 12.12.050 12.12.050 12.16.010 12.16.010 12.16.020 12.16.020 12.16.030 12.16.030 12.16.040 12.16.040 12.16.050 12.16.050 12.16.060 12.16.060 12.16.070 12.16.070 12.20.010 12.20.010 12.20.020 12.20.020 12.20.030 12.20.030 12.20.040 12.20.040 12.20.050 12.20.050 12.20.060 12.20.100 12.20.070 12.20.060 12.20.080 12.20.070 12.20.090 12.20.080 12.20.100 12.20.090 12.20.110 12.20.110 12.24.010 12.24.010 12.24.020 12.24.020 12.24.030 12.24.030 12.24.040 12.24.040 12.24.050 12.24.050 12.24.060 12.24.060 12.28.010 12.28.010 12.28.020 12.28.020 12.28.030 12.28.030 12.28.040 12.28.040 12.28.050 12.28.050 12.28.060 12.28.060 12.36.010 12.36.010 12.36.020 12.36.020 12.36.030 12.36.030 12.36.040 12.36.040 12.36.050 12.36.050 12.36.060 12.36.060 12.40.010 12.40.010 12.40.020 12.40.020 12.40.030 12.40.030 12.40.040 12.40.040 12.40.050 12.40.050 12.40.060 12.40.060 12.40.070 12.40.070 12.40.080 12.40.080 12.40.090 12.40.090 12.40.100 12.40.100 12.40.110 12.40.110 13.04.010 13.04.010 13.04.020 13.04.020 13.08.010 13.08.010 13.08.020 13.08.020 13.08.030 13.08.030 13.08.040 13.08.040 13.08.050 13.08.050 13.08.060 13.08.060 13.08.070 13.08.070 13.12.030 13.12.310 13.12.050 13.12.120 13.12.060 13.12.430 13.12.070 13.12.405 13.12.010 13.12.305 13.12.080 13.12.220 13.12.040 13.12.305 13.12.090 13.12.220 13.12.100 13.12.455 13.12.110 13.12.660 13.12.120 13.12.340 13.14.010 13.12.330 13.14.030 13.12.330 13.16.010 13.16.010 13.16.020 13.16.020 13.16.030 13.16.030 13.16.040 13.16.040 13.16.050 13.16.050 13.16.060 13.16.060 13.16.070 13.16.070 13.20.010 13.20.010 13.20.020 13.20.020 13.22.010 13.22.010 13.22.020 13.22.020 13.22.030 13.22.030 13.22.050 13.22.050 13.22.060 13.22.060 13.22.070 13.22.070 13.22.080 13.22.080 13.24.010 13.24.010 13.24.025 13.24.025 13.24.030 13.24.030 13.24.040 13.24.040 13.24.050 13.24.050 13.24.060 13.24.060 13.24.070 13.24.070 13.28.010 13.28.010 13.28.020 13.28.020 13.28.030 13.28.030 13.32.010 13.32.010 13.32.020 13.32.020 13.32.030 13.32.030 13.32.040 13.32.040 13.32.050 13.32.050 13.32.060 13.32.060 13.32.070 13.32.070 13.32.080 13.32.080 13.32.090 13.32.090 13.32.100 13.32.100 13.32.110 13.32.110 13.32.120 13.32.120 13.32.130 13.32.130 13.32.140 13.32.140 13.34.010 13.34.010 13.34.020 13.34.020 13.36.010 13.36.010 13.36.020 13.36.020 13.36.030 13.36.030 13.36.040 13.36.040 13.36.050 13.36.050 13.40.010 13.40.010 13.40.020 13.40.020 13.40.030 13.40.030 13.40.040 13.40.040 13.40.050 13.40.050 13.40.070 13.40.070 13.40.060 13.40.060 14.02.010 14.02.010 14.02.020 14.02.020 14.04.010 14.04.010 14.04.020 14.04.020 14.04.030 14.04.030 14.06.010 14.06.010 14.06.020 14.06.020 14.06.030 14.06.030 14.06.040 14.06.040 15.04.010 15.04.010 15.08.010 15.08.010 15.08.020 15.08.030 15.08.030 15.08.040 15.08.040 15.08.050 15.08.050 15.08.070 15.12.010 15.12.010 15.12.020 15.12.020 15.12.030 15.12.030 15.12.040 15.12.040 15.12.050 15.12.050 15.12.060 15.12.060 15.12.070 15.12.070 15.12.080 15.12.080 15.12.090 15.12.090 15.12.100 15.12.100 15.12.110 15.12.110 15.12.120 15.12.120 15.16.010 15.16.010 15.16.020 15.16.020 15.16.030 15.16.030 15.16.040 15.16.040 15.16.050 15.16.050 15.16.060 15.16.060 15.16.070 15.16.070 15.24.010 15.24.010 15.24.020 15.24.020 15.24.030 15.24.030 15.24.040 15.24.040 15.24.050 15.24.050 15.28.010 15.28.010 15.28.020 15.28.020 15.28.030 15.28.030 15.28.040 15.28.040 15.28.050 15.28.050 15.28.060 15.28.060 15.28.070 15.28.070 15.28.080 15.28.080 15.28.090 15.28.090 15.28.100 15.28.100 15.28.110 15.28.110 15.28.120 15.28.120 15.28.130 15.28.130 15.28.140 15.28.140 15.28.150 15.28.150 15.28.160 15.28.160 15.28.170 15.28.170 15.28.180 15.28.180 15.28.190 15.28.190 15.28.200 15.28.200 15.28.210 15.28.210 15.28.220 15.28.220 15.28.230 15.28.230 15.28.240 15.28.240 15.28.250 15.28.250 15.28.260 15.28.260 15.28.270 15.28.270 15.28.280 15.28.280 15.28.290 15.28.290 15.28.300 15.28.300 15.28.310 15.28.310 15.28.320 15.28.320 15.28.330 15.28.330 15.28.340 15.28.340 15.28.350 15.28.350 15.28.360 15.28.360 15.28.370 15.28.370 15.28.380 15.28.380 15.28.390 15.28.390 15.28.400 15.28.400 15.28.410 15.28.410 15.28.420 15.28.420 15.28.430 15.28.430 15.28.440 15.28.440 15.28.450 15.28.450 15.28.460 15.28.460 15.28.470 15.28.470 15.28.480 15.28.480 15.28.490 15.28.490 15.28.500 15.28.500 15.28.510 15.28.510 15.28.520 15.28.520 15.28.530 15.28.530 15.28.540 15.28.540 15.28.550 15.28.550 15.28.560 15.28.560 15.28.570 15.28.570 15.28.580 15.28.580 15.28.590 15.28.590 15.28.600 15.28.600 15.28.610 15.28.610 15.28.620 15.28.620 15.28.630 15.28.630 15.28.640 15.28.640 15.28.650 15.28.650 16.04.010 16.04.010 16.04.020 16.04.030 16.04.030 16.04.040 16.04.040 16.04.050 16.04.050 16.04.060 16.04.060 16.04.070 16.08.010 16.08.010 18.02.010 18.02.010 18.02.020 18.02.020 18.02.030 18.02.030 18.02.040 18.02.040 18.04.010 18.04.010 18.04.020 18.04.020 18.04.030 18.04.030 18.04.040 18.04.040 18.06.010 18.06.010 18.06.011 18.06.011 18.06.012 18.06.012 18.06.013 18.06.013 18.06.014 18.06.014 18.06.015 18.06.015 18.06.016 18.06.016 18.06.017 18.06.017 18.06.018 18.06.018 18.06.019 18.06.019 18.06.020 18.06.020 18.06.021 18.06.021 18.06.022 18.06.022 18.06.023 18.06.023 18.06.024 18.06.024 18.08.010 18.08.010 18.08.011 18.08.011 18.08.012 18.08.012 18.08.013 18.08.013 18.08.014 18.08.014 18.08.015 18.08.015 18.08.016 18.08.016 18.08.017 18.08.017 18.08.018 18.08.018 18.08.019 18.08.019 18.08.020 18.08.020 18.08.021 18.08.021 18.08.022 18.08.022 18.08.023 18.08.023 18.08.024 18.08.024 18.10.010 18.10.010 18.10.020 18.10.020 18.10.030 18.10.030 18.10.040 18.10.040 18.10.050 18.10.050 18.10.060 18.10.060 18.10.070 18.10.070 18.12.010 18.12.010 18.12.020 18.12.020 18.12.030 18.12.030 18.12.031 18.12.031 18.12.032 18.12.032 18.12.033 18.12.033 18.12.034 18.12.034 18.14.010 18.14.010 18.14.020 18.14.020 18.14.031 18.14.031 18.14.032 18.14.032 18.14.041 18.14.041 18.14.042 18.14.042 18.14.050 18.14.050 18.14.060 18.14.060 18.14.071 18.14.071 18.14.072 18.14.072 18.14.073 18.14.073 18.14.081 18.14.081 18.14.082 18.14.082 18.14.083 18.14.083 18.14.084 18.14.084 18.16.010 18.16.010 18.16.020 18.16.020 18.18.010 18.18.010 18.20.010 18.20.010 18.20.020 18.20.020 18.20.030 18.20.030 18.20.040 18.20.040 18.20.050 18.20.050 18.22.010 18.22.010 18.22.020 18.22.020 18.24.010 18.24.010 18.24.020 18.24.020 18.24.030 18.24.030 18.24.040 18.24.040 18.24.050 18.24.050 18.24.055 18.24.055 18.24.060 18.24.060 18.24.070 18.24.070 18.24.080 18.24.080  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Title of 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 83 1952 1 9.12.010 2 9.12.020 Ord. No. 99 1954 1 9.16.010 2 9.16.020 Ord. No. 130 1956 1 5.36.010 2(1) 5.36.020 2(2) 5.36.020 2(3) 5.36.030 2(4) 5.36.030 2(5) 5.36.040 2(6) 5.36.050 2(7) 5.36.060 2(8) 5.36.070 2(9) 5.36.080 Ord. No. 141 1958 1 3.04.010 2 3.04.020 Ord. No. 153 1959 1 9.24.040 2 9.24.050 Ord. No. 183 1962 1 2.20.010 2 2.20.020 Ord. No. 223 1965 2 2.08.010 3 2.08.020 4 2.08.030 5 2.08.040 6 2.08.050 7 2.08.060 8 2.08.070 Ord. No. 237 1966 1 12.08.010 2 12.08.020 3 12.08.030 4 12.08.040 5 12.08.050 6 12.08.060 7 12.08.070 8 12.08.080 Ord. No. 244 1966 1 1.02.010 2 1.02.020 3 1.02.030 Ord. No. 167 1967 2.01(a) 8.08.020 2.01(c) 8.08.040 2.01(part) 8.08.010 2.02 8.08.050 2.03 8.08.060 2.04 8.08.070 2.05 8.08.080 2.06 8.08.090 2.07 8.08.100 2.08 8.08.110 2.09 8.08.120 2.10 8.08.130 2.11 8.08.140 Ord. No. 256 1967 1 10.04.010 1.1 10.04.020 1.2 10.04.030 1.3 10.04.040 1.5 10.04.060 1.6 10.04.070 1.7 10.04.080 1.8 10.04.090 1.9 10.04.100 1.10 10.04.110 1.11 10.04.120 1.12 10.04.130 1.13 10.04.140 1.14 10.04.150 3 10.12.010 3.1 10.12.020 3.2 10.12.030 3.3 10.12.040 3.4 10.12.050 3.5 10.12.060 3.6 10.12.070 3.7 10.12.080 4 10.16.010 4.1 10.16.020 4.2 10.16.030 4.3 10.16.040 4.4 10.16.050 4.5 10.16.060 4.6 10.16.070 4.7 10.16.080 5 10.20.010 5.1 10.20.020 5.2 10.20.030 6 10.24.010 7 10.28.010 7.1 10.28.020 7.2 10.28.030 8 10.32.010 8.1 10.32.020 8.2 10.32.030 8.3 10.32.040 8.4 10.32.050 8.5 10.32.060 8.6 10.32.070 8.7 10.32.080 8.8 10.32.090 9 10.36.010 9.1 10.36.020 10 10.40.010 10.1 10.40.020 10.2 10.40.030 10.3 10.40.040 10.4 10.40.050 10.5 10.40.060 10.6 10.40.070 10.7 10.40.080 10.8 10.40.090 10.9 10.40.100 10.10 10.40.110 10.11 10.40.120 10.12 10.40.130 10.13 10.40.140 11 10.40.150 11.1 10.40.160 11.2 10.40.170 11.3 10.40.180 11.4 10.40.190 11.5 10.40.200 11.6 10.40.210 11.7 10.40.220 12 10.44.010 12.1 10.44.020 12.2 10.44.030 12.3 10.44.040 12.4 10.44.050 12.5 10.44.060 12.6 10.44.070 13.1 10.48.020 13.2 10.48.030 15 10.56.010 Ord. No. 267 1967 1 3.20.010 2 3.20.020 Ord. No. 268 1967 2 2.04.010 3 2.04.020 Ord. No. 269 1967 1 3.08.010 2 3.08.020 3 3.08.030 4 3.08.040 5 3.08.050 6 3.08.060 7 3.08.070 8 3.08.080 9 3.08.100 10 3.08.110 11 3.08.120 - 3.08.130 13 3.08.140 14 3.08.150 15 3.08.160 Ord. No. 273 1968 1 12.12.010 2 12.12.020 3 12.12.030 4 12.12.040 5 12.12.050 Ord. No. 275 1968 1 2.24.010 2 2.24.020 3 2.24.030 4 2.24.040 5 2.24.050 6 2.24.060 7 2.24.070 8 2.24.080 9 2.24.090 Ord. No. 276 1968 art. 1, § 1 13.08.010 art. 2, § 2 13.08.020 art. 2, § 3 13.08.030 art. 2, § 4 13.08.040 art. 2, § 5 13.08.050 art. 2, § 6 13.08.060 art. 3, § 1 13.16.010 art. 3, § 2 13.16.020 art. 3, § 3 13.16.030 art. 3, § 4 13.16.040 art. 3, § 5 13.16.050 art. 3, § 6 13.16.060 art. 3, § 7 13.16.070 art. 4, § 1 13.12.305 art. 4, § 3 13.12.310 art. 4, § 4 13.12.305 art. 4, § 5 13.12.120 art. 4, § 6 13.12.430 art. 4, § 7 13.12.405 art. 4, § 8 13.12.220 art. 4, § 9 13.12.220 art. 4, § 10 13.12.455 art. 5, § 1 13.12.660 art. 6, § 1 13.20.010 art. 6, § 2 13.20.020 art. 7, § 1 13.24.010 art. 7, § 3 13.24.030 art. 7, § 4 13.24.040 art. 7, § 5 13.24.050 art. 7, § 6 13.24.060 art. 8, § 1 13.28.010 art. 8, § 2(part) 13.28.020 - 13.28.030 Ord. No. 281 1968 1 8.16.010 2 8.16.020 3 8.16.030 Ord. No. 282 1968 1 13.32.010 2 13.32.020 3 13.32.030 4 13.32.040 5 13.32.050 6 13.32.060 7 13.32.070 8 13.32.080 9 13.32.090 10 13.32.100 11 13.32.110 12 13.32.120 Ord. No. 285 1968 2 2.12.010 Ord. No. 295 1969 2 1.01.020 3 1.01.030 4 1.01.040 5 1.01.060 6 1.01.070 7 1.01.090 8 1.01.110 9 1.01.130 10 1.01.140 11 1.01.150 Ord. No. 296 1969 1(a) 8.08.010 - 8.08.020 - 8.08.040 - 8.08.050 - 8.08.060 - 8.08.070 - 8.08.080 - 8.08.090 - 8.08.100 - 8.08.110 - 8.08.120 1(a) 8.08.130 1(c) 8.08.060 1(d) 8.08.090 1(e) 8.08.090 1(f) 8.08.130 1(g) 8.08.140 Ord. No. 303 1969 2 2.08.070 4 13.24.070 Ord. No. 306 1970 1(part) 7.04.010 - 7.04.020 - 7.04.030 - 7.04.040 - 7.08.010 - 7.08.030 - 7.12.010 - 7.16.010 - 7.20.010 Ord. No. 312 1970 1(part) 12.16.010 - 12.16.020 - 12.16.030 - 12.16.040 - 12.16.050 - 12.16.060 - 12.16.070 Ord. No. 316 1970 1(part) 3.24.010 - 3.24.020 - 3.24.030 2 13.24.060 Ord. No. 317 1970 1(part) 2.12.010 Ord. No. 327(part) 1970 10.64.060 10.64.070 Ord. No. 306 1970 1(part) 7.08.020 Ord. No. 329 1971 1(part) 13.12.330 Ord. No. 332 1971 1 10.40.040 Ord. No. 336 1971 5(part) 15.24.010 - 15.24.020 - 15.24.030 - 15.24.040 Ord. No. 341 1971 1(part) 9.36.010 - 9.36.020 - 9.36.030 - 9.36.040 Ord. No. 350 1971 1(part) 2.48.010 - 2.48.020 - 2.48.030 - 2.48.040 - 2.48.050 - 2.48.060 - 2.48.070 - 2.48.080 - 2.48.090 - 2.48.100 - 2.48.110 - 2.48.120 - 2.48.130 - 2.48.140 Ord. No. 351 1971 1 7.04.010 2 7.04.010 3 7.04.050 4 7.08.010 Ord. No. 351 1971 5 7.08.020 6 7.08.020 Ord. No. 361 1972 1 2.04.010 2 2.04.020 Ord. No. 365 1972 1 2.24.020 Ord. No. 371 1972 1 2.08.070 2 2.08.070 3 2.08.070 5 2.48.020 6 2.48.140 Ord. No. 373 1972 2 8.08.130 Ord. No. 374 1972 1(part) 13.22.010 - 13.22.020 - 13.22.030 - 13.22.060 - 13.22.070 1 13.22.050 3 13.12.120 Ord. No. 382 1973 1 13.08.070 Ord. No. 390 1974 1 2.04.010 Ord. No. 391 1974 1 13.22.060 Ord. No. 394 1974 1 2.04.010 2 2.04.012 Ord. No. 406 1975 1 13.22.020 Ord. No. 407 1975 1(part) 10.64.060 - 10.64.070 Ord. No. 408 1975 1 3.12.010 2 3.12.020 4 3.12.040 5 3.12.050 6 3.12.060 7 3.12.070 8 3.12.080 9 3.12.090 10 3.12.100 11 3.12.110 12 3.12.120 13 3.12.130 14 3.12.140 15 3.12.150 Ord. No. 411 1976 1(part) 9.34.020 - 9.34.030 - 9.34.040 - 9.34.050 Ord. No. 415 1976 1 9.24.070 Ord. No. 416 1976 1 10.64.080 Ord. No. 417 1976 1 12.12.020 Ord. No. 427 1977 1 2.08.070 2 2.08.070 3 2.08.070 4 2.48.020 6 2.20.030 Ord. No. 428 1977 1 2.04.010 Ord. No. 429 1977 1(part) 12.20.010 - 12.20.020 - 12.20.030 - 12.20.040 - 12.20.050 - 12.20.060 - 12.20.070 - 12.20.080 - 12.20.090 - 12.20.100 - 12.20.110 Ord. No. 432 1977 1 9.24.070 Ord. No. 440 1978 2 13.24.025 3 13.24.030 Ord. No. 442 1978 3(part) 2.16.010 - 2.16.020 - 2.16.030 - 2.16.040 - 2.16.050 - 2.16.060 - 2.16.070 - 2.16.080 - 2.16.090 Ord. No. 455 1979 1 10.18.010 Ord. No. 459 1979 1 2.24.035 Ord. No. 460 1979 1 13.34.010 Ord. No. 477 1981 1 13.34.010 2 13.34.020 Ord. No. 480 1981 1 2.04.010 Ord. No. 487 1981 1 2.04.010 Ord. No. 496 1982 1 2.08.070 3 2.48.010 4 2.48.020 5 2.48.030 6 2.48.110 Ord. No. 497 1982 1 10.18.010 Ord. No. 502 1983 1 1.01.150 Ord. No. 503 1983 1 1.01.160 Ord. No. 504(part) 1983 - 13.32.130 - 13.32.140 Ord. No. 513 1983 1 13.22.020 Ord. No. 518 1983 2(part) 15.04.010 2 (part) 16.08.010 Ord. No. 519 1983 1 14.02.010 2 14.02.020 5(part) 14.06.010 - 14.06.020 - 14.06.030 - 14.06.040 Ord. No. 522 1983 7 15.24.050 Ord. No. 527 1983 1 3.12.120 Ord. No. 528 1983 1(part) 6.22.010 - 6.22.020 - 6.22.030 - 6.22.040 - 6.22.050 - 6.22.060 - 6.22.070 - 6.22.080 - 6.22.090 - 6.22.100 - 6.22.110 - 6.22.120 - 6.22.130 - 6.22.140 - 6.22.150 Ord. No. 529 1984 2 9.24.070 Ord. No. 530 1984 1 9.42.010 Ord. No. 536 1984 1(part) 3.29.010 - 3.29.020 - 3.29.030 Ord. No. 539 1985 1 10.18.010 Ord. No. 543 1985 2(part) 2.28.010 - 2.28.020 - 2.28.030 - 2.28.040 Ord. No. 547 1985 2(part) 9.32.010 - 9.32.020 - 9.32.030 - 9.32.040 - 9.32.050 Ord. No. 548 1985 1 13.22.050 Ord. No. 552 1986 1 13.12.340 2 13.24.025 Ord. No. 553 1986 1 10.40.115 Ord. No. 558 1986 1(part) 5.24.010 Ord. No. 559 1986 1(part) 18.02.010 - 18.02.020 - 18.02.030 - 18.02.040 - 18.04.010 - 18.04.020 - 18.04.030 - 18.04.040 - 18.06.010 - 18.06.011 - 18.06.012 - 18.06.013 - 18.06.014 - 18.06.015 - 18.06.016 - 18.06.017 - 18.06.018 - 18.06.020 - 18.06.021 - 18.06.022 - 18.06.023 - 18.06.024 - 18.08.010 - 18.08.011 - 18.08.012 - 18.08.013 - 18.08.014 - 18.08.015 - 18.08.016 - 18.08.017 - 18.08.018 - 18.08.019 - 18.08.020 - 18.08.021 - 18.08.022 - 18.08.023 - 18.08.024 - 18.10.010 - 18.10.020 - 18.10.030 - 18.10.040 - 18.10.050 - 18.10.060 - 18.10.070 - 18.12.010 - 18.12.020 - 18.12.030 - 18.12.031 - 18.12.032 - 18.12.033 - 18.12.034 - 18.14.010 - 18.14.020 - 18.14.031 - 18.14.032 - 18.14.041 - 18.14.042 - 18.14.050 - 18.14.060 - 18.14.071 - 18.14.072 - 18.14.073 - 18.14.081 - 18.14.082 - 18.14.083 - 18.14.084 - 18.16.010 - 18.16.020 - 18.18.010 - 18.20.010 - 18.20.020 - 18.20.030 - 18.20.040 - 18.20.050 - 18.22.010 - 18.22.020 Ord. No. 563 1987 1 12.08.090 Ord. No. 565 1987 1(part) 9.32.060 - 9.32.070 - 9.32.080 - 9.32.090 Ord. No. 567 1987 3(part) 6.24.010 - 6.24.020 - 6.24.030 Ord. No. 568 1987 1 10.64.100 Ord. No. 571 1987 1(part) 13.36.010 - 13.36.020 - 13.36.030 - 13.36.040 - 13.36.050 Ord. No. 573 1987 1(part) 13.04.010 - 13.04.020 2 13.08.070 3 13.12.305 5 13.24.060 6 13.24.070 Ord. No. 575 1987 1 13.22.020 Ord. No. 576 1987 1 1.05.010 Ord. No. 697 1987 - 1.01.180 Ord. No. 577 1988 2 14.06.030 3 14.06.040 Ord. No. 582 1988 1 10.64.060 Ord. No. 586 1988 1(part) 5.70.010 - 5.70.020 - 5.70.030 - 5.70.040 - 5.70.050 - 5.70.060 - 5.70.070 - 5.70.080 - 5.70.090 Ord. No. 590 1988 1 13.22.020 2 13.22.030 3 13.22.050 4 13.22.060 Ord. No. 595 1988 1 13.36.010 2 13.36.030 Ord. No. 596 1988 2 1.01.170 Ord. No. 597 1988 1(part) 5.04.010 - 5.04.020 - 5.04.030 - 5.04.040 - 5.04.050 - 5.04.060 - 5.04.070 - 5.04.080 - 5.04.090 - 5.04.100 - 5.04.110 - 5.04.120 - 5.04.130 - 5.04.140 - 5.08.010 - 5.08.020 - 5.08.030 - 5.08.040 - 5.08.050 - 5.08.060 - 5.08.070 - 5.08.080 - 5.08.090 - 5.08.100 - 5.08.110 - 5.08.120 - 5.08.130 - 5.08.140 - 5.08.150 - 5.08.160 - 5.08.170 - 5.08.180 - 5.08.190 - 5.08.200 - 5.08.210 - 5.08.220 - 5.08.230 - 5.08.240 - 5.08.250 - 5.12.010 - 5.12.020 Ord. No. 600 1989 1(part) 13.22.020 - 13.22.050 Ord. No. 602 1989 2(part) 6.32.010 - 6.32.020 Ord. No. 604 1989 1(part) 12.24.010 - 12.24.020 - 12.24.030 - 12.24.040 - 12.24.050 - 12.24.060 Ord. No. 605 1989 1(part) 12.28.010 - 12.28.020 - 12.28.030 - 12.28.040 - 12.28.050 - 12.28.060 Ord. No. 606 1989 1(part) 12.36.010 - 12.36.020 - 12.36.030 - 12.36.050 - 12.36.060 Ord. No. 607 1989 2(part) 5.80.010 - 5.80.020 - 5.80.030 - 5.80.040 - 5.80.050 - 5.80.060 - 5.80.070 - 5.80.080 - 5.80.090 - 5.80.100 Ord. No. 609 1989 1 1.01.160 Ord. No. 612 1989 1 10.40.230 Ord. No. 615 1989 1(part) 9.32.090 - 9.34.010 - 9.34.050 Ord. No. 617 1989 1 10.04.070 2 10.04.080 3 10.04.140 4 10.04.110 5 10.04.155 6 10.04.085 8 10.18.010 Ord. No. 618 1989 2(part) 13.40.010 - 13.40.020 - 13.40.030 - 13.40.040 - 13.40.050 - 13.40.060 - 13.40.070 Ord. No. 620 1990 3 14.06.030 4 14.06.040 Ord. No. 628 1990 2 13.40.060 Ord. No. 629 1990 1 13.22.020 Ord. No. 630 1990 1 10.48.040 Ord. No. 631 1990 1 13.32.130 Ord. No. 635 1990 2 10.64.110 Ord. No. 636 1990 1 10.36.030 Ord. No. 638 1990 1 1.02.030 Ord. No. 641 1990 1 2.48.130 Ord. No. 642 1990 1 3.08.050 2 3.08.075 Ord. No. 643 1990 1 3.24.020 Ord. No. 648 1990 1 12.08.010 Ord. No. 649 1990 2 13.24.060 Ord. No. 650 1990 1 13.32.020 Ord. No. 652 1990 1 15.24.010 Ord. No. 653 1990 1 18.06.018 Ord. No. 654 1990 1(part) 6.34.020 2(part) 6.34.010 Ord. No. 657 1991 1 5.08.230 Ord. No. 666 1991 1 2.24.035 Ord. No. 667 1991 1 2.04.010 Ord. No. 669 1991 1 9.48.010 2 9.48.020 Ord. No. 670 1991 1 2.24.035 Ord. No. 683 1991 1 9.48.010 Ord. No. 675 1992 1 10.40.030 Ord. No. 677 1992 1 10.64.080 Ord. No. 678 1992 - 3.16.010 - 3.16.020 - 3.16.030 - 3.16.050 - 3.16.060 - 3.16.070 - 3.16.080 - 3.16.090 - 3.16.100 - 3.16.110 - 3.16.120 - 3.16.130 - 3.16.140 - 3.16.150 Ord. No. 684 1992 3 14.06.030 4 14.06.040 Ord. No. 689 1993 1 3.16.040 Ord. No. 691 1993 1(part) 6.21.010 - 6.21.020 - 6.21.030 - 6.21.040 - 6.21.050 - 6.21.060 - 6.21.070 - 6.21.080 Ord. No. 694 1993 2(part) 10.09.010 - 10.09.020 - 10.09.030 - 10.09.040 Ord. No. 696 1994 1(part) 5.27.010 - 5.27.020 - 5.27.030 - 5.27.040 - 5.27.050 - 5.27.060 - 5.27.070 Ord. No. 699 1994 1(part) 5.27.050 - 5.27.070 2 5.27.080 Ord. No. 713 1995 - 2.52.010 - 2.52.020 Ord. No. 715 1995 1(part) 6.32.030 - 6.32.040 - 6.32.050 - 6.32.060 - 6.32.070 - 6.32.080 - 6.32.100 Ord. No. 723 1996 2 9.32.045 3 9.32.045 Ord. No. 724 1996 1 1.01.150 Ord. No. 727 1996 3 14.06.030 4 14.06.040 Ord. No. 730 1996 2(part) 9.33.010 - 9.33.020 - 9.33.030 - 9.33.040 - 9.33.050 Ord. No. 732 1997 2 1.05.010 3 1.05.020 Ord. No. 733 1997 3(part) 9.04.010 - 9.04.020 - 9.04.030 - 9.04.040 - 9.04.050 - 9.04.060 - 9.04.070 - 9.04.080 - 9.04.090 - 9.04.100 Ord. No. 736 1997 1 5.27.010 2 5.27.020 3 5.27.030 4 5.27.040 5 5.27.050 6 5.27.060 7 5.27.070 8 5.27.080 Ord. No. 743 1998 2(part) 6.36.010 - 6.36.020 - 6.36.030 - 6.36.040 - 6.36.050 - 6.36.060 - 6.36.070 - 6.36.080 - 6.36.090 - 6.36.100 Ord. No. 744 1998 1(part) 9.52.010 - 9.52.020 - 9.52.030 Ord. No. 746 1999 3 1.01.060 4(part) 10.16.010 - 10.16.040 - 10.16.070 - 10.20.010 - 10.20.020 - 10.20.030 - 10.36.010 - 10.40.030 - 10.40.040 - 10.40.090 - 10.40.120 - 10.40.190 - 10.44.010 - 10.44.070 Ord. No. 747 1999 1(part) 15.28.010 - 15.28.020 - 15.28.030 - 15.28.040 - 15.28.050 - 15.28.060 - 15.28.070 - 15.28.080 - 15.28.090 - 15.28.100 - 15.28.110 - 15.28.120 - 15.28.130 - 15.28.140 - 15.28.150 - 15.28.160 - 15.28.170 - 15.28.180 - 15.28.190 - 15.28.200 - 15.28.210 - 15.28.220 - 15.28.230 - 15.28.240 - 15.28.250 - 15.28.260 - 15.28.270 - 15.28.280 - 15.28.290 - 15.28.300 - 15.28.310 - 15.28.320 - 15.28.330 - 15.28.340 - 15.28.350 - 15.28.360 - 15.28.370 - 15.28.380 - 15.28.390 - 15.28.400 - 15.28.410 - 15.28.420 - 15.28.430 - 15.28.440 - 15.28.450 - 15.28.460 - 15.28.470 - 15.28.480 - 15.28.490 - 15.28.500 - 15.28.510 - 15.28.520 - 15.28.530 - 15.28.540 - 15.28.550 - 15.28.560 - 15.28.570 - 15.28.580 - 15.28.590 - 15.28.600 - 15.28.610 - 15.28.620 - 15.28.630 - 15.28.640 - 15.28.650 Ord. No. 748 1999 1 9.04.050 Ord. No. 749 1999 1 14.02.020 2 14.04.010 3 14.04.020 4 14.04.030 5(part) 14.06.030 - 14.06.040 Ord. No. 753 1999 1 10.64.120 Ord. No. 754 2000 1 13.22.020 4 13.22.080 Ord. No. 757 2000 1 10.64.110 2 10.64.130 3 13.22.050 Ord. No. 758 2000 1(part) 9.60.010 - 9.60.020 - 9.60.030 - 9.60.040 - 9.60.050 - 9.60.060 - 9.60.070 Ord. No. 759 2000 2(part) 5.84.010 - 5.84.020 - 5.84.030 Ord. No. 760 2000 2(part) 1.01.150 - 1.01.160 3(part) 1.02.010 - 1.02.020 - 1.02.030 Ord. No. 761 2000 2 3.12.150 Ord. No. 763 2000 1 10.64.140 Ord. No. 764 2000 2(part) 2.08.020 - 2.08.030 4(part) 2.12.010 - 2.12.020 5(part) 2.16.085 - 2.16.100 8(part) 2.24.020 9(part) 2.28.020 - 2.28.030 Ord. No. 765 2000 2(part) 5.90.010 - 5.90.020 - 5.90.020 - 5.90.030 Ord. No. 766 2000 2(part) 5.60.010 - 5.60.020 - 5.60.030 - 5.60.040 - 5.60.080 - 5.60.130 - 5.60.140 - 5.60.150 - 5.60.160 - 5.60.170 - 5.60.180 Ord. No. 769 2001 1 5.27.020 Ord. No. 770 2001 2 2.28.020 Ord. No. 771 2001 1(part) 9.50.010 - 9.50.020 - 9.50.030 Ord. No. 780 2002 1 3.16.030 Ord. No. 782 2002 3(part) 6.20.010 - 6.20.020 - 6.20.030 - 6.20.040 - 6.20.050 - 6.20.060 - 6.20.070 - 6.20.080 - 6.20.090 - 6.20.100 - 6.20.110 - 6.20.120 - 6.20.130 - 6.20.140 - 6.20.150 - 6.20.160 - 6.20.180 - 6.20.190 - 6.20.200 - 6.20.210 - 6.20.220 - 6.20.230 - 6.20.240 - 6.20.250 - 6.20.260 - 6.20.270 - 6.20.280 - 6.20.290 - 6.20.300 - 6.20.310 - 6.20.320 - 6.20.330 - 6.20.340 - 6.20.350 - 6.20.360 - 6.20.370 - 6.20.380 - 6.20.390 - 6.20.400 - 6.20.410 - 6.20.420 - 6.20.430 - 6.20.440 - 6.20.450 - 6.20.460 - 6.20.470 - 6.20.480 - 6.20.490 - 6.20.500 - 6.20.510 - 6.20.520 - 6.20.530 - 6.20.540 - 6.20.550 - 6.20.560 - 6.20.570 - 6.20.580 - 6.20.590 - 6.20.600 - 6.20.610 - 6.20.620 - 6.20.630 - 6.20.640 - 6.20.650 - 6.20.660 - 6.20.670 Ord. No. 786 2003 2(part) 16.04.010 - 16.04.030 - 16.04.040 - 16.04.050 - 16.04.060 - 16.04.070 Ord. No. 789 2003 1(part) 6.30.010 - 6.30.020 - 6.30.030 - 6.30.040 - 6.30.050 - 6.30.060 - 6.30.070 - 6.30.080 - 6.30.090 - 6.30.100 - 6.30.110 - 6.30.120 - 6.30.130 - 6.30.140 Ord. No. 790 2003 1 1.01.180 Ord. No. 791 2003 2(part) 9.45.010 - 9.45.020 - 9.45.030 - 9.45.040 - 9.45.050 - 9.45.060 - 9.45.070 - 9.45.080 - 9.45.090 Ord. No. 795 2004 2(part) 12.04.010 - 12.04.020 Ord. No. 796 2004 1 8.08.130 Ord. No. 798 2004 1(part) 9.62.010 - 9.62.020 - 9.62.030 - 9.62.040 - 9.62.050 - 9.62.060 - 9.62.070 - 9.62.080 - 9.62.090 - 9.62.100 - 9.62.110 - 9.62.120 - 9.62.130 Ord. No. 800 2004 1 5.90.020 2 5.90.040 Ord. No. 803 2005 1 2.24.010 2 2.24.020 3 2.24.030 4 2.24.035 5 2.24.040 6 2.24.060 Ord. No. 805 2005 1(part) 6.24.040 - 6.24.050 Ord. No. 806 2005 3 14.06.020 Ord. No. 808 2005 1 2.04.010 2 2.04.020 Ord. No. 809 2005 2(part) 13.08.050 - 13.08.070 Ord. No. 811 2005 - 10.64.150 Ord. No. 816 2006 1 6.20.020 2 6.20.030 3 6.20.030 4 6.20.030 5 6.20.030 7 6.20.180 8 6.20.190 9 6.20.370 10 6.20.665 Ord. No. 822 2007 1 13.22.020 Ord. No. 827 2007 3(part) 12.40.010 - 12.40.020 - 12.40.030 - 12.40.040 - 12.40.050 - 12.40.060 - 12.40.070 - 12.40.080 - 12.40.090 - 12.40.100 Ord. No. 828 2007 2(part) 18.24.010 - 18.24.020 - 18.24.030 - 18.24.040 - 18.24.050 - 18.24.055 - 18.24.060 - 18.24.070 - 18.24.080 Ord. No. 829 2007 1 13.22.080 Ord. No. 834 2007 2(part) 9.28.010 - 9.28.020 - 9.28.030 - 9.28.040 - 9.28.050 - 9.28.060 - 9.28.070 - 9.28.080 Ord. No. 836 2007 1(part) 15.16.010 - 15.16.020 - 15.16.030 - 15.16.040 - 15.16.050 - 15.16.060 - 15.16.070 Ord. No. 838 2008 5(part) 16.04.010 - 16.04.030 - 16.04.040 - 16.04.050 - 16.04.060 - 16.04.070 Ord. No. 839 2008 1(part) 2.24.010 - 2.24.020 - 2.24.030 - 2.24.035 Ord. No. 841U 2008 1 15.24.050 Ord. No. 842 2008 1 15.24.050 Ord. No. 843 2008 3 12.40.110 Ord. No. 844 2008 1(part) 9.64.010 - 9.64.020 - 9.64.030 - 9.64.040 3 9.48.010 Ord. No. 847-2009 4-6-2009 1 9.24.070 2 9.25.010 - 9.25.020 - 9.25.030 - 9.25.040 - 9.25.050 - 9.25.060 - 9.25.070 - 9.25.080 - 9.25.090 - 9.25.100 - 9.25.110 - 9.25.120 - 9.25.130 - 9.25.140 - 9.25.150 - 9.25.160 - 9.25.170 - 9.25.180 - 9.25.190 - 9.25.200 - 9.25.210 - 9.25.220 - 9.25.230 - 9.25.240 - 9.25.250 Ord. No. 851-2009 6-1-2009 1 6.20.200 2 6.20.210 3 13.22.050 4 13.22.060 Ord. No. 860-2010 2-16-2010 1 2.24.010 - 2.24.020 - 2.24.030 - 2.24.035 - 2.24.040 - 2.24.050 - 2.24.060 - 2.24.070 - 2.24.080 - 2.24.090 Ord. No. 861-2010 3-1-2010 1 5.92.010 - 5.92.020 - 5.92.030 - 5.92.040 - 5.92.050 - 5.92.060 - 5.92.070 - 5.92.080 - 5.92.090 - 5.92.100 - 5.92.110 - 5.92.120 Ord. No. 862-2010 3-1-2010 1 12.08.020 Ord. No. 863-2010 4-5-2010 1 9.64.030 Ord. No. 868-2010 12-6-2010 - 2.40.010 - 2.40.020 - 2.40.030 - 2.40.040 - 2.40.050 - 2.40.060 2.40.070 - 2.40.080 2.40.100 - 2.40.110 - 2.40.120 - 2.40.130 - 2.40.140 - 2.40.150 - 2.40.160 - 2.40.170 - 2.40.180 - 2.40.190 - 2.40.200 2.40.210 - 2.40.220 Ord. No. 870-2010 1-18-2011 1 15.08.010 - 15.08.030 - 15.08.040 - 15.08.050 - 15.08.070 2 15.12.010 - 15.12.020 - 15.12.030 - 15.12.040 - 15.12.050 - 15.12.060 - 15.12.070 - 15.12.080 - 15.12.090 - 15.12.100 - 15.12.110 - 15.12.120 Ord. No. 871-2011 2-7-2011 - 8.12.010 - 8.12.020 - 8.12.030 - 8.12.040 - 8.12.050 - 8.12.060 - 8.12.070 - 8.12.080 - 8.12.090 - 8.12.100 - 8.12.110 - 8.12.120 - 8.12.130 - 8.12.140 - 8.12.150 - 8.12.160 - 8.12.170 - 8.12.180 - 8.12.190 8.12.200 Ord. No. 875-2011 3-7-2011 1 13.22.080 Ord. No. 874-2011 3-21-2011 1 13.22.020 Ord. No. 874A-2011 3-21-2011 1 13.22.020 Ord. No. 869-2010 4-18-2011 1 12.40.050 Ord. No. 877-2011 4-18-2011 1 8.20.010 - 8.20.020 - 8.20.030 - 8.20.040 - 8.20.050 Ord. No. 878-2011 4-18-2011 1 8.18.010 - 8.18.020 - 8.18.030 Ord. No. 879-2011 4-18-2011 1 13.22.010 Ord. No. 876-2011 5-2-2011 2 2.42.010 - 2.42.020 - 2.42.030 - 2.42.040 - 2.42.050 - 2.42.060 - 2.42.070 Ord. No. 882-2011 5-16-2011 1 1.01.160 2 6.30.020 Ord. No. 880-2011 6-6-2011 2(exh. B) 18.14.031 Ord. No. 883-2011 7-18-2011 1 8.04.010 - 8.04.020 - 8.04.050 - 8.04.060 - 8.04.070 - 8.12.220 2 8.08.010 4 8.12.210 - 8.12.230 5 8.14.010 - 8.14.020 - 8.14.030 6 8.18.030 Ord. No. 884-2011 8-1-2011 2(2.48.010) 2.48.010 2(2.48.030) 2.48.030 Ord. No. 887-2011 9-19-2011 1(2.52.010) 2.52.010 1(2.52.020) 2.52.020 1(2.52.030) 2.52.030 1(2.52.040) 2.52.040 1(2.52.050) 2.52.050 Ord. No. 889-2011 12-19-2011 1(2.04.010) 2.04.010 1(2.04.020) 2.04.020 1(2.04.011) 2.04.011 - 2.04.011 1(2.04.012) 2.04.012 Ord. No. 890-2012 6-18-2012 1(exh. A, § 13.12.100) 13.12.100 1(exh. A, § 13.12.105) 13.12.105 1(exh. A, § 13.12.110) 13.12.110 1(exh. A, § 13.12.115) 13.12.115 1(exh. A, § 13.12.120) 13.12.120 1(exh. A, § 13.12.125) 13.12.125 1(exh. A, § 13.12.130) 13.12.130 1(exh. A, § 13.12.135) 13.12.135 1(exh. A, § 13.12.140) 13.12.140 1(exh. A, § 13.12.145) 13.12.145 1(exh. A, § 13.12.200) 13.12.200 1(exh. A, § 13.12.205) 13.12.205 1(exh. A, § 13.12.210) 13.12.210 1(exh. A, § 13.12.215) 13.12.215 1(exh. A, § 13.12.220) 13.12.220 1(exh. A, § 13.12.225) 13.12.225 1(exh. A, § 13.12.230) 13.12.230 1(exh. A, § 13.12.235) 13.12.235 1(exh. A, § 13.12.240) 13.12.240 1(exh. A, § 13.12.245) 13.12.245 1(exh. A, § 13.12.250) 13.12.250 1(exh. A, § 13.12.255) 13.12.255 1(exh. A, § 13.12.300) 13.12.300 1(exh. A, § 13.12.305) 13.12.305 1(exh. A, § 13.12.310) 13.12.310 1(exh. A, § 13.12.315) 13.12.315 1(exh. A, § 13.12.320) 13.12.320 1(exh. A, § 13.12.325) 13.12.325 1(exh. A, § 13.12.330) 13.12.330 1(exh. A, § 13.12.335) 13.12.335 1(exh. A, § 13.12.340) 13.12.340 1(exh. A, § 13.12.345) 13.12.345 1(exh. A, § 13.12.400) 13.12.400 1(exh. A, § 13.12.405) 13.12.405 1(exh. A, § 13.12.410) 13.12.410 1(exh. A, § 13.12.415) 13.12.415 1(exh. A, § 13.12.420) 13.12.420 1(exh. A, § 13.12.425) 13.12.425 1(exh. A, § 13.12.430) 13.12.430 1(exh. A, § 13.12.435) 13.12.435 1(exh. A, § 13.12.440) 13.12.440 1(exh. A, § 13.12.445) 13.12.445 1(exh. A, § 13.12.450) 13.12.450 1(exh. A, § 13.12.455) 13.12.455 1(exh. A, § 13.12.460) 13.12.460 1(exh. A, § 13.12.465) 13.12.465 1(exh. A, § 13.12.470) 13.12.470 1(exh. A, § 13.12.475) 13.12.475 1(exh. A, § 13.12.500) 13.12.500 1(exh. A, § 13.12.505) 13.12.505 1(exh. A, § 13.12.515) 13.12.515 1(exh. A, § 13.12.520) 13.12.520 1(exh. A, § 13.12.525) 13.12.525 1(exh. A, § 13.12.530) 13.12.530 1(exh. A, § 13.12.535) 13.12.535 1(exh. A, § 13.12.540) 13.12.540 1(exh. A, § 13.12.600) 13.12.600 1(exh. A, § 13.12.605) 13.12.605 1(exh. A, § 13.12.610) 13.12.610 1(exh. A, § 13.12.620) 13.12.620 1(exh. A, § 13.12.625) 13.12.625 1(exh. A, § 13.12.630) 13.12.630 1(exh. A, § 13.12.635) 13.12.635 1(exh. A, § 13.12.640) 13.12.640 1(exh. A, § 13.12.650) 13.12.650 1(exh. A, § 13.12.655) 13.12.655 1(exh. A, § 13.12.660) 13.12.510 - 13.12.645 - 13.12.660 1(exh. A, § 13.12.665) 13.12.665 1(exh. A, § 13.12.700) 13.12.700 1(exh. A, § 13.12.705) 13.12.705 1(exh. A, § 13.12.710) 13.12.710 1(exh. A, § 13.12.715) 13.12.715 1(exh. A, § 13.12.720) 13.12.720 1(exh. A, § 13.12.725) 13.12.725 Ord. No. 892-2012 6-18-2012 1(5.24.010) 5.24.010 1(5.24.020) 5.24.020 1(5.24.030) 5.24.030 1(5.24.040) 5.24.040 1(5.24.050) 5.24.050 1(5.24.060) 5.24.060 1(5.24.070) 5.24.070 1(5.24.080) 5.24.080 1(5.24.090) 5.24.090 1(5.24.015) 5.24.015 1(5.24.100) 5.24.100 1(5.24.110) 5.24.110 1(5.24.120) 5.24.120 1(5.24.130) 5.24.130 1(5.24.140) 5.24.140 1(5.24.150) 5.24.150 1(5.24.160) 5.24.160 1(5.24.170) 5.24.170 1(5.24.180) 5.24.180 1(5.24.190) 5.24.190 1(5.24.135) 5.24.135 1(5.24.200) 5.24.200 1(5.24.210) 5.24.210 1(5.24.220) 5.24.220 1(5.24.230) 5.24.230 1(5.24.240) 5.24.240 1(5.24.250) 5.24.250 1(5.24.260) 5.24.260 1(5.24.270) 5.24.270 1(5.24.280) 5.24.280 1(5.24.290) 5.24.290 1(5.24.300) 5.24.300 1(5.24.310) 5.24.310 1(5.24.320) 5.24.320 1(5.24.330) 5.24.330 1(5.24.340) 5.24.340 1(5.24.350) 5.24.350 1(5.24.360) 5.24.360 1(5.24.370) 5.24.370 1(5.24.380) 5.24.380 1(5.24.410) 5.24.410 1(5.24.420) 5.24.420 1(5.24.430) 5.24.430 1(5.24.440) 5.24.440 Ord. No. 893-2012 8-20-2012 2 2.42.010 - 2.42.020 - 2.42.030 - 2.42.040 - 2.42.050 - 2.42.060 - 2.42.070 Ord. No. 898-2013 3-4-2013 1(9.70.010) 9.70.010 1(9.70.020) 9.70.020 1(9.70.030) 9.70.030 1(9.70.040) 9.70.040 1(9.70.050) 9.70.050 1(9.70.060) 9.70.060 1(9.70.070) 9.70.070 1(9.70.080) 9.70.080 1(9.70.090) 9.70.090 1(9.70.030) 9.70.170 1(9.70.110) 9.70.110 1(9.70.120) 9.70.120 1(9.70.130) 9.70.130 1(9.70.140) 9.70.140 1(9.70.150) 9.70.150 1(9.70.160) 9.70.160 1(9.70.180) 9.70.180 1(9.70.190) 9.70.190 1(9.70.200) 9.70.200 1(9.70.210) 9.70.210 1(9.70.220) 9.70.220 1(9.70.230) 9.70.230 Ord. No. 899-2013 3-18-2013 1(10.64.010) 10.64.010 1(10.64.020) 10.64.020 1(10.64.030) 10.64.030 1(10.64.040) 10.64.040 1(10.64.060) 10.64.060 1(10.64.070) 10.64.070 1(10.64.080) 10.64.080 1(10.64.090) 10.64.090 1(10.64.100) 10.64.100 1(10.64.110) 10.64.110 1(10.64.120) 10.64.120 1(10.64.130) 10.64.130 1(10.64.140) 10.64.140 1(10.64.150) 10.64.150 1(10.64.160) 10.64.160 1(10.64.170) 10.64.170 1(10.64.180) 10.64.180 Ord. No. 901-2013 3-18-2013 1(13.08.070) 13.08.070 Ord. No. 902-2013 4-15-2013 1(13.08.050) 13.08.050 Ord. No. 903-2013 4-15-2013 1(9.72.010) 9.72.010 1(9.72.020) 9.72.020 1(9.72.030) 9.72.030 1(9.72.040) 9.72.040 1(9.72.050) 9.72.050 Ord. No. 905-2013 5-20-2013 6.28.010 6.28.010 6.28.020 6.28.020 6.28.030 6.28.030 6.28.040 6.28.040 6.28.050 6.28.050 6.28.060 6.28.060 6.28.070 6.28.070 6.28.080 6.28.080 6.28.090 6.28.090 6.28.100 6.28.100 6.28.110 6.28.110 6.28.120 6.28.120 6.28.130 6.28.130 6.28.140 6.28.140 6.28.150 6.28.150 6.28.160 6.28.160 6.28.170 6.28.170 6.28.180 6.28.180 6.28.190 6.28.190 6.28.200 6.28.200 6.28.210 6.28.210 6.28.220 6.28.220 6.28.230 6.28.230 6.28.240 6.28.240 6.28.250 6.28.250 Ord. No. 907-2013 6-17-2013 2.40.010 2.40.010 2.40.020 2.40.020 2.40.030 2.40.030 2.40.040 2.40.040 2.40.050 2.40.050 2.40.060 2.40.060 2.40.070 2.40.070 2.40.080 2.40.080 2.40.100 2.40.100 2.40.110 2.40.110 2.40.120 2.40.120 2.40.130 2.40.130 2.40.140 2.40.140 2.40.150 2.40.150 2.40.160 2.40.160 2.40.170 2.40.170 2.40.180 2.40.180 2.40.190 2.40.190 2.40.200 2.40.200 2.40.210 2.40.210 2.40.220 2.40.220 Ord. No. 908-2013 6-17-2013 1 2.42.010 - 2.42.020 - 2.42.030 - 2.42.040 - 2.42.050 - 2.42.060 - 2.42.070 Ord. No. 910-2013 7-15-2013 1 12.04.010 - 12.04.020 - 12.04.021 - 12.04.022 3 18.14.031 4 5.72.010 - 5.72.020 - 5.72.030 Ord. No. 913-2013 8-19-2013 1 18.06.017 - 18.08.017 Ord. No. 914-2013 9-16-2013 1(12.20.010) 12.20.010 1(12.20.020) 12.20.020 1(12.20.030) 12.20.030 1(12.20.040) 12.20.040 1(12.20.050) 12.20.050 1(12.20.060) 12.20.060 1(12.20.070) 12.20.070 1(12.20.080) 12.20.080 1(12.20.090) 12.20.090 1(12.20.100) 12.20.100 1(12.20.110) 12.20.110 1(12.20.120) 12.20.120 1(12.20.130) 12.20.130 1(12.20.140) 12.20.140 1(12.20.150) 12.20.150 Ord. No. 915-2013 9-16-2013 1(9.24.010) 9.24.010 1(9.24.020) 9.24.020 1(9.24.040) 9.24.040 1(9.24.050) 9.24.050 1(9.24.070) 9.24.070 Ord. No. 916-2013 10-7-2013 1 2.08.070 Ord. No. 918-2013 11-18-2013 13.22.020 Ord. No. 920-2013 12-16-2013 1(2.41.010) 2.41.010 1(2.41.020) 2.41.020 1(2.41.030) 2.41.030 1(2.41.040) 2.41.040 1(2.41.050) 2.41.050 1(2.41.060) 2.41.060 1(2.41.070) 2.41.070 1(2.41.080) 2.41.080 1(2.41.090) 2.41.090 1(2.41.100) 2.41.100 1(2.41.110) 2.41.110 1(2.41.120) 2.41.120 1(2.41.130) 2.41.130 1(2.41.140) 2.41.140 1(2.41.150) 2.41.150 Ord. No. 921-2014 2-18-2014 1 5.04.160 Ord. No. 925-2014 7-21-2014 1 15.08.010 - 15.08.030 - 15.08.040 - 15.08.050 - 15.08.070 2 15.12.010 - 15.12.020 - 15.12.030 - 15.12.040 - 15.12.050 - 15.12.060 - 15.12.070 - 15.12.080 - 15.12.090 - 15.12.100 - 15.12.110 - 15.12.120 Ord. No. 928-2014 10-6-2014 1(5.65.010) 5.65.010 1(5.65.020) 5.65.020 1(5.65.030) 5.65.030 1(5.65.040) 5.65.040 1(5.65.050) 5.65.050 Ord. No. 929-2014 10-20-2014 1(9.70.010) 9.70.010 1(9.70.020) 9.70.020 1(9.70.030) 9.70.030 1(9.70.040) 9.70.040 1(9.70.050) 9.70.050 1(9.70.060) 9.70.060 1(9.70.070) 9.70.070 1(9.70.080) 9.70.080 1(9.70.090) 9.70.090 1(9.70.110) 9.70.110 1(9.70.120) 9.70.120 1(9.70.130) 9.70.130 1(9.70.140) 9.70.140 1(9.70.150) 9.70.150 1(9.70.160) 9.70.160 1(9.70.170) 9.70.170 1(9.70.180) 9.70.180 1(9.70.190) 9.70.190 1(9.70.200) 9.70.200 1(9.70.210) 9.70.210 1(9.70.220) 9.70.220 1(9.70.230) 9.70.230 Ord. No. 932U-2015 2-2-2015 2 8.12.070 3 8.12.240 Ord. No. 933-2015 6-15-2015 1 9.32.045 Ord. No. 934-2015 7-20-2015 19.00.010 19.00.010 19.00.020 19.00.020 19.00.030 19.00.030 19.00.040 19.00.040 19.00.050 19.00.050 19.00.060 19.00.060 19.00.070 19.00.070 19.00.080 19.00.080 19.02.005 19.02.005 19.04.010 19.04.010 19.04.020 19.04.020 19.06.010 19.06.010 19.06.020 19.06.020 19.06.030 19.06.030 19.06.040 19.06.040 19.06.050 19.06.050 19.06.060 19.06.060 19.06.070 19.06.070 19.06.080 19.06.080 19.06.090 19.06.090 19.06.100 19.06.100 19.06.110 19.06.110 19.08.010 19.08.010 19.08.020 19.08.020 19.08.030 19.08.030 19.08.040 19.08.040 19.08.050 19.08.050 19.08.060 19.08.060 19.08.070 19.08.070 19.08.080 19.08.080 19.08.090 19.08.090 19.10.010 19.10.010 19.10.020 19.10.020 19.10.030 19.10.030 19.10.040 19.10.040 19.10.050 19.10.050 19.10.060 19.10.060 19.10.070 19.10.070 19.10.080 19.10.080 19.10.090 19.10.090 19.12.010 19.12.010 19.12.020 19.12.020 19.12.030 19.12.030 19.12.040 19.12.040 19.12.050 19.12.050 19.12.060 19.12.060 19.12.070 19.12.070 19.12.080 19.12.080 19.12.090 19.12.090 19.12.100 19.12.100 19.14.010 19.14.010 19.14.020 19.14.020 19.14.030 19.14.030 19.14.040 19.14.040 19.14.050 19.14.050 19.14.060 19.14.060 19.14.070 19.14.070 19.14.080 19.14.080 19.14.090 19.14.090 19.14.100 19.14.100 19.14.110 19.14.110 19.16.010 19.16.010 19.16.020 19.16.020 19.16.030 19.16.030 19.16.040 19.16.040 19.16.050 19.16.050 19.16.060 19.16.060 19.16.070 19.16.070 19.16.080 19.16.080 19.16.090 19.16.090 19.16.100 19.16.100 19.16.110 19.16.110 19.16.120 19.16.120 19.16.130 19.16.130 19.18.010 19.18.010 19.18.020 19.18.020 19.18.030 19.18.030 19.18.040 19.18.040 19.18.050 19.18.050 19.18.060 19.18.060 19.18.070 19.18.070 19.18.080 19.18.080 19.18.090 19.18.090 19.18.100 19.18.100 19.18.110 19.18.110 19.18.120 19.18.120 19.18.130 19.18.130 19.18.140 19.18.140 19.18.150 19.18.150 19.18.160 19.18.160 19.18.170 19.18.170 19.20.010 19.20.010 19.20.020 19.20.020 19.20.030 19.20.030 19.22.010 19.22.010 19.22.020 19.22.020 19.22.030 19.22.030 19.22.040 19.22.040 19.22.050 19.22.050 19.22.060 19.22.060 19.24.010 19.24.010 19.24.020 19.24.020 19.24.030 19.24.030 19.24.035 19.24.035 19.24.040 19.24.040 19.24.050 19.24.050 19.24.060 19.24.060 19.24.070 19.24.070 19.24.080 19.24.080 19.24.090 19.24.090 19.24.100 19.24.100 19.24.110 19.24.110 19.26.010 19.26.010 19.26.020 19.26.020 19.26.030 19.26.030 19.26.040 19.26.040 19.26.050 19.26.050 19.26.060 19.26.060 19.26.070 19.26.070 19.26.080 19.26.080 19.26.090 19.26.090 19.26.100 19.26.100 19.26.110 19.26.110 19.26.120 19.26.120 19.26.130 19.26.130 19.26.140 19.26.140 19.26.150 19.26.150 19.26.160 19.26.160 19.26.170 19.26.170 19.26.180 19.26.180 19.26.190 19.26.190 19.26.200 19.26.200 19.26.210 19.26.210 19.26.220 19.26.220 19.26.230 19.26.230 19.26.240 19.26.240 19.26.250 19.26.250 19.26.260 19.26.260 19.26.270 19.26.270 19.28.010 19.28.010 19.28.020 19.28.020 19.28.030 19.28.030 19.28.040 19.28.040 19.28.050 19.28.050 19.28.060 19.28.060 19.28.070 19.28.070 19.28.080 19.28.080 19.28.090 19.28.090 19.28.100 19.28.100 19.30.010 19.30.010 19.30.020 19.30.020 19.30.030 19.30.030 19.30.040 19.30.040 19.30.050 19.30.050 19.30.060 19.30.060 19.30.070 19.30.070 19.30.080 19.30.080 19.30.090 19.30.090 19.30.100 19.30.100 19.30.110 19.30.110 19.30.120 19.30.120 19.32.010 19.32.010 19.32.020 19.32.020 19.32.030 19.32.030 19.32.040 19.32.040 19.32.050 19.32.050 19.32.060 19.32.060 19.32.070 19.32.070 19.32.080 19.32.080 19.32.090 19.32.090 19.32.100 19.32.100 19.34.010 19.34.010 19.34.020 19.34.020 19.34.030 19.34.030 19.34.040 19.34.040 19.34.050 19.34.050 19.34.060 19.34.060 19.34.070 19.34.070 19.34.080 19.34.080 19.34.090 19.34.090 19.34.100 19.34.100 19.36.010 19.36.010 19.36.020 19.36.020 19.36.030 19.36.030 19.38.010 19.38.010 19.38.020 19.38.020 19.38.030 19.38.030 19.38.040 19.38.040 19.38.050 19.38.050 19.38.060 19.38.060 19.38.070 19.38.070 19.38.080 19.38.080 19.38.090 19.38.090 19.38.100 19.38.100 19.38.110 19.38.110 19.38.120 19.38.120 19.38.130 19.38.130 19.40.010 19.40.010 19.42.010 19.42.010 19.42.020 19.42.020 19.42.030 19.42.030 19.44.010 19.44.010 19.44.020 19.44.020 19.44.030 19.44.030 19.44.040 19.44.040 19.44.050 19.44.050 19.46.010 19.46.010 19.46.020 19.46.020 19.46.030 19.46.030 19.46.040 19.46.040 19.46.050 19.46.050 19.46.060 19.46.060 19.46.070 19.46.070 19.46.080 19.46.080 Exh. B Tit. 19, App. A Ord. No. 935-2015 8-3-2015 1-5 13.22.020 Ord. No. 936-2015  8-17-2015 1       Added 15.10.010- 
15.10.040 Ord. No. 938-2015  9-21-2015 1 6.36.010- 
6.36.080 2       Rpld 6.36.090, 
6.36.100 Ord. No. 937-2015  9-21-2015 1 12.40.010- 
12.40.110 Ord. No. 940-2015 11-16-2015 1       Added Preface Ord. No. 943-2015 12-21-2015 1 6.20.330 Ord. No. 942-2015 12-21-15 1       Added 9.66.010- 
9.66.070 Ord. No. 944-2015  1-19-2016 1 19.06.060 Ord. No. 945-2015  1-19-2016 1 19.06.110(d) Ord. No. 946-2016  2-16-2016 1(Exh. A) 19.06.100 Ord. No. 947-2016  2-16-2016 2.40.100 2.40.180 Ord. No. 948-2016  3-21-2016 1(sub. 19.06.061-19.06.069) 19.06.060 Ord. No. 949-2016 11- 7-2016 1       Rpld 19.06.110(d) 2       Added 19.27.010-19.27.060 Ord. No. 950-2017  1-17-2017 1 15.08.010-15.08.050 1       Rpld 15.08.070 Ord. No. 951-2017  3- 6-2017 2       Added 15.14.010-15.14.130 Ord. No. 953-2017  5-15-2017 1(Exh. A) 19.10.010-19.10.090       Added 19.10.100 Ord. No. 954-2017  7-17-2017 1(Exh. A)       Added 19.05.010-19.05.120 Ord. No. 955-2017 12-18-2017       Rpld 5.27.010-5.27.080       Added 5.27.010-5.27.080 Ord. No. 956-2018U  1-16-2018 3       Added 2.54.010-2.54.020 Ord. No. 957-2018 12-17-2018 1       Added 3.33.010-3.33.180 Ord. No. 958-2018  8-20-2018 1 6.24.020 Ord. No. 959-2018U 12-17-2018 1       Added 5.40.010-5.40.060 4 5.08.070 5 5.08.130 Ord. No. 960-2019  2- 4-2019 1       Added 2.26.010-2.26.070  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to California State Law. 
Business and Professions Code 
Section Section 
this Code Div. 10 19.27.050 4600 et seq. 19.06.020 4612 19.06.020 5412.1, 5412.2 1906 5491.1 19.06 7590 et seq. Ch. 5.27 7592.8 Ch. 5.27 13470-13490 19.06 13530-13540 19.06 16000 et seq. Tit. 5 (note) 19300.5 19.06 19800 et seq. Ch. 9.24 21640 et seq. Ch. 5.36 22435 et seq. Ch. 6.36  
Civil Code 
Section Section 
this Code 3479-3503 Ch. 6.28 4080 15.10  
Code of Civil 
Procedure Section 
this Code 1230.010 19.06.060  
Elections Code 
Section Section 
this Code 10227 2.54.010  
Financial Code 
Section Section 
this Code 21000 et seq. Ch. 5.36  
Food and Agricultural Code 
Section Section 
this Code 30501 et seq. Tit. 8 (note) 31601 et seq. Ch. 8.12 31683 Tit. 8 (note)  
Government Code 
Section Section 
this Code 810 et seq. Ch. 2.52 4216 et seq. Ch. 12.08 5800 et seq. Ch. 5.60 6800 1.01.050 6804 1.01.050 6805 1.01.050 8610 et seq. Ch. 2.16 8630 et seq. Ch. 2.16 14999.30 et seq. Ch. 5.92 14999.36 Ch. 5.92 34000 et seq. Tit. 2 (note) 34851 et seq. Ch. 2.08 34856 2.08.070 34871 2.54.010 34882 2.54.010 36501 et seq. Tit. 2 (note) 36516 Ch. 2.28 36805 2.04.010 36809 2.01.010 37101 Tit. 5 (note) 38660 Tit. 15 38772 Ch. 6.32 38790 Ch. 6.20 38790.1 Ch. 6.20 38792 Tit. 8 (note) 38793 Ch. 13.32 38900 et seq. Ch. 13.04 39561 et seq. Ch. 6.28 40401 Tit. 12 (note) 40805.5 2.20.020 43000 3.04.010 45000 et seq. Ch. 2.48 45004 2.48.020 50230 et seq. Ch. 6.28 51038(c)(4) 5.40.020 5.40.050 51501 Ch. 3.04 53019 et seq. Ch. 2.16 53054 et seq. Ch. 5.60 53069.4 Ch. 6.30 53075.5 Ch. 5.24 53730.5 Ch. 3.24 54202 et seq. Ch. 2.40 65000 et seq. Tit. 19 (note) 65088 et seq. Ch. 10.09 65100 et seq. Ch. 2.24 65583(a)(5) 19.10.100 65800 et seq. Tit. 19 (note) 65850.4 Ch. 19.26 65850.5 15.10 65852.2 19.10.070 65901 19.10.060 65915 19.10.090 65943 19.05.080 66000 12.40 66000 et seq. Ch. 13.36 66001 12.40 66004 12.40 66006 12.40 66007 12.40 66018 12.40 66410 et seq. Tit. 18 (note) 68632(a) 5.40.060  
Health and Safety Code 
Section Section 
this Code 4600 et seq. Ch. 13.04 11018 19.06 11362.5 19.06 11362.7-11362.83 19.06 17910 et seq. Tit. 15 (note) 17920.3 14.06.020 17958.1 19.10.070 17960 Ch. 15.08 17980 et seq. 14.06.030 25280 et seq. Ch. 6.22 25297.01 Ch. 6.22 38771 et seq. Ch. 6.28 101450 Tit. 6 (note) - Ch. 6.28 122335 8.12.220 12500 et seq. Ch. 9.70  
Penal Code 
Section Section 
this Code 318.5 Ch. 19.26 318.6 Ch. 19.26 326.5 Ch. 9.25 396 2.16.085 594.5 Ch. 6.32 597.1 8.04.060 853.5 et seq. Ch. 1.02 16550 5.36.030 26700-26915 5.36.030 28100 et seq. 5.36.030  
Public Contracts Code 
Section Section 
this Code 22000 et seq. Ch. 2.42  
Public Resources Code 
Section Section 
this Code 2710 et seq. Ch. 15.28 4117 Tit. 16 (note) 21065 15.14.040 30107.5 15.14.040 40050 et seq. Ch. 6.21 49300 Ch. 6.20  
Public Utilities Code 
Section Section 
this Code 21411 3.33.110  
Revenue and Taxation Code 
Section Section 
this Code 6001 et seq. Ch. 3.12 Ch. 3.33 Pt. 1, Div. 2 3.33.140 Pt. 1.6, Div. 2 3.33.080 3.33.110 3.33.140, 3.33.150 Pt. 1.7, Div. 2 3.33.140 7200 et seq. Ch. 3.12 Ch. 3.33 7280 et seq. Ch. 3.16 11901 et seq. Ch. 3.08  
Streets and Highways Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1800 et seq. Tit. 12 (note) 2100 et seq. Ch. 3.20 2113 Ch. 3.20 5000 et seq. Tit. 12 (note) 5896.1 et seq. Ch. 13.32  
Vehicle Code 
Section Section 
this Code 21 Tit. 10 (note) 4060 3.33.110 9840 3.33.110 16501 Ch. 5.24 21000 et seq. Tit. 10 (note) 21100 et seq. Tit. 10 (note) 21100(b) Ch. 5.24 21351 Ch. 10.16 21354 Ch. 10.28 21657 Ch. 10.24 21967 Ch. 9.28 22101 Ch. 10.20 22113 Ch. 10.20 22500 et seq. Ch. 10.40 22650 et seq. Tit. 7 (note) 22660 Tit. 7 (note)  
