Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE, REFERENCE TO CODE. [Ord. #856, § 1100]
For statutory provisions authorizing cities to codify their ordinances, see
Gov. Code §§ 50022.1 to 50022.8 and 50022.10.
This Code shall be known as the "Compton Municipal Code, 1985," and it
shall be sufficient to refer to said Code as the "Compton Municipal Code" in
any prosecution for the violation thereof, or to refer to any Chapter, Article,
section or subsection thereof by referring to the Chapter number, section
number or subsection number immediately preceding such Chapter, section
or subsection. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding
to, amending, or repealing this Code, or portions thereof, as an addition or
amendment to, or a repeal of, the Compton Municipal Code, or a portion
thereof.
§ 1-2. CODIFICATION AUTHORITY. [Ord. #856, § 1101]
This record consists of all of the regulatory and penal and of certain of
the administrative ordinances of the City of Compton, codified pursuant to
Section 610 of the City Charter of the City of Compton.
§ 1-3. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #856, §§ 1300 — 1325; New; Ord. 2240]
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require, the following words and phrases shall have the
following definitions:
CHIEF OF POLICE OR CHIEF OF POLICE OF THE COMPTON POLICE
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean and include, unless otherwise specified, the
qualified designated representative of the law enforcement agency or
agencies authorized by the City to enforce the laws of the City of Compton
and/or State of California within the jurisdiction of the City of Compton, who
is authorized to exercise all the powers that are now, or may hereafter be
conferred upon sheriffs and other police officers by the laws of the State of
California.
AO:1
CITY — Shall mean the City of Compton in the County of Los Angeles and
State of California.
CITY COUNCIL OR COUNCIL — Shall mean the Council of the City of
Compton.
CLERK OR CITY CLERK — Shall mean the City Clerk of the City of Compton
duly appointed pursuant to law.
COMPTON POLICE DEPARTMENT OR POLICE DEPARTMENT OR POLICE
DEPARTMENT OF THE CITY OF COMPTON — Shall mean and include,
unless otherwise specified, the law enforcement agency or agencies
authorized by the City to enforce the laws of the City of Compton and/or
State of California within the jurisdiction of the City of Compton.
COUNCIL — Shall mean the City Council of the City of Compton.
COUNTY — Shall mean the County of Los Angeles.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the government
established or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the government assigned to
such Organizational unit by the City Council.
GOODS — Shall mean and include wares or merchandise.
LAWS — Shall mean laws of the State of California.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or Chapter of this Code.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
OATH — Shall mean and include affirmation.
OFFICE — The use of the title of any officer, employee, office or ordinance
shall mean such officer, employee, office or ordinance respectively of the
City of Compton.
OPERATE — Shall mean and include carry on, keep, conduct or maintain.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this revision, so long as it is adopted by
the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as
it remains in force and effect pursuant to the law. Ordinance refers to an
ordinance of the City of Compton.
OWNER — Applied to a building or land, shall mean and include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or
a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, Massachusetts
Trusts, corporations or unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents,
employees, servants, factors of any kind of personal representatives of any
thereof in any capacity, acting either for himself or for any other person,
under either personal appointment or pursuant to law.
§ 1-3 COMPTON § 1-3
AO:2
SALE — Shall mean and include any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale.
STATE — Shall mean the State of California.
STREET — Shall mean and include all streets, highways, avenues, lanes,
alleys, courts, places, squares, sidewalks, parkways, curbs, or other public
ways in this City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open
to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this
State.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, shall mean and
include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land,
whether alone or with others.
THIS CODE — Shall mean the General Ordinances of the City of Compton.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-4. CONSTRUCTION. [Ord. #856, § 1300 et seq.; New]
Unless the provisions of the context otherwise require, these general
provisions, rules of construction and definitions shall govern the
construction of this Code. The provisions of this Code and all proceedings
under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote
justice.
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
Shall is mandatory and may is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the City are closed, that day shall
be excluded.
Writing and written shall include printing, typewriting and any other mode
of communication using paper or similar materials which is in general
use, as well as legible handwriting. Writing includes any form or recorded
message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever
any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this
Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is
expressly provided otherwise.
Effect of Headings. Section and subsection headings contained herein shall
not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope,
meaning or intent of the provisions of any section or subsections hereof.
Reference to Acts or Omissions Within this City. This Code shall refer
only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of
the City and to that territory outside of the City over which the City has
§ 1-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-4
AO:3
jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason
of ownership or control of property.
Prohibited Acts Include Causing, Permitting, or Suffering. Whenever in
this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing,
permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing such act or omission.
Acts by Deputy. Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a
public officer, or employee, the power may be exercised, or the duty may be
performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise
duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this Code expressly
provides otherwise.
Service of Notice. Whenever a notice is required to be given under this
Code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made,
such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person
to be notified, or by deposit thereof in the United States mail, in a sealed
envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his
last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public
records of the City or other records pertaining to the matter to which such
notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed
at the time of deposit in the post office.
Proof of Notice. Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate
of any officer or employee of the City, or by affidavit of any person over the
age of 18 years, which shows service in conformity with this Code, or other
provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of California during any day in
any year.
Any citation of a law or ordinance contained in this Code shall be deemed to
refer to such law or ordinance as amended, whether or not such designation
is included in the citation.
Chapter shall mean one of the major divisions of the Code identified by an
Arabic number and divided by the subject matter.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a Chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ 1-5. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. #856, § 1105]
If any Chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Code shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such Chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
§ 1-4 COMPTON § 1-5
AO:4
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining Chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this revision.
§ 1-6. PENALTY.1
§ 1-6.1. Violations. [Ord. #856, § 1200]
Any person, firm, corporation or other group, who violates any ordinance
or law of the City shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, unless by
ordinance the violation is deemed to be an infraction. Punishment for
violation of any ordinance or law shall be as set forth under the State law
for prosecution of a misdemeanor or infraction or as stated in this section.
§ 1-6.2. Maximum Penalty-Misdemeanor. [Ord. #856, § 1200]
Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the City or in any rule,
regulation or order promulgated pursuant thereto any act is prohibited or
is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, (unless
specifically declared to be an infraction) or the doing of any act is required
or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation
of any such provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the City or
any such rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. Such violations may also be redressed by civil
action.
§ 1-6.3. Infractions. [New; Ord. #1894, § 5; Ord. #1917, § 2]
a. Violation of a City ordinance is a misdemeanor unless by ordinance or
on motion by City Attorney it is made an infraction. Such a violation
may be prosecuted by City authorities in the name of the people of the
State of California, or redressed by civil action.
b. Every violation determined to be an infraction is punishable by:
1. A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation;
2. A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of the same
ordinance within one year;
3. A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of the same
ordinance within one year.
c. The violations of Subsections 7-9.2, 12-2.26, 12-2.27 and 12-2.43 are
hereby deemed infractions unless the City Attorney files the violations
as misdemeanors.
1. Editor's Note: For statutory provisions authorizing cities to impose penalties for violations
of ordinances not exceeding $1,000 and/or six months imprisonment, see Gov. Code
§ 36901. For statutory provisions permitting cities to state by ordinance specific violations
to be infractions, see Gov. Code § 36900.
§ 1-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-6.4
AO:5
§ 1-6.4. Separate Violations. [Ord. #856, § 1200]
Except as otherwise provided, every day any violation of this Code or any
other ordinance of the City or any such rule, regulation or order shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-6.5. Application. [New]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for every violation, any lesser penalty, including a
nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular
case or violation.
§ 1-6.6. Abatement of Public Nuisances. [Ord. #856, § 1201]
In addition to the penalties provided in Subsection 1-5.2, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code
or any other City ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be,
by this City, summarily abated as such. Each day such condition continues
shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.
§ 1-6.7. Labor Upon Public Works. [Ord. #856, § 1202]
Persons confined in the City jail under a final judgment of imprisonment for
violation of any ordinance may be required by the Chief of Police to perform
labor on the streets or other public property or works within the City.
§ 1-6.8. Streets and Public Works Defined. [Ord. #856, § 1203]
As used in this section: Streets or other public property or works within the
City, shall include, among other things, clerical and menial labor in the City
jail, or in any camp maintained for the labor of such persons on the streets
or other public property or works within the City.
§ 1-6.9. Violation of Administrative Provisions. [Ord. #856, § 1204]
The violation of any administrative provision of this Code by any officer
or employee of the City may be deemed a failure to perform the duties
under, or to observe the rules and regulations of the department, office or
board, within the meaning of the Civil Service Ordinances and rules and
regulations of the City.
§ 1-7. ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS. [Ord. #2175 § 4; amended
10-15-2019 by Ord. No. 2316]
§ 1-7.1. Administrative Fines and Penalties for Violations of City
Ordinances and Codes.
Every violation of a provision of the Municipal Code, the penalty for which
is defined as an "infraction" or "misdemeanor," shall be subject to an
administrative fine and/or penalty. The provisions of this section relating
§ 1-6.4 COMPTON § 1-7.1
AO:6
to administrative fines and penalties are in addition to all other legal
remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the City to address
any violation of codes, ordinances, resolutions, mandates, regulations, rules
or other laws adopted by the City, or other applicable state codes. Use of
this section shall be at the sole discretion of the City and nothing in this
section shall prevent the City from initiating a civil, criminal or other legal
or equitable proceedings as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in
the administrative fine and/or penalty provisions of this section.
§ 1-7.2. Definitions.
As used in this section:
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION — The ticket issued to the responsible
person(s) who has violated a provision of the Municipal Code.
CITY — The City of Compton.
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Compton or the City
Manager's designee(s).
CONTINUING VIOLATION — A building, plumbing, electrical or other
similar structural or zoning violation which does not create an immediate
danger to health or safety.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any individual employed or otherwise
charged by the City to enforce codes, ordinances, mandates, regulations,
rules or other laws adopted by the City.
HEARING OFFICER — The person or contracted company designated by
the City Manager or his/her designee to determine the validity of an
administrative citation after the person to whom the citation was issued
requests a hearing.
MUNICIPAL CODE — Any codified or noncodified ordinance or law adopted
by the City, including codes adopted by reference.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON(S) — Any individual, corporation, partnership,
association or other group or combination of individuals acting as an entity,
the heirs, executors, administrators, assigns or agents of the aforesaid, who
is the owner or occupant of real property, or the parent or legal guardian of
any person under the age of 18 years, who creates, allows, causes, commits,
continues, permits and/or maintains any violation of the Municipal Code.
For purposes of this section, there may be more than one "responsible
person."
TRANSIENT VIOLATION — A violation which is of a brief or nonpermanent
nature and which can be remedied rapidly.
VIOLATION — Any violation of any provision of the Municipal Code and any
code adopted by reference by the Municipal Code.
§ 1-7.3. Administrative Citations.
§ 1-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-7.3
AO:7
a. An Enforcement Officer shall have authority to issue an administrative
citation to any responsible person for a violation of any provision of the
Municipal Code and codes adopted by reference.
b. Except when a violation creates an immediate danger to health or
safety, if the violation pertains to building, plumbing, electrical or other
similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an immediate
danger to health or safety, the cited person shall be given a reasonable
period of time, but no more than 30 calendar days, to correct the
violation before an administrative fine or penalty is imposed.
1. Administration fines or penalties may be immediately imposed if a
violation(s) of building, plumbing, electrical or other similar
structural, health and safety or zoning requirements exists as a
result of, or to facilitate the illegal cultivation of cannabis. This
subsection shall not be construed to apply to cannabis cultivation
that is lawfully undertaken pursuant to Section 11362.1 of the
California Health and Safety Code.
2. Notwithstanding Subsection b1 above, prior to immediate
imposition of administrative fines or penalties for a violation
specified in Subsection b1 above, the cited person shall be given a
reasonable period of time, but no more than 30 calendar days, to
correct the violation before an administrative fine or penalty is
imposed if all of the following conditions exist:
(a) A tenant is in possession of the property that is the subject of
the administrative action;
(b) The rental property owner or agent can provide evidence that
the rental or lease agreement prohibits the cultivation of
cannabis; and
(c) The rental property owner or agent did not know the tenant
was illegally cultivating cannabis and no complaint, property
inspection or other information caused the rental property
owner or agent to have actual notice of the illegal cannabis
cultivation.
c. Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:
1. The date of the violation;
2. The address or a legal description of the location where the
violation occurred;
3. The section of the Municipal Code violated and a description of the
violation;
4. A description of the action required to correct the violation;
§ 1-7.3 COMPTON § 1-7.3
AO:8
§ 1-7.4. Service of Administrative Citations.
An administrative citation may be issued by an Enforcement Officer to the
responsible person for violation(s) of the Municipal Code, including any
code adopted by reference, in the following manner:
5. The number of days provided to correct or otherwise remedy the
violation prior to the imposition of fines and/or penalties, if
applicable;
6. The amount of the fine for the violation and the amount of the late
charge if the fine is not paid by a specified date;
7. A description of the fine payment process, including a description
of the time within which and the place to which the fine shall be
paid;
8. A description of the administrative citation review process,
including the time within which the administrative citation may be
contested and the place from which a Request for Hearing form to
contest the administrative citation may be obtained;
9. An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of
the violation described in the administrative citation with notice
that payment of the fine does not excuse the requirement to
remedy a continuing violation; and
10. The name and signature of the citing Enforcement Officer.
a. Personal Service. The Enforcement Officer shall attempt to locate and
personally serve the responsible person and attempt to obtain that
person's signature on the administrative citation. If the responsible
person is an entity, the Enforcement Officer may personally serve an
employee over the age of 18, manager, principal, partner, director,
officer or representative of the entity on behalf of the entity. The failure
or refusal of a person to sign a citation shall not affect its validity or any
related subsequent proceeding, nor shall signing a citation constitute
an admission of guilt. Service shall be deemed to have been completed
on the date of service of the citation.
b. Service by Mail. As an alternative to personal service, the
administrative citation may be mailed to the responsible person by
certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, with a copy of
the citation simultaneously sent by first-class mail. The date indicated
on the certified mail receipt, or, if returned unsigned or unclaimed, the
date of the first-class mailing shall constitute the date of issuance of the
citation.
c. Service by Posting Notice.
1. If service cannot be accomplished by personal service or mailed
service, the Enforcement Officer shall post the administrative
§ 1-7.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-7.4
AO:9
§ 1-7.5. Amount of Fines and Penalties.
§ 1-7.6. Payment of Fines.
citation on any real property within the City in which the City has
knowledge that the responsible person has a legal interest, and
such posting shall be deemed effective service. A photograph of
the administrative citation posted on the property shall be taken as
proof of service. Service shall be deemed to have been completed
on the date of posting.
2. The failure of a responsible person to receive an administrative
citation shall not invalidate any fine, late charge, action or
proceeding.
a. The amount of fines for violations of the Municipal Code imposed
pursuant to this section shall be established by ordinance or resolution
of the City Council. Where the violation would otherwise be an
infraction, the administrative fine or penalty shall not exceed the
maximum fine or penalty amounts for infractions set forth in Section
25132 and Subdivision (b) of Section 36900 of the California
Government Code.
b. Except with regard to violations that would otherwise be an infraction,
fines shall be increased, in a manner established by ordinance or
resolution of the City Council, for subsequent repeat violations of the
same or similar provisions of the Municipal Code by the same
responsible person within a twelve-month consecutive period from the
date of the first violation.
c. The ordinance or resolution establishing the amount of fines shall
specify the amount of any late payment charges imposed for the
payment of a fine after its due date.
a. All fines and penalties shall be paid to the City within 30 calendar days
from the effective date of the administrative citation. The effective date
of an administrative citation shall be the date the citation is issued,
unless the enforcement officer grants an opportunity for the person
cited to correct the violation. Where a correction period has been
granted, the effective date of the administrative citation shall be on the
final date of the correction period, if the person has not corrected the
violation.
b. Where there is more than one responsible person, each responsible
person shall be jointly and severally liable for the amount of the fine,
plus any penalty that may be owed.
c. Any administrative citation fine or penalty paid pursuant to Subsection
a above shall be refunded if it is determined, after hearing, that the
person charged was not the person responsible for the violation or
there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation.
§ 1-7.4 COMPTON § 1-7.6
AO:10
§ 1-7.7. Appeal of an Administrative Citation.
d. Payment of a fine or penalty under this section shall not excuse or
discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of a violation of the
Municipal Code that is the subject of an administrative citation.
e. The City may use all available legal means to collect any past due fines,
penalties and other costs related to issuing administrative citations and
collecting the fines and penalties, including, but not limited to,
contracting with collection agencies, filing liens and seeking judgments
in court.
a. Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a
violation or that he or she is a responsible person, not later than 15
calendar days from the date of service of the administrative citation.
The request shall be submitted in writing on a Request for Hearing form
available from the issuing agency or as directed on the citation and
shall include a detailed written explanation as to why the administrative
citation is being contested. The request shall be accompanied by a
deposit in the full amount of the fine or a request for an Advance
Deposit Hardship Waiver. An appeal hearing will not be scheduled
unless the full amount of the fine is deposited, or the City finds the
responsible person unable to do so and waives the deposit requirement.
b. The recipient of an administrative citation shall deposit the amount of
the fine and/or penalty specified on the administrative citation as
directed on the citation at the time he or she submits the Request for
Hearing form, or he or she shall submit notice that a request for an
Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver has been filed pursuant to § 1-7.8.
Fines that are deposited with the City while a citation is contested shall
not accrue interest.
c. The recipient of an administrative citation requesting the hearing shall
be notified of the date, time and location of the hearing at least 10
calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be set
for a date that is not less than 15 calendar days and not more than 60
calendar days from the date that a completed request for administrative
hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this section. The
notice may be served personally on the cited person or by U.S. mail with
first-class postage prepaid. Mailed notice shall be addressed to the
cited party at the address provided by the cited party, or if there is no
such address then in care of the property address of the cited party.
Service of notice is complete upon personal service on the cited party or
upon depositing the notice of hearing in the U.S. mail. Failure of any
person to receive the mailed notice shall not affect the validity of any
proceeding or order regarding administrative citations.
d. Failure to timely request a hearing shall render the administrative
citation final and shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative
remedies.
§ 1-7.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-7.8
AO:11
§ 1-7.8. Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver.
§ 1-7.9. Administrative Hearing Officer.
The City Manager shall designate the Hearing Officer or the contracted
company for the administrative hearings. The Hearing Officer shall not be
a City employee and his or her compensation shall not be conditioned upon
whether or not administrative citations are upheld.
§ 1-7.10. Administrative Citation Hearing Procedure.
Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and
discovery do not apply. Evidence shall be relevant to the issues to be
decided. The Hearing Officer shall use preponderance of the evidence as
the standard of proof in deciding the issues.
a. If the recipient of an administrative citation intends to request an
administrative hearing and is financially unable to make the advance
deposit of the fine as required herein, a request for an Advance Deposit
Hardship Waiver may be filed. Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver forms
are available from the issuing agency, the City Attorney's Office or as
directed on the citation. The completed Advance Deposit Hardship
Waiver form must be filed simultaneously with the Request for Hearing
form.
b. The City Attorney or his/her designee may waive the requirement of an
advance deposit and issue the Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver only if
the applicant submits the required Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver
form, together with supporting documents, demonstrating to the
satisfaction of the City Attorney or his/her designee that the recipient of
the administrative citation is financially unable to deposit with the City
the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing. Documentation of
financial hardship may include, but is not limited to, proof of receipt of
specified public benefit programs, current payroll stubs, recent W-2
and/or similar documents acceptable to the City Attorney or his/her
designee, demonstrating that the cited party is unable to deposit the
fine. Written notice of the determination shall be served by first-class
mail or by personal service upon the cited party. Service shall be
deemed complete at the time the notice is personally serviced or
deposited into the mail and addressed to the person at the address
indicated on the Administrative Hearing Request form. If applicable,
the notice shall include a brief description of the reasons for the City's
determination to not issue the Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver. The
written determination of the City shall be final.
c. If the City determines not to issue an Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver,
the recipient of the administrative citation shall remit the full amount of
the fine within 10 days of service of the written decision to deny the
advance deposit hardship waiver.
§ 1-7.8 COMPTON § 1-7.10
AO:12
a. At the hearing, all persons contesting the validity of an administrative
citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence
concerning the administrative citation. The party requesting the
hearing may bring an interpreter to the hearing at his or her sole
expense. The Hearing Officer may question any person who presents
evidence or who testifies at any appeal hearing. The cited party, or that
person's representative, may attend the hearing in person, or in lieu of
attending may submit an Appearance by Written Declaration on a form
provided by the City for that purpose.
b. The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the
Enforcement Officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
violation. The Enforcement Officer who issued the citation may
participate in the hearing. If the Enforcement Officer submits an
additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the
Hearing Officer, then a copy of this report shall be served on the person
requesting the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested, at
least five calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Service shall be
deemed complete at the time the report is deposited into the mail and
addressed to the person at the address indicated on the administrative
hearing request form.
c. Failure of the party contesting the administrative citation to appear at
the hearing shall constitute forfeiture of the fine and a failure to
exhaust his or her administrative remedies and shall result in forfeiture
of the deposit. The Hearing Officer shall dismiss the challenge to the
administrative citation and shall issue a written notice to that effect.
The advance deposit shall then become the property of the City.
d. If a hearing is scheduled after approval of an Advance Deposit Hardship
Waiver and then dismissed at the request of the cited party, the cited
party shall pay the fine to the City within seven days after written notice
to do so. If the cited party obtained an Advance Deposit Hardship
Waiver and neither attended the hearing nor submitted an Appearance
by Written Declaration, the cited party shall pay the fine within seven
days after written notice to do so.
e. The Hearing Officer may continue the hearing from time to time and
provide the person with additional time in which to remedy the
violation. In addition, the Hearing Officer may request additional
information or evidence from the Enforcement Officer or the recipient
of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision.
f. At the conclusion of the hearing or within 30 calendar days thereafter,
the Hearing Officer shall render a decision as follows:
1. After consideration of all of the evidence, the Hearing Officer shall
issue a written decision to uphold or cancel the administrative
citation and shall state the reason for the decision and notice of the
right to appeal the decision.
§ 1-7.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-7.10
AO:13
§ 1-7.11. Judicial Review of Administrative Order.
A cited person who objects to the Hearing Officer's administrative decision
and/or order may obtain review of the administrative citation by filing
an appeal with the Superior Court of Los Angeles County in accord with
Section 53069.4 of the California Government Code. Such appeal must be
filed within 20 days after mailing or personal service of the Administrative
Order to the cited party. The cited party shall within 10 days of filing a
notice of appeal with the Superior Court serve upon the City Clerk, either
in person or by first-class mail, a copy of the notice of appeal.
§ 1-7.12. Failure to Comply with the Administrative Order.
Failure to comply with an administrative order directing the abatement of a
continuing violation shall constitute a public nuisance and a misdemeanor
crime. In that event, or if the City prevails in an appeal of such
administrative order to the Superior Court and the responsible person
does not comply with the administrative order, the City may file a criminal
misdemeanor action against the responsible person. Filing the criminal
misdemeanor action does not preclude the City from using any other legal
remedy available to gain compliance with the administrative order.
§ 1-7.13. Only Abatement Discharges the Violation.
Payment of the fine and/or penalty under this section shall not excuse or
discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation
that is the subject of the administrative citation. Only abatement of the cited
condition discharges the violation.
2. The cited party/appellant and the Enforcement Officer shall each
be served by first-class mail, postage prepaid, with a copy of the
Hearing Officer's written decision. The cited party/appellant shall
also be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. Service
shall be deemed made as of the date on the receipt or, it returned
unsigned or unclaimed, as of the date of mailing of the Hearing
Officer's written decision.
3. If the administrative citation is upheld, the deposit with the City
shall be retained by the City. If the administrative citation is not
upheld, the City shall, within 30 calendar days, refund the amount
of the deposited fine. If the administrative citation is upheld and
the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an Advance Deposit
Hardship Waiver, the Hearing Officer shall set forth in the decision
a payment schedule for the fine and/or penalty. If the
administrative citation is upheld and the violation has not been
fully corrected as of the date of the hearing, the Hearing Officer's
decision shall contain an order to correct the violation and a
deadline for compliance.
4. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be the City's final
administrative decision.
§ 1-7.10 COMPTON § 1-7.14
AO:14
§ 1-7.14. Recovery of Abatement Costs.
The administrative citation process described in this section does not
preclude the City from recovering any code violation abatement costs
incurred by the City in performing its code enforcement efforts pursuant to
this Code.
§ 1-8. CONTINUATION CLAUSE. [Ord. #856, § 1103.1; Ord. #2175,
§ 1]
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as
ordinance provisions previously adopted by the City relating to the same
subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations, and
not as new enactments.
§ 1-9. REPEAL CLAUSE. [Ord. #856, § 1106; New; Ord. #2175, § 2]
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or
at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance
shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took
effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the
repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed.
§ 1-10. MAINTENANCE OF CODE.
§ 1-10.1. Copies for Public Record. [Ord. #856, § 1107; Ord. #2175,
§ 3]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 610 of the Charter of the
City of Compton, not less than three copies of this Code shall be filed for
examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk. At least three
copies, duly certified to by the City Clerk, shall be permanently maintained
on file in his office. Additional copies shall be prepared in loose-leaf form
and shall be mounted to withstand heavy usage in such binders as the City
Clerk may prescribe. Copies thereof shall be distributed to the Departments
and Divisions of the City as shall be prescribed by the City Manager.
§ 1-10.2. Index and Record of Ordinances. [Ord. #856, § 1108; Ord.
#2175, § 3]
Duly certified copies of every ordinance making changes in such Code shall
be filed in the office of the City Clerk in books for such purpose, duly
indexed for ready reference.
§ 1-10.3. Reprints. [Ord. #856, § 1110; Ord. #2175, § 3]
At least twice yearly, the City Clerk shall cause the loose-leaf pages of
said Code in which changes have been made to be reprinted, including
the notation as to the ordinance number pursuant to which such change
is adopted, in order that at least twice yearly the loose-leaf copies of such
Code prepared for the use and convenience of the officers and employees of
§ 1-7.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-10.3
AO:15
the City and the general public may be brought up to date. As directed by
the City Manager, the City Clerk shall distribute copies of such amendments
without charge to the various City Departments and the officers and
employees thereof.
§ 1-10.4. Purchase of Code. [Ord. #856, § 1111; Ord. #2175, § 3;
Ord. #2295 § 1]
Copies of this Code and of all amendments hereto shall be available for
purchase by the general public at the City Clerk's office at a price
established by ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
Editor's Note: For regulations concerning personnel policies, see
Chapter 5, Personnel Policies.
§ 1-10.3 COMPTON § 1-10.4
AO:16
ARTICLE I
City Council
§ 2-1. CITY COUNCIL.
§ 2-1.1. Location of Council Meetings.2 [Ord. #856, § 2100]
All meetings of the Council shall be held in the Council Chamber in the City
Hall.
§ 2-1.2. Regular Meetings; Adjournment. [Ord. #856, § 2100.1; Ord.
#1088; Ord. #1200; Ord. #1372; Ord. #1487; Ord. #2214; Ord.
#2246; Ord. #2264; Ord. #2303 § 1]
Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first four Tuesdays
of each month. All regular City Council meetings wherein Closed Session
item(s) are to be considered and discussed shall be scheduled to begin
at 4:30 p.m. for the sole purpose of convening and recessing for Closed
Session(s) by the City Council. Public Sessions of regular meetings of the
City Council shall be scheduled to commence at 5:30 p.m. Regular meetings
falling on days of primary or general municipal elections shall be held on
the next succeeding business day at the same hour and place. (For purposes
of clarification, this exception shall not constitute a City holiday.) Regular
meetings may be adjourned or readjourned to a date certain, which date
shall be specified in the order of adjournment, and, when so specified in
the order of adjournment, and, when so adjourned, each adjourned meeting
shall be a regular meeting for all purposes.
§ 2-1.3. Meetings; Legal Holidays. [Ord. #856, § 2100.2]
If a regular meeting shall occur on a legal holiday, such regular meeting
shall be held on the next succeeding business day at the same hour and
place.
§ 2-1.4. Emergencies; Change of Location of Meeting. [Ord. #856,
§ 2100.3]
If, by reason of fire, flood, or other emergency, it shall be unsafe to meet in
the place designated in this Code, all meetings may be held for the duration
of such emergency at such place as is designated by the Mayor or, if the
Mayor should fail to act, by three members of the Council.
§ 2-1.5. Quorum Required. [Ord. #856, § 2100.4]
In accordance with the provisions of the City Charter, three members of the
Council shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a less number may
adjourn from time to time. In the absence of all members of the Council
from any regular meeting or adjourned regular meeting, the City Clerk may
2. Editor's Note: For statutory provisions as to City Council meetings, see Gov. Code
§§ 36802, 36805 to 36814. Also see Gov. Code §§ 54950 to 54961.
§ 2-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.5
AO:17
declare such meeting adjourned to a stated day and hour. Notice of such
adjourned meeting shall be given or may be waived in the same manner as
specified in the City Charter of the giving or waiving of notices of special
meetings of the Council.
§ 2-1.6. Special Meetings. [Ord. #856, § 2100.5; Ord. #1488; Ord.
#2195, § 1]
Special meetings may be called at any time by the Mayor, or by three
members of the City Council in accordance with and pursuant to the
procedures set forth in State law for the calling and conducting of special
meetings.
§ 2-1.7. Order of Business. [Ord. #856, § 2100.6; Ord. #1495; Ord.
#1961, § 1; Ord. #2007, § 1; Ord. #2123, § 1; Ord. #2195, § 2; Ord.
#2220, § 1; Ord. #2230, § 1; Ord. #2303 § 2]
The order of business of City Council meetings shall be as follows (please
note that the order of agenda items may be changed during the Council
meeting at the discretion of the City Council):
a. Closed Session Items (if applicable).
1. Roll Call.
2. Public Comments on Closed Session Agenda Items Only (comments
limited to one minute per speaker).
3. Recess to Closed Session.
b. Public Meeting.
1. Call to Order.
2. Roll Call.
3. Moment of Silence.
4. Pledge of Allegiance.
5. Report on Closed Session Actions.
6. Introduction of Special Guests.
7. Commendatory Resolutions/Presentations.
8. Public Comments on Agenda Items and Non-Agenda Matters within
the Jurisdiction of the City Council (comments limited to three
minutes per speaker).
9. Public Hearings (except for an applicant, owner and/or appellant;
comments limited to two minutes per speaker).
§ 2-1.5 COMPTON § 2-1.7
AO:18
§ 2-1.7.1. Consent Agenda. [Ord. #1961, § 2; Ord. #2195, § 3]
10. Consent Agenda Items (Consent Agenda consists of routine items
which will be approved by one motion and one vote unless removed
for separate discussion):
(a) Approval of minutes of previous meetings.
(b) Reports of Officers and Commissions.
(c) City Manager/City Attorney/City Treasurer/City Controller
Reports.
(d) Resolutions/Other Action Items.
11. Regular Agenda Items:
(a) Items Withdrawn From Consent Agenda.
(b) Reports of Officers, Boards, Commissions, Committees and
City Council.
(c) City Manager Reports.
(d) City Attorney Reports.
(e) City Treasurer Reports.
12. Unfinished Business.
13. New Business.
14. Approval of Warrants.
15. Council Comments.
16. Adjournment.
a. All matters listed under the consent agenda are considered to be
routine and all will be enacted by one vote of the City Council.
b. Members of the public will have an opportunity to comment on consent
agenda items prior to their consideration by the Council. These
comments shall be made during the "Public Comments on Agenda Items
and Non-Agenda Matters" period on the Agenda (Section 2-1.7h).
c. Any member of the City Council may request that an item on the
consent agenda be separately considered by the City Council. The
request will result in the withdrawal of the item from the consent
agenda for consideration by the Council under subsection 2-1.7k. No
further public comment on any withdrawn consent agenda item will be
permitted beyond that provided for under subsection 2-1.7h, "Public
Comments on Agenda Items and Non-Agenda Matters."
§ 2-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.8
AO:19
§ 2-1.8. Audience Comments at Council Meetings. [Ord. #856,
§ 2100.7; Ord. #987; Ord. #1495; Ord. #1931, § 1; Ord. #1939, § 1;
Ord. #2123, § 2; Ord. #2195, § 4; Ord. #2220, § 2]
All citizens are encouraged to appear before the Council to present
grievances, to offer suggestions for the betterment of municipal affairs or
comment on agenda items. In order that Council meetings may proceed in
an efficient manner for the conduct of the peoples' business, the following
time limits are established. The presiding officer may limit the length of
time allotted for comments due to the number of persons wishing to speak
or if comments become repetitious or irrelevant.
§ 2-1.9. Agenda Preparation Procedure. [Ord. #856, § 2100.8; Ord.
#1495; Ord. #2164, § 1]
The City Clerk shall prepare an agenda prior to each meeting of the City
Council as follows:
a. Agenda Items and Non-Agenda Matters. Each person shall be allotted
three minutes in which to address the City Council on any item(s)
appearing on the agenda and matters that are within the jurisdiction of
the Council but do not appear on the agenda. This shall be the only
opportunity for public comment except for scheduled public hearing
items.
b. Public Hearings. Each person (other than an applicant, owner or
appellant) shall be allotted two minutes in which to address the City
Council during a public hearing.
a. Each item intended to be brought up at the meeting for discussion and/
or action shall be listed on the agenda. Matters may be placed on the
agenda at the request of any member of the City Council, any other
elected City official, or the City Manager. All submissions are subject to
City Attorney approval. All items for the agenda shall be submitted to
the City Manager. The City Manager will cause the appropriate staff
report to be prepared so that the matter may be scheduled to be placed
on the agenda by the third regular meeting after its submission.
b. The City Clerk shall post, file and distribute to each member of the
Council, the City Manager, and the City Attorney a written copy of the
agenda in accordance with all State and local laws relating to local
governmental meetings.
c. In case of a matter arising after the posting and filing referred to in the
immediately preceding section, and the matter cannot reasonably wait
until the next regular meeting, the City Clerk shall prepare a
supplemental agenda and the City Clerk shall provide as much advance
posting, filing and distributing as is possible under the circumstances,
complying with all State and local provisions relating to local
governmental meetings.
§ 2-1.8 COMPTON § 2-1.10
AO:20
§ 2-1.10. Public Hearings. [Ord. #856, § 2100.9; Ord. #1495]
Public hearings before the Council shall be heard at such dates and hours
as may be determined by the Council.
§ 2-1.11. Committees. [Added by Ord. #1495, § 2100.10]
The Council may appoint such committees as it may deem necessary to
assist it in the proper discharge of its duties.
§ 2-1.12. Adjournment of City Council Meetings in August. [Added
by Ord. #1836, § 1; amended by Ord. #1857, § 1]
That the regular City Council, Urban Community Development Commission
and Public Finance Authority meetings scheduled for the month of August
beginning in 1991 are hereby ordered adjourned until the first regularly
scheduled meeting in September.
§ 2-1.13. Rules of Decorum for Meetings. [Added by Ord. #1839,
§ 2; Ord. #2195, § 5; Ord. #2220, § 3]
a. Decorum. Meetings of the City Council shall be conducted in an orderly
manner to ensure that the deliberative process of the Council is
retained at all times and the peoples' business is conducted in an
efficient manner. The presiding officer of the Council, who shall be the
Mayor, Mayor Pro Tempore or, in their absence, another member so
designated by the Council, shall be responsible for maintaining the
order and decorum of meetings.
b. Rules of Decorum. While any meeting of the City Council is in session,
the following rules and decorum shall be observed:
1. Councilmembers. The members of the City Council shall preserve
order and decorum, and a member shall not by conversation or
other means delay or interrupt the Council proceedings or disturb
any other member while speaking.
2. City Staff Member. Employees of the City shall observe the same
rules of order and decorum as those which apply to the members of
the Council.
3. Persons Addressing the Council. Public oral communications at the
City Council meetings should not be a substitute for any item that
can be handled during normal working hours of municipal
government. The primary purpose of oral communications is to
allow citizens the opportunity to formally communicate with the
City Council as a whole on matters that cannot be handled during
regular working hours of City government. Each person who
addresses the Council shall do so in an orderly manner and shall
not make personal, impertinent, slanderous or profane remarks to
any member of the Council, staff or general public.
§ 2-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.13
AO:21
4. Members of the Audience. No person in the audience at a Council
meeting shall engage in disorderly or boisterous conduct, including
the utterance of loud, threatening or abusive language, whistling,
stamping of feet or other acts which disturb, disrupt or otherwise
impede the orderly conduct of any Council meeting.
c. Addressing the Council. A person wishing to address the Council
regarding any item on the agenda (except for public hearings) and
matters not appearing on the agenda, but within the subject matter
jurisdiction of the Council, shall submit a request on the form provided,
or at the discretion of the presiding officer, seek recognition by the
presiding officer during the place on the agenda set aside for such
items. No person shall address the Council without first being
recognized by the presiding officer. The following procedure shall be
observed by persons addressing the Council:
1. Each person shall step up to the podium provided for the use of the
public and, if the speaker desires to have his or her comments
recorded for public record, state his or her name and organization,
if any, the speaker represents, and the agenda item(s) and/or
subject matter within the jurisdiction of the City Council he or she
wishes to discuss.
2. Each person shall limit his or her comments to three minutes (two
minutes for public hearings), unless the presiding officer grants
further time.
3. Each person shall confine his or her comments to the Council
agenda item(s) or to matters within the subject matter jurisdiction
of the City Council. The presiding officer may rule persons who do
not comply with this rule as out of order.
4. All comments shall be addressed to the Council as a whole and not
to any single member, unless in response to a question from said
member.
5. No question may be asked of a member of the Council or of the City
staff without permission of the presiding officer.
d. Enforcement of Decorum. The rules of decorum set forth above shall be
enforced in the following manner:
1. Warning. Any person who disturbs, disrupts or otherwise impedes
the conduct of the City Council meeting is out of order and the
presiding officer shall request that such person be orderly and
comply with the applicable rules. If, after receiving a warning from
the presiding officer, a person persists in disturbing, disrupting or
otherwise impeding the meeting, the presiding officer shall order
that person to leave the Council meeting and not return for the
duration of the meeting. If such person does not remove himself or
herself, the presiding officer may order any law enforcement officer
§ 2-1.13 COMPTON § 2-1.13
AO:22
§ 2-1.14. Length of Council Meeting. [Added by Ord. #1869, § 1]
No Council Meeting shall exceed four hours from start to finish, with the
exception that a simple majority vote of the Councilmembers present may
extend the meeting time.
§ 2-1.15. Council Time Limit. [Added by Ord. 1869, § 1; Ord. #2195,
§ 6]
The City Council members shall limit their comments to three minutes per
Council member per agenda item and five minutes per Council member for
any matters not appearing on the agenda (except for public hearings).
who is on duty at said meeting as sergeant-at-arms of the Council
to remove that person from the Council chambers.
2. Removal. Any law enforcement officer who is serving as sergeantat-
arms of the Council shall carry out all lawful orders and
instructions given by the presiding office for the purpose of
maintaining order and decorum at the Council meeting. Upon
instruction of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the
sergeant-at-arms to remove from the Council meeting any person
who is disturbing, disrupting or otherwise impeding the
proceedings of the Council.
3. Resisting Removal. Any person who resists removal by the
sergeant-at-arms may be charged with a violation of this section or
other applicable law.
4. Penalty. Any person, who violates any provision of this section, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor or subject to the administrative
enforcement proceedings of Section 1-7 of this Code.
5. Motion to Enforce. If the presiding officer fails to enforce the rules
set forth above, any member of the Council may move to require
him or her to do so, and an affirmative vote of a majority of the
Council shall require him or her to do so. If the presiding officer
fails to carry out the will of a majority of the Council, the majority
may designate another member of the Council to act as presiding
officer for the limited purpose of enforcing any rule of this section
which it wishes to enforce.
6. Adjournment. If a meeting of the Council is disturbed or disrupted
in such a manner as to make infeasible or improbable the
restoration of order, the meeting may be adjourned or continued by
the presiding officer or a majority of the Council, and the remaining
Council business may be considered at the next meeting.
§ 2-1.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.16
AO:23
§ 2-1.16. Mayor Pro Tem. [Added by Ord. #1952, § 1; amended by
Ord. #2248; Ord. #2299, §§ 1 — 4]
The City Council shall designate one of its members as Mayor Pro Tem at
the first City Council meeting of each fiscal year to preside over any Council
meeting from which the Mayor is absent.
a. The City Council shall by a majority vote of the entire Council select the
Mayor Pro Tem at any time.
b. A City Council member may decline the Mayor Pro Tem designation. In
such case, the City Council may designate the Mayor Pro Tem seat by a
majority vote of the entire Council.
c. In the absence of both the Mayor and designated Mayor Pro Tem, the
Presiding Officer of the City Council meeting shall be the City Council
member of the next consecutive district.
§ 2-1.16 COMPTON § 2-1.16
AO:24
ARTICLE II
City Officers
§ 2-2. CITY MANAGER.
§ 2-2.1. Appointment. [Added by Ord. #1335, § 2-1000]
The City Manager shall be appointed by the Council wholly on the basis
of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold
office for and during the pleasure of the Council.
§ 2-2.2. Residence. [Added by Ord. #1335, § 2-1001]
Residence in the City at the time of appointment of a City Manager shall
not be required as a condition of the appointment, but within 180 days after
reporting for work, the City Manager shall become a resident of the City
unless the Council approves his residence outside the City.
§ 2-2.3. Eligibility of Council Members. [Added by Ord. #1335,
§ 2-1002]
No member of the Council shall be eligible for appointment as City Manager
until one year has elapsed after such Council member shall have ceased to
be a member of the Council.
§ 2-2.4. Bond. [Added by Ord. #1335, § 2-1003]
The City Manager and Acting City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety
bond to be approved by the Council in such sum as may be determined by
the Council. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance
of the duties imposed upon the City Manager and Acting City Manager
as set forth in this section. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper
charge against the City.
§ 2-2.5. Acting City Manager. [Added by Ord. #1335, § 2-1004]
The Assistant City Manager shall serve as manager pro tempore during any
temporary absence or disability of the City Manager. In the event there is no
Assistant City Manager, the City Manager, by filing a written notice with the
City Clerk, shall designate a qualified City employee to exercise the powers
and perform the duties of City Manager during his temporary absence or
disability. In the event the City Manager's absence or disability extends over
a two-month period, the Council may, after the two-month period, appoint
an Acting City Manager.
§ 2-2.6. Compensation. [Added by Ord. #1335, § 2-1005; amended
by Ord. #1597]
The City Manager shall receive such compensation as the Council shall
determine. In addition, the City Manager shall be reimbursed for all actual
§ 2-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.6
AO:25
necessary expenses incurred by him in the performance of his official
duties.
§ 2-2.7. Powers and Duties. [Added by Ord. #1335, §§ 2-1006 —
2-1006.12]
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the government of
the City under the direction and control of the Council except as otherwise
provided in this section. The City Manager shall be responsible for the
efficient administration of all the affairs of the City which are under his
control. In addition to his general duties as administrative head, and not as
a limitation thereon, it shall be his duty and he shall have the powers set
forth in the following paragraphs.
a. Law Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to enforce
the provisions, of this Code and all laws and ordinances of the City and
to see that all franchises, contracts, permits, and privileges granted by
the Council are faithfully observed.
b. Authority over Employees. It shall be the duty of the City Manager and
he shall have the authority to control, order, and give directions to all
heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the
City under his jurisdiction through their department heads.
c. Power of Appointment and Removal. It shall be the duty of the City
Manager to appoint, remove, promote, and demote any and all officers
and employees of the City, subject to all applicable personnel
ordinances, rules, and regulations.
Exception: City Clerk, City Attorney, City Treasurer, and City Controller.
d. Administrative Reorganization of Offices. It shall be the duty and
responsibility of the City Manager to conduct studies and effect such
administrative reorganization of offices, positions, or units under his
direction as may be indicated in the interests of efficient, effective, and
economical conduct of the City's business.
e. Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to recommend to
the Council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems
necessary.
f. Attendance at Council Meetings. It shall be the duty of the City
Manager to attend all meetings of the Council, unless at his request he
is excused therefrom by the Mayor individually of the Council, except
when his removal is under consideration.
g. Financial Reports. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to keep the
Council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs
of the City.
§ 2-2.6 COMPTON § 2-2.7
AO:26
§ 2-2.8. Internal Relations. [Added by Ord. #1335, §§ 2-1007 —
2-1007.3]
h. Annual Salary Plan. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to prepare
and submit the proposed annual salary plan to the Council for its
approval.
i. Expenditure Control and Purchasing. It shall be the duty of the City
Manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or
recommended to the Council except on approval of the City Manager or
his authorized representative. The City Manager or his authorized
representative shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for
all the departments or divisions of the City.
j. Investigations and Complaints. It shall be the duty of the City Manager
to make investigations into the affairs of the City, and any department
or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any
obligations of the City.
k. Public Buildings. It shall be the duty of the City Manager and he shall
exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and
all other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction of
the Council.
l. Additional Duties. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to perform
such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated
to him from time to time by ordinance, resolution, or other official
action of the Council.
a. Council-Manager Relations. The Council and its members shall deal
with the administrative services of the City only through the City
Manager except for the purpose of inquiry; and neither the Council nor
any member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any
subordinates of the City Manager. The City Manager shall take his
orders and instructions from the Council only when sitting in a duly
convened meeting of the Council, and no individual Councilman shall
give any orders or instructions to the City Manager.
b. Department Cooperation. It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers
and the City Clerk, the City Treasurer, the City Attorney, and the City
Controller to assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the
City efficiently, economically and harmoniously.
c. Attendance at Commission Meetings. The City Manager may attend any
and all meetings of the Planning Commission, Recreation and Park
Commission, and any other commissions, boards or committees created
by the Council upon his own volition or upon direction of the Council. At
such meetings which the City Manager attends, he shall be heard by
such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which
he wishes to address the members thereof, and he shall inform such
members as to the status of any matter being considered by the
§ 2-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.8
AO:27
§ 2-2.9. Limitation on Removal. [Added by Ord. #1335, § 2-1008;
renumbered and amended by Ord. #1597, § 3]
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 703 of the Charter of the City of
Compton, the City Manager shall not be removed from office, other than for
misconduct in office during or within a period of 90 days next succeeding
any general municipal election held in the City at which election a member
of the Council is elected or when a new Councilman is appointed. The
purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member
of the Council, or a reorganized Council, to observe the actions and ability
of the City Manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his
office. After the expiration of the 90 days, the provisions of the above-cited
Charter Section shall apply.
§ 2-2.10. Agreements on Employment. [Added by Ord. #1335,
§ 2-1009]
The provisions of this section shall not be construed as limitations on
the power of or authority of the Council to enter into any supplemental
agreement with the City Manager delineating additional terms and
conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this
section.
§ 2-3. (RESERVED)
Council; and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members
of all commissions, boards, or committees appointed by the Council.
§ 2-2.8 COMPTON § 2-3
AO:28
ARTICLE III
Departments, Boards, and Commissions3
§ 2-4. EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS.4
§ 2-4.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2219]
The purpose of this section is to comply with the provisions of the California
Emergency Services Act, Title Two, Division One, Chapter Seven of the
Government Code of the State of California (commencing with Section
8285.5 or successor legislation) and to provide for the preparation and
carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within
this City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency
organization; and, the coordination of the emergency functions of this City
with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected
private persons.
§ 2-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2219]
As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall be construed
as follows:
EMERGENCY — Shall mean any or all of the following, as the context
requires: an emergency situation, a local emergency, a state of emergency,
or a state or war emergency.
LOCAL EMERGENCY — Shall mean the duly proclaimed existence of
conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and
property within the territorial limits of a county, city and county, or city,
caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot,
drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or
disease, the Governor's warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or
other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy,
which are or likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel,
equipment, and facilities of that political subdivision and require the
combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat, or with respect
to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage requires
extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the California Public
Utilities Commission.
STATE OF EMERGENCY — Shall mean the duly proclaimed existence of
conditions of disaster or extreme peril to the safety of persons and property
within the State caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood,
storm, epidemic, riot, draught, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant
3. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2235 abolished the Public Works Department and the
Compton Municipal Water Department as separate departments of the City and
consolidated these departments as the Department of Public Works and Municipal
Utilities, with the water utility becoming a Division of the new consolidated department.
Ordinance No. 2272: That pursuant to Section 704 of the Compton City Charter, the
Department of Public Works and Municipal Utilities shall be hereby abolished and the
Public Works Department and the Compton Municipal Water Department shall be reestablished
as separate City departments.
4. Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 1599.
§ 2-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-4.2
AO:29
or animal infestation or disease, the Governor's warning of an earthquake
or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake, or other conditions, other than
conditions resulting from a labor controversy or conditions causing a "State
of War Emergency," which, by reason of their magnitude, are or are likely to
be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities
of any single county, city and county, or city and require the combined
forces of a mutual aid region or regions to combat, or with respect to
regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage requires
extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the California Public
Utilities Commission.
STATE OF WAR EMERGENCY — Shall mean the condition which exists
immediately, with or without a proclamation thereof by the Company,
whenever the State or nation is attacked by an enemy of the United States,
or upon receipt of the State of a warning from the Federal government
indicating that such an enemy attack is probable or imminent.
§ 2-4.3. Disaster Council; Membership. [Ord. #2219]
The City of Compton Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of
the following:
§ 2-4.4. Disaster Council; Powers and Duties. [Ord. #2219]
It shall the duty of the City of Compton Disaster Council, and it is hereby
empowered to:
a. The City Manager, who shall be Chairperson;
b. The Assistant City Manager(s), who shall be Vice Chairperson(s);
c. The Emergency Management Coordinator;
d. Such chiefs and directors of emergency services as are provided for in
the current Emergency Plan of the City adopted pursuant to this
section;
e. The City Attorney or his or her representative; and
f. Such representation of civic, business, labor, veterans, professionals or
other organizations within the community as may be appointed by the
City Manager with the approval of the City Council.
a. Develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency
and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and
resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement
such plans and agreements.
b. Register Disaster Service Workers.
c. Designate the individual responsible for keeping the registration of
Disaster Service Workers current, and for the accuracy and safekeeping
of the official registration records, provided, however, that the
§ 2-4.2 COMPTON § 2-4.4
AO:30
§ 2-4.5. Director of Emergency Services, Assistant Director of
Emergency Services, Emergency Management Coordinator; Offices
Created. [Ord. #2219]
§ 2-4.6. Director of Emergency Services; Powers and Duties. [Ord.
#2219]
In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided,
the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or the Secretary
of the California Emergency Management Agency, or the existence of a state
of war emergency the Director of Emergency Services is hereby empowered
to:
documented proof that the Disaster Service Worker has taken the oath
of office shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
d. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the Chairperson or, in his/
her absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon call of
the Vice Chairperson or, in his/her/their absence from the City or
inability to call such meeting, upon call of either the Fire Chief, Police
Chief or the Director of Public Works Department. In the event that
none of the above-indicated individuals are able to call such meeting,
the Chairperson shall designate a further order of succession to call
such meeting.
a. There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency Services.
The City Manager of the City of Compton shall be the Director of
Emergency Services.
b. There is hereby created the office of Assistant Director of Emergency
Services, who shall be appointed by the Director of Emergency
Services.
c. There is also hereby created the office of Emergency Management
Coordinator, who shall be appointed by the Director of Emergency
Services and shall manage day-to-day affairs of the Emergency
Management Program and have certain other emergency management
functions as specified.
a. Request the City Council of the City of Compton to proclaim the
existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the City
Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is
not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the
Director, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation
within seven days thereafter, or the proclamation shall have no further
force or effect;
b. Request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the
opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to
cope with the emergency;
§ 2-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-4.6
AO:31
c. Control and direct the effort of the Emergency Organization of this City
for the accomplishment of the purpose of this chapter;
d. Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the
emergency organization of this City, and resolve questions of authority
and responsibility that may arise between them;
e. Represent the City in all dealings with public or private agencies on
matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter;
f. Coordinate and carry out the policies and direction of the City Council
and the Disaster Council, and perform such other duties and
responsibilities as delegated by the Disaster Council or by the City
Council; and
g. In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as herein
provided, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or
the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence
of a state of war emergency, the Director of Emergency Services, and in
his absence, the Assistant Director of Emergency Services, and in the
absence of the Director and Assistant Director, the Emergency
Management Coordinator is hereby empowered to:
1. Implement and carry out the City's Emergency Plan.
2. Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by such
emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations shall be
confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council.
3. Obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found
lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to
bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately,
to commandeer the same for public use.
4. Require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in
the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the county
in which this City is located or the existence of a state of war
emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this
community as deemed necessary in the execution of his duties;
such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and
immunities as are provided by state laws for registered Disaster
Service Workers.
5. Requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department
or agency.
6. Execute all of his ordinary power as City Manager, all of the special
powers and duties conferred upon him by this section or by
resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City
Council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any
§ 2-4.6 COMPTON § 2-4.6
AO:32
§ 2-4.7. Emergency Organization. [Ord. #2219]
All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces
enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations,
and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons
impressed into service under the provision of subsection 2-4.6g4 of this
section, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and
property in this City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency
organization of the City of Compton.
agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful
authority.
7. Authorize the use of any gifts of services, equipment, temporary
loan of equipment, supplies, goods or other in-kind donations, as
necessary to provide for the protection of life and property,
regardless of whether the donation comes from public or private
sources. The order authorizing the use of any gifts shall be in
writing. Any such donations used by the City shall be deemed duly
accepted by the City Council in accordance with Section 37354 of
the California Government Code. A report of all such gifts shall be
made to the City Council at its next regular meeting for review.
8. In the event of a situation in which a significant number of persons
are without the ability to obtain shelter, resulting in a threat to
their health and safety, the Director of Emergency Services may
issue a declaration of a shelter crisis pursuant to Section 8698.2 of
the California Government Code, and exercise all authority in
accordance with Chapter 7.8 of Division 1 of Title 2 of the
Government Code.
h. The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of
succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is
unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during
an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City
Council.
i. The Assistant Director of Emergency Services, under the supervision of
the Director of Emergency Services, shall have such powers and duties
as may be assigned by the Director of Emergency Services.
j. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall, under the supervision
of the Director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs,
develop and maintain the City's emergency plans; manage, organize,
and coordinate the City's emergency programs and training, to include
volunteers; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be
assigned by the Director of Emergency Services.
§ 2-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-4.8
AO:33
§ 2-4.8. Emergency Plan. [Ord. #2219]
The Compton Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development
of the City of Compton Emergency Plan, which plan shall provide for the
effective mobilization of all of the resources of this City, both public and
private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state or
emergency or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the
organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency
organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the
City Council.
§ 2-4.9. Expenditures. [Ord. #2219]
Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including
mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct
protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of
Compton.
§ 2-4.10. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. #2219]
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed $500 or by
imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during
an emergency, to:
§ 2-4.11. Continuity of Government in Event of Disaster. [Ord.
#2219]
For purposes of this section, the line of succession for the Mayor and
City Council members who are unavailable during a duly declared local
emergency or state of emergency, or during the existence of a state of war
emergency shall be as follows:
a. Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation or
curfew issued pursuant to this section, or in the performance of any
duty imposed upon him by virtue of this section.
b. Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to
this section, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give
assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants
of this City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection
thereof.
c. Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any actual, simulated or
counterfeit form of identification specified or purporting to be issued by
any emergency or disaster agency, any public or private humanitarian
or assistance agency, any media or news agency, or by any branch of the
Federal, State, regional, County or local governmental agency, or any
branch thereof.
a. In the event that the Mayor is unavailable, the Mayor Pro-Tem shall
serve as Mayor. If the Mayor Pro-Tem is unavailable, the remaining City
§ 2-4.8 COMPTON § 2-4.11
AO:34
Council members shall serve as Mayor in the order of their seniority,
excluding standby successors.
b. In the event that City Council members are unavailable, pursuant to
Section 8638 of the Government Code, the City Council shall appoint
standby successors for each member of the City Council.
1. At the second Council meeting in January each year or as soon
thereafter as may be practicable, the City Council shall select five
Emergency Standby Council members. Emergency Standby
Council members shall be selected from residents of the City and/
or City employees who agree to serve in that capacity during the
year and reside within the City of Compton during that year so long
as they elect to participate as members of the Emergency Standby
Council. City residents must reside within the Council District of
the Council member for whom they will be appointed as Emergency
Standby Council member. A member of the emergency standby
council shall serve in that capacity from the date of appointment
until appointment of another Emergency Standby Council the
following year; unless and until the member notifies the City Clerk
in writing that the member has elected to terminate participation in
the Emergency Standby Council. Each Emergency Standby Council
member shall take the oath of office required for the City Council
prior to assuming the position of emergency standby Council
member.
2. Each standby Council members appointed by the City Council as
described in paragraph 1 above, shall have the duty during the
term of that member's appointment to remain informed of the
duties of City Council members and the business and affairs of the
City of Compton to the extent necessary to enable participation as a
member of the City Council upon appointment in the event of an
emergency as provided hereafter, and must complete State
mandated training in accordance with Section 8607 of the
Government Code and Federally mandated training in accordance
with Homeland Security Presidential Directive-5, as well as other
essential training deemed necessary by the Emergency
Management Coordinator.
3. In the event of the declaration of a state of war emergency, a state
of emergency, or a local emergency as those terms are designated
in subsection 2-4.2, and less than a quorum of the City Council is
available and a City Council meeting is urgently required, the
members of the Emergency Standby Council shall be contacted for
service. At that meeting, any City Council members who are
unavailable for duty at the time of that meeting as defined by
Section 8636 of the California Government Code, shall be replaced
by a member of the Emergency Standby Council as necessary to
reach five members. The order of selection of Emergency Standby
Council members shall be determined by Council policy. The
appointment of members of the Emergency Standby Council
§ 2-4.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-4.11
AO:35
§ 2-5. RECREATION AND PARKS COMMISSION.
§ 2-5.1. Membership. [Added by Ord. #924, § 2320; amended by
Ord. #1547, § 1]
The number of members of the Recreation and Parks Commission shall
consist of five members as provided in Section 1011 of the Charter of the
City.
§ 2-5.2. Compensation of Members. [Ord. No. 2197, § 1]
The members of the Recreation and Parks Commission shall receive a
stipend of $20 per meeting attended, not to exceed $40 per month.
§ 2-6. COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY.
§ 2-6.1. Findings. [Added by Ord. #1302, § 2330; amended by Ord.
#1318]
The Council hereby finds and determines as follows:
members to fill vacancies created by the unavailability of City
Council members at any time during a state of emergency shall
be performed by City Council, and additional emergency standby
members shall be appointed during the state of emergency as
required to maintain a total of five members of the City Council.
4. Members of the emergency standby council who are appointed to
serve as City Council members shall serve in that position until
replaced by a member of the City Council who becomes no longer
unavailable such that the addition of emergency standby council
members is no longer necessary in order to constitute a quorum,
until termination of the state of emergency, or until the election or
appointment of a new regular City Council member as provided by
law. Persons appointed as Emergency Standby Council members
shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed
and replaced at any time with or without cause.
a. The Planning Commission and Council have caused to be prepared,
approved and adopted a Comprehensive General Plan for the City in
accordance with Chapter I of Title 7 of the Government Code of the
State;
b. There exists within the City blighted areas as defined in Sections 33031
to 33034 inclusive of the Health and Safety Code of the State;
c. There is a need for a Community Redevelopment Agency to function in
the City to promote the elimination of blighted areas by sound
development and redevelopment;
d. It is in the best interests and for the general welfare of the community
of Compton to have the rights, powers, duties, privileges, and
§ 2-4.11 COMPTON § 2-6.1
AO:36
§ 2-6.2. Agency Members. [Added by Ord. #1302, § 2331; amended
by Ord. #1318]
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the Health and Safety
Code of the State, the Council hereby declares itself to be the Community
Redevelopment Agency in which all the rights, powers, duties, privileges,
and immunities provided by said Health and Safety Code shall be and are
vested.
§ 2-7. OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE.5
§ 2-7.1. Created. [Ord. #2135, § 1]
There is hereby created an Oversight Committee, which shall consist of five
members.
§ 2-7.2. Appointment of Members. [Ord. #2135, § 2]
The members of the Committee must be residents of the City of Compton
and shall be appointed by the Council.
§ 2-7.3. Terms of Office. [Ord. #2135, § 3]
The first two appointments made shall expire June 30, 2008 and the next
three appointments shall expire June 30, 2009. Each member appointed/
reappointed thereafter will serve a term of four years. The members of
the existing committee shall hold office until their successor(s) have been
appointed or until their reappointment.
§ 2-7.4. Vacancies. [Ord. #2135, § 4]
If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 2-7.5. Removal of Members. [Ord. #2135, § 5]
Any member of the Oversight Committee may be removed by a majority of
the City Council at anytime without cause.
immunities of the Community Redevelopment Agency exercised in the
manner provided in Section 33200 of the Health Safety Code of the
State; and
e. No members have been appointed to the Community Redevelopment
Agency pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No. 1302 of the
Council.
5. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-7, Community Development Committee, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1513 and 2051 was repealed in
its entirety by Ordinance No. 2128.
§ 2-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-7.6
AO:37
§ 2-7.6. Election of Officers. [Ord. #2135, § 6]
The Committee shall elect a chair and vice-chair from among the appointed
members for a term of one year and, subject to other provisions of the law,
may create and fill such other offices as it may determine.
§ 2-7.7. Meetings Required; Compensation. [Ord. #2135, § 7]
The Committee shall meet at least once each month, and each member in
attendance shall receive $150 per month.
§ 2-7.8. Duties. [Ord. #2135, § 8]
The Oversight Committee shall have the following duties.
§ 2-8. PLANNING COMMISSION.6
§ 2-8.1. Membership. [Ord. No. 2199, § 1]
The Planning Commission shall consist of five members as provided in
Section 1007 of the Charter of the City.
§ 2-8.2. Compensation of Members. [Ord. No. 2199, § 1]
The members of the Planning Commission shall receive a stipend of $150
per month.
§ 2-9. PUBLIC SAFETY COMMISSION.
§ 2-9.1. Creation; Membership. [Added by Ord. #1551]
The Council hereby creates the Public Safety Commission which shall
consist of seven members to be appointed by the Council. Members shall be
appointed for a term of four years. All vacancies occurring during a term
shall be filled for the unexpired term. A member shall hold office until his
successor has been appointed and has qualified.
a. To advise the Mayor and Council of the needs and concerns of the City's
Boards, Commissions and Committees.
b. To attend and monitor all aspects (i.e. attendance, goals, objectives
activities) of the City's Boards, Commissions and Committees meetings.
c. Make quarterly reports to the Mayor and City Council on the
effectiveness of the City's Boards, Commissions and Committees.
d. Perform such other duties relative to the Oversight Committee as the
Council may from time to time direct.
6. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-8, Police Commission, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 1696 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
2128.
§ 2-7.6 COMPTON § 2-9.2
AO:38
§ 2-9.2. Duties of Public Safety Commission. [Added by Ord. #1551,
§ 2357]
The Public Safety Commission shall act as an advisory commission to the
Council and perform the following duties:
§ 2-9.3. Meetings: Compensation. [Added by Ord. #1551, § 2358]
The Public Safety Commission shall meet at least once each month, and
each member in attendance shall receive a stipend of $20 per meeting up
to a maximum of $40 per month.
§ 2-10. BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION.7
§ 2-10.1. Created. [Ord. #2130, § 1]
There is hereby created a Beautification Committee, which shall consist of
11 members.
§ 2-10.2. Purpose. [Ord. #2130, § 2]
It is the purpose of the Committee to encourage Compton property owners
and business owners to improve the appearance of their property, and by
doing so enhance the overall image of the community. The committee will
determine various criteria to provide systematic recognition of and awards
to business owners and residents for improvement in the individual and
overall aesthetics of the City. The committee will sponsor "Clean Up Week"
activities, a program of awards for recognition of homes and businesses
with significantly improved appearances, develop beautification programs
in conjunction with Municipal Law Enforcement Services (Coded
Enforcement Division), Building and Safety Department and the
Infrastructure Construction Maintenance Services Department and any
other purposes which the City Council may from time to time assign.
a. Receive and process information received from individuals and/or
groups that depicts a concern or problem in the area of public safety;
b. Make recommendations to the Council regarding public safety
concerns that have been brought to the attention of the Commission;
c. Review and recommend to the Council expenditures of all funds
pursuant to public safety activities;
d. Conduct all business according to Sections 1000 through 1006 of the
Charter of the City; and
e. Perform such other duties relating to public safety as the Council may
direct.
7. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-10, Cultural Commission, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1403, 1421, 1550, 1589 and 1611 was repealed in
its entirety by Ordinance No. 2128.
§ 2-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-10.3
AO:39
§ 2-10.3. Appointment of Members. [Ord. #2130, § 3]
The members of the Committee must be residents or licensed business
owners of the City and shall be appointed by the Council as follows: Each
Council member shall appoint two representatives from their respective
district and the Mayor shall appoint three from the City at large.
§ 2-10.4. Advisory Members. [Ord. #2130, § 4]
The City Manager or his/her designee, the Director of Code Enforcement
or his/her designee, the Director of the Building Department or his/her
designee, the Director of the Street Department or his/her designee shall
each be a nonvoting advisory member to the Committee.
§ 2-10.5. Terms of Office. [Ord. #2130, § 5]
The first five appointments made by the Mayor and Council shall expire
June 30, 2008 and the next six appointments shall expire June 30, 2009.
Each member appointed/reappointed thereafter will serve a term of four
years. The members of the existing Committee shall hold office until their
successors have been appointed or until their reappointment.
§ 2-10.6. Vacancies. [Ord. #2130, § 6]
If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 2-10.7. Removal of Members. [Ord. #2130, § 7]
Any member of the Beautification Committee may be removed by a majority
of the City Council at any time without cause.
§ 2-10.8. Election of Officers. [Ord. #2130, § 8]
The Committee shall elect a Chair and Vice-Chair from among the appointed
members for a term of one year and, subject to other provisions of the law,
may create and fill such other offices as it may determine.
§ 2-10.9. Regular Meetings. [Ord. #2130, § 9]
The Committee will schedule regular meetings, at a minimum, on a
quarterly basis. The meetings will be held at such location designated by
the City Manager.
a. For the purpose of conducting meetings and making recommendations
pertaining to the Beautification Committee, any six members of the
Beautification Committee shall constitute a quorum.
b. The Committee shall be an advisory body subject to the provisions of
the Brown Act. All meetings of the Committee shall be open and public,
and all persons shall be permitted to attend any meeting of the
§ 2-10.3 COMPTON § 2-10.9
AO:40
§ 2-10.10. Special Meetings. [Ord. #2130, § 10]
Special meetings may be called at any time by the chair or six members of
the Committee by advance written notice and procedure as provided by law.
§ 2-10.11. Compensation. [Ord. #2130, § 11]
The members of the Committee shall serve without compensation for their
service, unless the City Council by resolution otherwise provides, but may
receive reimbursement for necessary travel and other expenses incurred
in the performance of an official duty, when such expenditures are first
authorized by the City Council.
§ 2-10.12. Duties of Committee. [Ord. #2130, § 12]
The duties of the Committee shall be to act in an advisory capacity to the
Council on matters and means to promote, encourage and recognize efforts
and investments to beautify the visual and architectural image of the City
and community. Such duties include, but are not limited to, the semi-annual
nomination of property owners and/or business owners to the Council for
appropriate beautification award recognition.
§ 2-11. PARKING AUTHORITY.
§ 2-11.1. Parking Authority. [Added by Ord. #1543, § 2370]
The Council finds and declares that there is a need for a Parking Authority
to function in the City coextensively with the corporate boundaries of the
City as they now and from time to time hereafter may exist and further
declares that the Parking Authority functions be performed by the Planning
Commission.
§ 2-12. COMMISSION FOR WOMEN.
§ 2-12.1. Created; Authority. [Added by Ord. #1490, § 2385]
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Commission
for Women. The Commission shall assist in assuring to all women the
opportunity for full and equal participation in the affairs of City government
and promote the general welfare of women in the community.
Committee. Agendas shall be prepared prior to each meeting and
posted by the staff representative designated by the City Manager.
c. The Committee shall keep a record of its proceedings, which shall be
public record.
d. The Committee shall adopt rules and regulations to govern procedures
and to promulgate the semi-annual recognition of property
beautification awardees.
§ 2-10.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-12.2
AO:41
§ 2-12.2. Organization; Meetings; Compensation. [Added by Ord.
#1490, § 2385.1; amended by Ord. #1549; Ord. #2126, § 1]
The Commission for Women shall consist of 15 members appointed by the
Mayor and City Council. The members shall serve for a term of four years
unless removed by action of 3/5 of the Council.
The Commission shall elect from among its members a president and a vicepresident
at the beginning of each fiscal year.
The Commission shall meet at least once each month, and each member
in attendance shall receive $25 per month. The Commission may create
committees to assist in its work; however, no remuneration shall be paid
to a Commissioner or committee member in connection with a committee
meeting.
§ 2-12.3. Staff Assignments. [Added by Ord. #1490, § 2385.2;
amended by Ord. #1540]
The City Manager shall be responsible for appointing members of the City
Hall staff to work with the Commission for Women on an as-needed basis.
§ 2-12.4. Conformance with City Organizations. [Added by Ord.
#1490, § 2385.3]
The Commission for Women shall adhere to all laws, rules, regulations, and
Charter provisions.
§ 2-12.5. Powers and Duties. [Added by Ord. #1490, § 2386]
The Commission for Women shall have the following powers and duties:
a. To advise the Mayor and Council of the needs and problems of the
women in the City, with special emphasis given to the women in City
government;
b. To maintain an active liaison with citizens' groups interested in the
problems facing women;
c. To find new ways of promoting awareness of the changing life patterns,
opportunities, and responsibilities of women today;
d. To investigate problems and recommend programs which will provide
women in the City a greater opportunity and ability to pursue
alternative life styles without discrimination. Such programs may
address, but shall not be limited to:
1. Discrimination based on marital status which should not be a
proper concern for most employers, potential creditors, landlords,
etc.;
2. Programs to retrain women who wish to pursue new careers;
§ 2-12.2 COMPTON § 2-12.5
AO:42
§ 2-12.6. Public Hearings. [Added by Ord. #1490, § 2386.1]
No action may be taken by the Commission for Women which action shall
conflict or interfere with any lawful power or duty reposed in the several
offices, departments, commissions, and boards of the City by the provisions
of the City Charter.
The Commission, in exercising any of its powers involving the personnel
of any department bureau, or office of the City, shall first advise the City
Manager.
The Commissioners or the Executive Secretary shall have the power to
administer oaths and affirmations in any investigation or public hearing
before the Commission.
§ 2-12.7. Cooperation of Other City Departments. [Added by Ord.
#1490, § 2387]
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City that all offices,
departments, and bureaus thereof shall cooperate to the fullest extent with
the Commission for Women; provided, however, no such office, department,
or bureau shall be required to do anything in this connection which would
conflict with the lawful and necessary conduct of its duties as provided by
law.
3. Discrimination against women when applying for credit;
4. Special problems of safety for women and particularly those who
live alone;
5. Scarcity of adequate housing, especially for the single or divorced
women with children;
6. The establishment and expansion of child care services;
7. The availability of assistance to mothers raising children alone in
dealing with problems of drugs, delinquency, etc.; and
8. Special problems of elderly women living alone;
e. To suggest to the Mayor and Council methods through which any
existing inequities in pay and job opportunities between men and
women can be alleviated;
f. To perform other studies and surveys on the status of women as may be
specifically requested by the Mayor and Council and provide
information and advice thereon; and
g. To submit an annual report to the Council at the end of each fiscal year.
§ 2-12.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-12.8
AO:43
§ 2-12.8. Coordination with Other Agencies. [Added by Ord. 1490,
§ 2387.1]
The Commission for Women shall, whenever practical, coordinate its
program with any other similar agency, Federal, State, or otherwise, so as to
avoid the duplication of efforts and assure an effective working relationship
between the City and other public or private agencies in this field.
§ 2-13. URBAN COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.
§ 2-13.1. Created. [Added by Ord. #1479, § 2395]
The Urban Community Development Commission is hereby created and
shall commence to function in the community at such time on or after
August 14, 1975, as the Council shall approve the organizing bylaws of
the Commission. After such approval the Commission shall meet and adopt
bylaws for its operation. The Commission shall be known as the Urban
Community Development Commission and shall not be construed as the
same entity as, or the successor to, the Compton Community Development
Corporation.
§ 2-13.2. Commission Members and Procedures. [Added by Ord.
#1479, § 2395.2]
The Urban Community Development Commission shall have five members,
and the Mayor and Council shall be the members of the Commission.
The officers of the Commission shall be elected or appointed in a manner
established by Commission resolution. The Commission shall adopt
personnel rules and regulations applicable to all its employees. The
Commission may agree with the City that the City will administer the
Commission personnel system. In the event no Commission rule or
regulation covers procedures affecting conflicts of interests, the use of
funds, the award of contracts, or personnel hiring or termination, it shall
be deemed that the Council has imposed on the Commission the rules,
regulations, and procedures which would pertain to performing City
functions and that the Commission has adopted such rules, regulations, or
procedures.
§ 2-13.3. Powers. [Added by Ord. #1479, § 2395.3]
The nature, powers, authority, functions, and jurisdiction of the Urban
Community Development Commission shall include:
a. All of the nature, power, authority, functions, and jurisdiction of
redevelopment agencies, housing authorities, and Federal surplus
property authorities granted under the Marks Foran Residential
Rehabilitation Act to charter cities;
b. Concurrent jurisdiction with the City to exercise City Charter powers to
exercise powers in community development and in participation in
Federal programs or in State programs of grants in aid; and
§ 2-12.8 COMPTON § 2-13.3
AO:44
§ 2-13.4. Proceedings. [Added by Ord. #1479, § 2395.4]
The Urban Community Development Commission shall operate under
Article X of the City Charter to the extent that the City Carter is not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the State
or other State laws.
§ 2-13.5. CRA and LHA to Remain Entities. [Added by Ord. #1479,
§ 2395.5]
Notwithstanding the fact that the Urban Community Development
Commission exercises as a government body the powers of a redevelopment
agency and a housing authority, both agencies shall remain separate public
bodies, corporate and politic, and all formal actions of those bodies shall be
in their respective names.
§ 2-13.6. Transferred Federal Programs. [Added by Ord. #1479,
§ 2395.6]
The Urban Community Development Commission shall administer all
community development programs transferred to it by the Council. Upon
the approval of such program transfers by any governmental agencies
as are required by law and the acceptance of such programs by the
Commission, the Commission shall have the sole and exclusive jurisdiction
of the programs transferred.
§ 2-14. FEDERAL GRANTS ADVISORY BOARD/OVERALL ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM COMMITTEE.
§ 2-14.1. Creation. [Added by Ord. #1496, § 2396; amended by Ord.
#1546; Ord. #1729, § 1]
There is hereby created a Federal Grants Advisory Board/OEDP Committee
which shall consist of nine members, to be attained through attrition. All
members of the Board shall be appointed by the Council.
§ 2-14.2. Duties. [Added by Ord. #1546, § 2396.1; Ord. #1729, § 2]
The Federal Advisory Board/OEDP Committee shall act as an advisory body
to the Council. The specific duties shall be to:
c. Such further powers, authority, and functions as may be duly delegated
to the Commission in the City by Council resolution to the extent that
such are not inconsistent with law or with the provisions of subsections
2-13.1 and 2-13.4 through 2-13.6 of this section.
a. Provide a citizen review of all grant proposals in terms of adherence to
stated priorities for the City, both short and long range; in-house
capabilities for meeting grant funding requirements; compatibility with
City policies; and fiscal requirements of programs;
§ 2-13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-14.2
AO:45
§ 2-14.3. Stipend. [Added by Ord. #1546, § 2396.2; Ord. #1729, § 3;
Ord. #2198, § 1]
The members of the Federal Grants Advisory Board/OEDP Committee shall
receive a maximum stipend of $150 per month.
§ 2-15. EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING ADVISORY COUNCIL.
§ 2-15.1. Creation. [Added by Ord. #1496, § 2397; amended by Ord.
#1542]
There is hereby created an Employment and Training Advisory Council
which shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the City
Council and who shall represent the following categories:
§ 2-15.2. Duties. [Added by Ord. #1542, § 2397.1]
The Employment and Training Advisory Council shall act as an advisory
body to the City Council. The specific duties shall be to:
b. Make recommendations regarding submitted proposals or applications
to the City Manager and Council;
c. Review the progress reports of proposals and applications under
preparation or redrafting; and
d. Review grant status reports;
e. Make recommendations to the City Council on an Overall Economic
Development Plan;
f. Initiate plans designed to create employment opportunities, foster a
more diversified economy, and improve local conditions.
a. Client community;
b. Community-based organizations;
c. Employment services;
d. Education and training agencies;
e. Business;
f. Labor; and
g. At large.
The members shall serve four-year terms.
a. Provide a citizen review of all manpower related proposals submitted
by or to the City for review in terms of adherence to stated priorities for
the City, both short and long range; in-house capabilities for meeting
§ 2-14.2 COMPTON § 2-15.2
AO:46
§ 2-15.3. Stipend. [Added by Ord. #1542, § 2397.2]
The members of the Employment and Training Advisory Council shall
receive a stipend of $20 per meeting up to a maximum of $40 per month.
§ 2-16. COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMISSION.8
§ 2-16.1. Creation; Membership. [Ord. #2189, § 1]
There is hereby created a Community Relations Commission which shall
consist of nine members representing each major ethnic group and
socioeconomic level.
§ 2-16.2. Purpose. [Ord. #2189, § 1]
It is the purpose of the Community Relations Commission to advise and
consult with the City Council and Officers of the City on all matters that
involve improving community relations, awareness, mutual understanding,
tolerance and respect for all residents of the community. The Commission
will also advise on matters relating to the promotion of good will among
individuals, civic pride, peace and tranquility.
§ 2-16.3. Duties. [Ord. #2189, § 1]
The duties of the Community Relations Commission shall be to:
grant funding requirements; compatibility with City policies; and fiscal
requirements of programs;
b. Make recommendations regarding submitted manpower proposals or
applications to the City Manager and City Council;
c. Review the progress reports of manpower proposals and applications
under preparation of redrafting; and
d. Review manpower programs and grant status reports.
a. Monitor demographic trends of the City in order to ensure that the
Commission is representative of the City's population.
b. Collaborate with neighborhood, community, educational, business and
social service groups and organizations to work towards the
Commission's purpose.
c. Recommend City-wide, neighborhood and community events, which
would include opportunities for heritage and cultural awareness.
8. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-16, Sister Cities Commission, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1649, 1724 and 1735 was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 2128.
§ 2-15.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-16.3
AO:47
§ 2-16.4. Appointment of Members. [Ord. #2189, § 1]
The members of the Community Relations Commission shall be either
residents or licensed business owners of the City. They shall be appointed
by the Council as follows:
d. Recommend such educational programs that increase new
opportunities, good will awareness, tolerance and respect among
members of the community.
e. Recommend events, of a holistic-centered approach, to engage
residents, employees and community leaders in dialog, education and
training relating to diversity issues, conflict resolution, violence and
tension suppression.
f. Collaborate with local City and County departments to develop a
support system for the delivery of programs and services to manage
tensions between groups of different cultures, ethnicity, race, sexual
orientation, age and religion.
g. Make recommendations to departments to publish articles in local
newspapers, the City's website and television channels in order to
promote desired behavior consistent with the Commission's purpose.
h. Discourage discriminatory practices against groups and individuals by
increasing community awareness and understanding of all racial,
religious, ethnic, national origin, age, gender, sexual orientation,
physical or mental disability groups within the community.
i. Promote civic engagement of all residents of the community by
promoting attendance in council meetings, programs and events.
a. Four Commission members to represent each of the four City Council
Districts.
b. One Commission member to represent youth (may be a member of the
Youth Commission).
c. One Commission member to represent businesses (may be a member of
the Chamber of Commerce).
d. One Commission member to represent Compton Unified School
District.
e. One Commission member to represent the religious organizations (may
be a member of the Religious Commission).
f. One Commission member to represent the community organizations or
groups concerned with improvement of mutual understanding and
respect among all residents.
§ 2-16.3 COMPTON § 2-16.5
AO:48
§ 2-16.5. Election of Officers. [Ord. #2189, § 1]
At the first meeting of each fiscal year, the Community Relations
Commission shall elect a Chair and a Vice-Chair from among the appointed
members for a term of one year. The Commission may also create and fill
other offices including sub-committees from among its members as they
deem necessary.
§ 2-16.6. Staff Liaison. [Ord. #2189, § 1]
The City Manager shall assign a staff liaison to the Commission to be
responsible for staff liaison duties. These duties shall include:
§ 2-16.7. Terms of Office. [Ord. #2189, § 1]
The first four appointments made by the City Council shall expire June
30, 2011 and the next five appointments shall expire June 30, 2012. Each
member appointed/reappointed thereafter will serve a term of four years.
The members of the existing Commission shall hold office until their
successors have been appointed or until their reappointment.
§ 2-16.8. Vacancies. [Ord. #2189, § 1]
If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 2-16.9. Removal of Members. [Ord. #2189, § 1]
Any member of the Community Relations Commission may be removed by a
majority of the City Council at any time without cause.
§ 2-16.10. Regular Meetings. [Ord. #2189, § 1]
The Community Relations Commission will schedule at least one regular
meeting per month at such time and date designated in the rules and
regulations of the Commission. The meetings will be held at such location
designated by the City Manager.
a. Attending all meetings of the Commission.
b. Keeping records of meeting agendas and minutes of meetings.
c. Submitting records, agendas and minutes to the City Clerk.
d. Participate in discussions and make recommendations with reference to
any matter coming before the Commission.
The Staff liaison shall be a nonvoting representative of the Commission.
a. For the purpose of conducting meetings and making recommendations
pertaining to the Commission, any five members of the Community
Relations Commission shall constitute a quorum.
§ 2-16.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-16.10
AO:49
§ 2-16.11. Special Meetings. [Ord. #2189, § 1]
Special Meetings may be called at any time by the Chair or five members
of the Community Relations Commission by advance written notice and
procedure as provided by law.
§ 2-16.12. Compensation. [Ord. #2189, § 1]
The members of the Community Relations Commission shall receive
compensation at the rate of $35 for each meeting, not to exceed a total
compensation of $70 in any one month.
§ 2-16.13. Absence from Meetings. [Ord. #2189, § 1]
If a member of the Community Relations Commission is absent from three
successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or
is absent for any reason for more than six regular meetings in any twelvemonth
period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the member
removed. The Commission shall immediately notify the City Council, City
Manager and Oversight Committee. Upon such notification, a successor for
the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the City
Council.
§ 2-16.14. Liability of City. [Ord. #2189, § 1]
The Community Relations Commission shall have no power or authority to
bind or obligate the City or any office or department for any money, debt,
undertaking or obligation of any kind in excess of the appropriation which
the City Council may have made for the purposes of the Commission.
§ 2-17. (RESERVED)9
§ 2-18. BLOCK CLUB COMMISSION.
b. The Commission shall be an advisory body subject to the provisions of
the Brown Act. All meetings of the Commission shall be open and
public, and any person shall be permitted to attend any meeting of the
Community Relations Commission. Agendas shall be prepared prior to
each meeting and posted by the staff liaison designated by the City
Manager.
c. The Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings, which shall be a
public record.
d. The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations to govern
procedures.
9. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-17, Affirmative Action Commission, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1650 was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2128.
§ 2-16.10 COMPTON § 2-18.1
AO:50
§ 2-18.1. Creation; Members; Compensation. [Added by Ord. #1663,
§ 2398; Ord. #1692, § 1; Ord. #1724, § 1; Ord. #1841, § 1; Ord.
#1860, § 1]
There is hereby created a Block Club Commission which shall consist of
nine members. Such members shall be appointed by the Council as follows:
Four with equal representation from each councilmanic district; and five at
large. Each will serve a term of four years. The Commission shall meet at
least once each month and each member in attendance shall receive $20
per month stipend.
§ 2-18.2. Duties. [Added by Ord. #1663, § 2398; Ord. #1692, § 1]
The Block Club Commission shall act as an advisory body.
The specific duties shall be, but not limited to:
§ 2-18.3. Conformance with City Organization. [Added by Ord.
#1663, § 2398; Ord. #1692, § 2]
The Commission shall adhere to all laws, rules and charter provisions.
§ 2-19. CITY ATTORNEY'S OFFICE DESIGNATED AS LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.
§ 2-19.1. Agency Designated. [Ord. #1735, § 1]
The City Attorney's Office is hereby designated as a general and specialized
law enforcement agency under the general direction and control of the
City Attorney with all rights, privileges and certifications of any and all law
enforcement agencies as authorized by Federal, State and local laws.
a. Receive and process information received from individuals and/or
groups that depict a concern or problem in the area of Block Clubs.
b. Organize, coordinate and oversee new Block Clubs.
c. Make recommendations to the Council regarding Block Clubs that have
been brought to the attention of the Commission.
d. The duly elected Chairman of the Commission (pursuant to Section
1004 of the City Charter) shall have the authority and be required to
designate members of the Commission to attend Block Club meetings.
It is the responsibility of the Chairman to keep the Council informed of
Block Club meetings and activities.
e. Perform such other duties relative to Block Clubs as the Council may
from time to time direct.
§ 2-18.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-19.2
AO:51
§ 2-19.2. Purpose. [Ord. #1735, § 2]
The City declares it desires to qualify to receive aid from the State under
Section 13522 of Chapter 1 of Title 4, part 4 of the California Penal Code.
§ 2-19.3. Adherence to Recruitment and Training Standards. [Ord.
#1735, § 3]
Pursuant to Section 13522 of said Chapter 1, the City, while receiving aid
from the State pursuant to said Chapter 1, will adhere to the standards for
recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace
Officer Standards and Training.
§ 2-19.4. Powers. [Ord. #1735, § 4]
The City Attorney is hereby granted appointative powers to appoint police
officers, public safety officers and other appropriate peace officers as
prescribed in Section 830 et seq. of the penal code subject to the consent of
the City Council which may be granted or ratified by resolution.
§ 2-19.5. Duties. [Ord. #1735, § 5]
The primary duties of the Agency and its appointee(s) will consist of
managing and conducting law enforcement activities in the prevention,
detection and investigation of crime, including the enforcement of laws.
§ 2-19.6. Access to Facilities and Records. [Ord. #1735, § 6]
The City Attorney's Office shall have access to and use any and all
equipment, facilities and records necessary and proper to effectuate
appointments, and for the Agency and appointee(s) to carry out the
designated duties.
§ 2-20. COMPTON YOUTH LEADERSHIP COUNCIL.10 [Ord. #2150,
§ 1]
There is hereby created the Compton Youth Leadership Council of the City
of Compton.
§ 2-20.1. Composition and Appointment of Members. [Ord. #2150,
§ 1; Ord. #2284]
Each City Council member shall appoint one member to the Compton Youth
Leadership Council (CYLC). The CYLC shall consist of five members, ages
16 through 21. The chairperson shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City
Council.
10.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1856, 1885,
1932, 2032 and 2127.
§ 2-19.2 COMPTON § 2-20.2
AO:52
§ 2-20.2. Council Members. [Ord. #2150, § 1; Ord. #2226; Ord.
#2284 § 2]
All members of the CYLC shall be residents of the City of Compton and
all Council membership shall be currently enrolled in a high school, trade
school, college, or university. Any member of the CYLC shall be deemed to
have resigned and their membership on the CYLC automatically vacated in
the event said member ceases to be a resident of the City of Compton.
§ 2-20.3. Terms of Office. [Ord. #2150, § 1]
The terms of office for CYLC shall be two years.
§ 2-20.4. Notification of Unexcused Absences. [Ord. #2150, § 1]
The Chairperson of the CYLC shall forthwith notify the City Council when
any member is absent without having been excused for three consecutive
regular meetings of the Council.
§ 2-20.5. Removal of Members. [Ord. #2150, § 1]
Any member of the CYLC may be removed by a majority of the City Council
at any time without cause.
§ 2-20.6. Vacancies. [Ord. #2150, § 1]
A vacancy in the membership of the Council, other than one created by the
expiration of a term, shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion
of the term by the City Council.
§ 2-20.7. Compensation of Members. [Ord. #2150, § 1]
To acknowledge their community service, members of the CYLC shall
receive $50 per meeting, not to exceed two meetings per month.
§ 2-20.8. Organization. [Ord. #2150, § 1]
The Council shall select from its members a vice-chairperson to serve in the
chairperson's absence.
§ 2-20.9. Meetings Time and Place. [Ord. #2150, § 1]
The Council shall hold no more than two regular meetings per month, the
meeting shall be held in the City Council Chambers, unless the City Council
shall provide for another place of meeting. The day and time shall be the 1st
and 3rd Tuesday at 4:00 p.m.
§ 2-20.10. Goals of the Council. [Ord. #2150, § 1]
It shall be the goal(s) of the Council to:
§ 2-20.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.10
AO:53
§ 2-20.11. Objectives of the Council. [Ord. #2150, § 1]
The Council will work toward the following objectives:
§ 2-21. (RESERVED)11
§ 2-21A. COMMISSION ON AGING.
§ 2-21A.1. Duties. [Ord. #1936, § 1]
The Commission on Aging shall act as an advisory Commission to the
Council and perform the following duties:
a. Provide youth with the opportunity to make recommendations relative
to policies that affect their lives;
b. Expose and educate youth relative to the nature and scope of city
government;
c. Provide a forum for the exchange of positive ideas and information
among youth;
d. Conduct workshops and symposiums on important issues facing youth.
a. Propose, develop, and recommend programs and plans intended to
promote the full acceptance of youth in all aspects of community life
without regard to race, religion, or natural origin; provided however,
that all such programs and plans shall be subject to the approval of the
City Council;
b. To cooperate with and assist those community agencies engaged in
fostering mutual understanding and respect for youth;
c. To cooperate with City departments, agencies and commissions in
identifying and ameliorating youth problems with which they may be
concerned; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed
as authorizing the Council to act as a hearing agency or tribunal in a
personal matter;
d. To recommend to the City Council and various City departments and
agencies changes in procedures, policies and/or legislation for the
purpose of improving youths' input in the community.
e. To build a working relationship with the Compton Unified School
District and other local education agencies.
a. Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters pertaining
to community needs for the elderly.
11.Editor's Note: Section 2-21, Gaming Commission containing portions of Ordinance Nos.
1905A, 1912, 1963 and 1964 was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2262. See
Section 9-23, Bingo Games for Charitable Purposes.
§ 2-20.10 COMPTON § 2-21A.1
AO:54
§ 2-21B. (RESERVED)12
§ 2-21C. (RESERVED)13
§ 2-21D. (RESERVED)
§ 2-21E. PERSONNEL BOARD.
§ 2-21E.1. Membership. [Ord. #2212]
The Personnel Board shall consist of five members as provided in Section
1009 of the Charter of the City.
§ 2-21E.2. Compensation of Members. [Ord. #2212; Ord. #2288]
Pursuant to Section 1005 of the Charter of the City, the compensation of
each member of the Personnel Board shall be as follows:
§ 2-21E.3. Meetings of Board. [Ord. #2212]
b. Exercise its influence with other agencies, groups and system in the
service area to insure provision of adequate programs for the elderly.
c. Attend at least three special events during the year.
d. Make recommendations and assist in the planning, organizing and
implementation of at least two programs during the year.
a. The members of the Personnel Board shall receive a stipend of $150 per
month.
b. The members of the Personnel Board shall receive an additional stipend
of $100 per meeting attended to conduct appeal hearings of employees
relative to suspension, demotions or dismissals and to conduct review
hearings relative to employee grievances filed pursuant to Rule 10 of
the Compton Personnel Rules and Regulations, or any amendments
thereto not-to-exceed $300 per month.
a. The Personnel Board shall meet regularly on the 3rd Thursday of each
month.
b. Special meetings shall be held on the call of the Chairperson or any
three members of the Board.
c. All meetings shall comply with State laws governing open and public
meeting.
12.Editor's Note: Former Section 2-21B, Citizens Commission, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 2028 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
2128.
13.Editor's Note: Former Section 2-21C, Mayor's Citizens Commission, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2029 was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2128.
§ 2-21A.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-21E.3
AO:55

ARTICLE IV
Administrative Procedures and Regulations
§ 2-22. CITY SEAL. [Ord. #856, § 2800]
The common Seal of the City is hereby adopted and described as follows:
in the margin of the Seal shall appear the words "CITY OF COMPTON,
CALIFORNIA." In the center of the Seal shall appear the words
"INCORPORATED MAY A.D. 1888."
§ 2-23. OFFICIAL BONDS.14
§ 2-23.1. Faithful Performance Bonds. [Added by Ord. #950, § 2801;
Ord. #1545]
The following elective officers shall give a faithful performance bond
payable to the City, and the condition of such bonds shall be that the surety
will be liable for any loss to the City due to the failure of any official duty of
the principal, whether of omission or commission, in the following amounts:
§ 2-23.2. Fidelity Bonds. [Added by Ord. #950, § 2801.1]
The City Manager and his staff, the City Controller and his staff, the City
Attorney and his staff, subordinates of the City Treasurer, the City Engineer,
and the Street Superintendent shall give a fidelity bond, in an amount not
less than $5,000, payable to the City, and the condition of such bonds shall
be that the surety will be liable for any loss to the City due to the failure of
any official duty of the principal, whether of omission or commission.
§ 2-23.3. Honesty Bonds. [Added by Ord. #950, § 2801.2]
All officers and employees not covered by the provisions of this Chapter
shall give an honesty bond in an amount not less than $2,500, payable to
the City.
§ 2-23.4. Applications. [Added by Ord. #950, § 2801.3]
Applications for official bonds shall be signed by the principal, and official
bonds shall be signed by the surety. A surety shall be an organization
authorized under the laws of the State to act as surety and to issue surety
bonds for public officials and employees, and such bonds shall be joint and
several.
a. City Treasurer: $300,000.
b. City Clerk: $50,000.
14.Editor's Note: For statutory provisions authorizing the City Council to require bonds from
City Officials, see Gov. Code §§ 36518 and 36519.
§ 2-22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-23.5
AO:57
§ 2-23.5. Premiums. [Added by Ord. #950, § 2801.4]
Premiums on official bonds shall be paid by the City.
§ 2-23.6. Officers and Employees. [Added by Ord. #950, § 2801.5]
The City Manager is hereby authorized to place any or all of such officers
and employees under one official bond.
§ 2-24. CITY HALL REGULATIONS.
§ 2-24.1. through 2-24.2. (Reserved)15
§ 2-24.3. No Eating and Drinking Areas in the City Hall. [Added by
Ord. #1523, § 2802.2]
The general public shall be prohibited from eating and drinking in the
following designated areas of the City Hall:
§ 2-24.4. Bare Feet Prohibited. [Added by Ord. #1523, § 2802.3]
Bare feet shall be prohibited in all areas of the Council Chamber and City
Hall.
§ 2-25. RETENTION AND DESTRUCTION OF CITY RECORDS.
§ 2-25.1. Records Retention. [Added by Ord. #1555, § 2803]
The Council, by resolution, shall establish a records retention schedule for
all City records. Such retention schedule shall be in conformance, where
applicable, with State and Federal retention/destruction laws. The records
retention schedule may be amended as needed by Council resolution, and
such amendments shall be incorporated in the original records retention
schedule.
Certain City records shall be microfilmed in accordance with the approved
records retention schedule. This program shall be mandatory for all City
Offices, Departments, and Agencies. Each Department shall appoint a
Department Records System Coordinator and notify the Records
Management office (City Clerk's office) of such appointment. Each
Department shall conduct an annual inventory of all records with the
a. Council Chamber;
b. Elevators;
c. Corridors; and
d. Offices.
15.Editor's Note: Former subsections 2-24.1 and 2-24.2, prohibiting smoking in City facilities
and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1520, 1541 and 1844, were repealed in their
entirety by Ordinance No. 2225. See Section 7-28 for smoking prohibitions.
§ 2-23.5 COMPTON § 2-25.1
AO:58
assistance of the Records Management office. During February of each year
(for files maintained on a calendar year basis) and during August of each
year (for files maintained on a fiscal year basis), each Department shall
submit a request for the Records Manager (City Clerk) to destroy obsolete
records.
§ 2-25.2. Destruction of Records. [Added by Ord. #1555, § 2803.1]
The Council, by resolution, shall authorize the City Clerk to destroy certain
City records.
§ 2-26. PROCEDURE FOR ACQUISITION BY THE CITY OF LAND
OWNED BY PUBLIC UTILITIES.
§ 2-26.1. Compliance with This Section Required. [Added by Ord.
#1153, § 2900]
Unless otherwise specifically provided in any grant of franchise made by the
City of Compton, all Public Utility Franchises granted by the City pursuant
to the provisions of Article XV of the Charter of the City shall be subject to
and governed by the following provisions of this section.
§ 2-26.2. Determination of Price. [Added by Ord. #1153, § 2901]
Whenever the City exercises its reserved right to purchase the property of
a public utility pursuant to Section 1505 of the Charter of the City in the
absence of an agreement as to the price of such acquisition, such price shall
be determined within the provisions of said Section 1505 as follows:
a. The City may purchase any utility at any time after one year from the
date that such franchise becomes effective, by delivering a notice in
writing of such intention to purchase, at least six months prior to the
date upon which the City proposes to exercise its right to purchase said
utility; together with a notice in writing of the intention of the City to
purchase and take over the property of such utility at the date fixed for
the purchase of the utility, upon the payment by the City, to grantee
owning such property under said franchise of the fair value of the
property of such utility as hereinafter provided.
b. That in the event the City shall elect to purchase the utility and shall
notify the grantee in writing of its intention to purchase and take over
the property of such utility, as herein provided, the grantee, at the
period fixed in the notice for the termination of the franchise and upon
payment or tender of payment by the City, to the grantee of the
purchase price of the property of such utility, as hereinafter provided,
shall transfer the title to the property by good and sufficient written
instrument to the City, and the payment or tender of payment by the
City to the grantee of the purchase price of the property of such utility
shall, ipso facto, operate to transfer the title of the property to said City,
and the grantee shall forthwith surrender to said City, and the City may
forthwith take and hold possession of the property of such utility.
§ 2-25.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-26.2
AO:59
c. That in the event the franchise shall expire by operation of law, the City
shall have the right, at its option, declared not more than one year
before the expiration of the franchise term as herein fixed, which right
and option is hereby reserved to the City, to purchase and take over the
property of such utility, and in the event that the City shall so exercise
its right under such option the City shall pay to the grantee the fair
value of the property of such utility as herein provided.
d. The term "fair value" as used herein shall be construed to mean the
reasonable value of the property of such utility having regard to its
condition of repair and its adaptability and capacity for the use for
which it shall have been originally intended. The price to be paid by the
City for any utility shall be on the basis of actual cost to the utility for
the property taken, less depreciation accrued, as of the date of
purchase, with due allowance for obsolescence, if any, and the
efficiency of its units to perform the duties imposed on them; no
allowance shall be made for franchise value (other than the actual
amount paid to the City at the time of the franchise acquisition), good
will, going concern, earning power, increased cost of reproduction or
increased value of right-of-way or allowance for damages by reason of
severance.
e. That the valuation of the property of such utility proposed to be
purchased upon the termination of the franchise as herein provided, or
otherwise, shall be determined by a board of three arbitrators of whom
one shall be appointed by the City, one by the grantee, and the third by
the two arbitrators so appointed. The arbitrators shall be appointed
within 30 days after the declaration by the City of its option to purchase
the property of such utility. In case the arbitrators fail to make and file
an award within the time hereinafter limited, a new board of three
arbitrators shall be appointed as hereinbefore prescribed. The Board of
Arbitrators shall immediately upon the appointment of its members
enter upon the discharge of its duties. Any vacancy in the Board of
Arbitrators shall be filled by the party who made the original
appointment to the vacant place.
f. In the event the grantee shall fail to appoint an arbitrator within 30
days after the declaration by the City of its option to purchase the
property of such utility, or in the event of the death or resignation of
such arbitrator so appointed and such grantee, its successors or
assigns, shall fail to appoint an arbitrator to fill such vacancy within 10
days thereafter, or in the event the two arbitrators appointed by the
City and grantee, as hereinbefore provided, shall fail to appoint a third
arbitrator within 60 days after the declaration of the City of its option to
purchase the property of such utility, then upon application made either
by the City or by the grantee after five days' notice in writing to the
other party, such arbitrator shall be appointed by the presiding Judge of
the Superior Court of the State of California, in and for the County of
Los Angeles, and the arbitrators so appointed shall have the same
§ 2-26.2 COMPTON § 2-26.2
AO:60
§ 2-27. DISABILITIES COMMISSION. [Added by Ord. #1951, § 1]
The Disabilities Commission shall act as an advisory to the City Council and
adhere to the following provisions.
§ 2-27.1. Notification of Unexcused Absences. [Added by Ord.
#1951, § 1]
The chairperson of the Disabilities Commission shall forthwith notify the
City Council when any member is absent without having been excused
therefrom the Commission for three consecutive regular meetings of the
Commission.
powers and duties as though he had been appointed in the manner
hereinabove prescribed.
g. The award of the arbitrators shall be made and filed with the City Clerk
of said City within three months after their appointment, and a majority
of the arbitrators who agree hereto may make such award. The amount
of the valuation of the property of such utility to be paid to the grantee,
as herein provided, in lawful money of the United States, less an
amount equivalent to or sufficient to offset or pay any outstanding,
unsettled, unpaid or disputed debts, suits or uncompleted or unsettled
contracts or pending damage suits or judgments against or affecting
said grantee, or any encumbrances or defects in title which may
constitute a charge or lien upon the property of such utility. The amount
so deducted or reserved shall be placed by the City, if the property of
such utility be purchased by the City, in a special fund in the City
Treasury for the purpose of liquidating or satisfying unpaid debts,
claims, contracts, suits, judgments, encumbrances, charges or liens;
and after the same have been liquidated and settled, the City shall pay
the grantee the balance of the amount in the fund remaining.
h. Whenever the City shall have paid the grantee, as above provided, the
value of the property of such utility, less such amount to be placed in the
fund, as above provided, then the grantee shall, by good and sufficient
written instrument, transfer to the City all of the property of such
utility, together with all franchise rights, appurtenances, renewals,
additions, extensions, connections, and repairs thereto, including all
and every part of the property constituting the property of such utility,
together with all claims and rights held, owned, operated and claimed,
under and by virtue of the franchise herein granted, free and clear of all
encumbrances, claims or liens, whatsoever, excepting such as have not
been liquidated, as hereinbefore provided.
i. Acceptance of a franchise shall constitute an agreement on the part of
the grantee thereof to sell said property upon the terms and conditions
hereinabove provided.
§ 2-26.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-27.2
AO:61
§ 2-27.2. Removal of Members. [Added by Ord. #1951, § 1]
Any members of the Disabilities Commission may be removed by a majority
vote of the City Council at any time without cause.
§ 2-27.3. Vacancies. [Added by Ord. #1951, § 1]
A vacancy in the membership of the Commission other than one created by
the expiration of a term, shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired
portion of the term by the City Council.
§ 2-27.4. Compensation of Members. [Added by Ord. #1951, § 1]
Members of the Commission shall serve as such with compensation; as
established by resolution of City Council.
§ 2-27.5. Organization. [Added by Ord. #1951, § 1]
The Commission shall select from its members a chairperson and vice
chairperson, each of whom shall serve for a term of one year.
§ 2-27.6. Meeting - Time and Place. [Added by Ord. #1951, § 1]
The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting per month, the
meeting shall be held in the City Council Chambers, unless the City Council
shall provide for another place of meeting. The Commission may hold
additional meetings at places other than the City Council Chambers to the
extent otherwise permitted by law. The day and time shall be established by
Commission and must be ratified by City Council.
§ 2-27.7. Responsibilities of Commission. [Added by Ord. #1951,
§ 1]
It shall be the responsibility of the Commission to:
§ 2-27.8. Duties of Commission. [Added by Ord. #1951, § 1]
The Commission will discharge the following duties:
a. Provide the disabled with the opportunity to make recommendations
relative to policies that affect their lives;
b. Exercise its influence with other agencies, groups and systems in the
service area to insure provisions of adequate programs for the disabled;
c. Provide a forum for the exchange of positive ideas and information
among disabled;
d. Conduct workshops and symposiums on important issues facing the
disabled.
a. Propose, develop, and recommend programs and plans intended to
promote the full acceptance of disabled in all aspects of community life
§ 2-27.2 COMPTON § 2-27.8
AO:62
§ 2-28. (RESERVED)16
§ 2-29. LOBBYIST, LOBBYIST ORGANIZATION REGISTRATION AND
DISCLOSURE.
§ 2-29.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2146, § 1]
The following words are defined as set forth in this section:
CITY — Shall mean City of Compton.
CITY OFFICIAL — Shall mean a person holding the office of Mayor, City
Council, or any member of any city board, committee or commission.
COMMITTEE — Shall mean a committee created by the Mayor and City
Council, including all standing committees of the City Council, and all City
boards, committees and commissions created by City Charter, ordinance,
or resolution or governed under the provisions of the public boards,
commissions and committee ordinance.
COMPENSATION — Shall mean money, per diem, salary, fee or portion
thereof or the equivalent in services rendered or in-kind contributions
received or to be received directly or indirectly in return for lobbying
services performed or to be performed.
CONTRIBUTION — Shall mean a gift, subscription, loan, advance or deposit
of any money or other thing of value, including the fair market value of an
in-kind contribution, that is made or received for the purpose of influencing
City officials regarding an official action.
EXPENDITURE — Shall mean a direct or indirect payment, transfer or
distribution or obligation or promise to pay, transfer or distribute any money
or other thing of value but does not include a lobbyist's own personal
living expenses and the expenses incidental to establishing and maintaining
an office in connection with lobbying activities or compensation paid to a
lobbyist by a lobbyist's employer.
without regard to race, religion, or national origin; provide however,
that all such programs and plans shall be subject to the approval of the
City Council;
b. To cooperate with City departments, agencies and commissions in
identifying and ameliorating disability problems with which they may
be concerned; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be
construed as authorizing the Commission to act as a hearing agency or
tribunal in a personnel matter;
c. To recommend to the City Council and various City departments and
agencies changes in procedures, policies and/or legislation for the
purpose of improving disability input in the community.
16.Editor's Note: Section 2-28, Housing Development Commission, containing portions of
Ordinance No. 2018, was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2261.
§ 2-27.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-29.1
AO:63
LOBBYING — Shall mean attempting to influence:
LOBBYIST — Shall mean any individual who is directly or indirectly
compensated for the specific purpose of lobbying; is designated by an
individual, interest group, or organization or entity to represent it on a
substantial or regular basis for the purpose of lobbying; or in the course
of his employment is engaged in lobbying on a substantial or regular basis.
"Lobbyist" does not include:
LOBBYIST CAMPAIGN OR LOBBYIST CAMPAIGNING — Shall mean the
direct or indirect receipt of contributions and/or expenditure of funds to
influence the public and/or City officials regarding an official action by
a lobbyist or a lobbyist organization. Each official action the lobbyist or
lobbyist organization supports or opposes shall be a separate lobbyist
campaign.
A decision related to any matter to be considered or being considered
by the City Council, any Council Committee or any Council matter
requiring action by the Mayor or awaiting action by the Mayor; or
a.
b. An official action.
An individual who appears on his own behalf in connection with an
official action.
a.
Any elected or appointed officer of the State or its political subdivisions
or an Indian tribe or pueblo acting in his official capacity.
b.
An employee of the State or its political subdivisions, specifically
designated by an elected or appointed officer of the State or its political
subdivision, who appears before the City Council, Council Committee,
or a rulemaking proceeding only to explain the effect of legislation or
a rule on his agency or political subdivision, provided the elected or
appointed officer of the State or its political subdivision keeps for public
inspection, and files with the Secretary of State, such designation.
c.
A member of the City Council or an employee or representative of the
City of Compton when addressing legislation.
d.
Any witness called by a Council Committee or administrative
department to appear before that committee or department in
connection with legislation or an official action.
e.
An individual who provides only oral or written public testimony in
connection with a City Council or Committee or in a rulemaking
proceeding and whose name and the interest on behalf of which the
individual testifies has been clearly and publicly identified.
f.
A publisher, owner or employee of the print media, radio or television,
while gathering or disseminating news or editorial comment to the
general public in the ordinary course of business.
g.
A representative or officer of an officially recognized Block Club who
speaks on behalf of that Block Club.
h.
§ 2-29.1 COMPTON § 2-29.1
AO:64
LOBBYIST ORGANIZATION — Shall mean any person who directly or
indirectly receives contributions and/or makes expenditures to influence the
public and/or City officials regarding an official action.
LOBBYIST'S EMPLOYER — Shall mean the person whose interests are
being represented and by whom a lobbyist is directly or indirectly retained,
compensated or employed.
OFFICIAL ACTION — Shall mean the action or nonaction of a City official
related to any legislative, policy making or rulemaking proceeding or any
proposed ballot measure as defined in the Charter of the City of Compton.
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, partnership, association, committee,
Federal, State or local governmental entity or agency, however constituted,
public or private corporation or any other organization or group of persons
who are voluntarily acting in concert, including both for profit and nonprofit
entities.
PRESCRIBED FORM — Shall mean a form prepared and prescribed by the
City Clerk.
RULEMAKING PROCEEDING — Shall mean a formal process conducted
by a City agency, board or commission for the purpose of adopting a rule,
regulation, standard, policy or other requirement of general applicability
and does not include adjudicatory proceedings.
§ 2-29.2. Registration Statement to be Filed; Contents; Modification
to Statement. [Ord. #2146, § 1]
a. Before any service or lobbyist campaigning covered by the Lobbyist and
Lobbyist Organization Registration and Disclosure Ordinance17
commences, any individual who is initially employed or retained as a
lobbyist or any lobbyist organization shall register with the City Clerk
by filing a single registration statement under oath on a prescribed
form showing:
1. The lobbyist's or lobbyist organization's full name, permanent
business address and business address while lobbying or
conducting lobbyist campaigning;
2. The name and address of each of the lobbyist's employers;
3. The official action the lobbyist or lobbyist organization supports or
opposes;
4. The name, address and telephone number of the lobbyist
organization's chairperson and treasurer and all officers for the
lobbyist organization.
b. The City Clerk shall charge a registration fee of $50 for the initial
registration by a lobbyist or lobbyist organization. No additional fee
17.Editor's Note: The Lobbyist and Lobbyist Organization Registration and Disclosure
Ordinance is codified herein as Section 2-29.
§ 2-29.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-29.2
AO:65
§ 2-29.3. Enforcement of Act; Investigations by the City Attorney.
[Ord. #2146, § 1]
may be charged for amendments to the original registration or for
the annual statement required in this section. Lobbyist organizations
that file a lobbyist campaign registration concerning an official action
different from that designated in a previous registration shall pay the
registration fee required in this subsection for each such subsequent
registration. No registration fee shall be required of lobbyists receiving
only reimbursement of personal expenses and no other compensation
or salary for lobbying unless they are filing for the purpose of
conducting lobbyist campaigning.
c. For each succeeding year that an individual is employed or retained as
a lobbyist by the same employer, and for whom all the information
disclosed in the initial registration statement remains substantially the
same, the lobbyist shall file a simple annual registration renewal 12
months following initial registration and every 12 months thereafter for
each of the lobbyist's employers together with a short, abbreviated
prescribed form for renewal. The annual statement shall be in addition
to any lobbyist campaign registration and disclosure statement that the
lobbyist may be required to file under the provisions of this section.
d. Whenever there is a modification of the facts required to be set forth by
this section or there is a termination of the lobbyist's employment as a
lobbyist before the end of the year, the lobbyist shall notify the City
Clerk within one month of such occurrence.
e. Lobbyists and lobbyist organizations shall file a separate registration
with the City Clerk for each official action the lobbyist or lobbyist
organization supports or opposes. When lobbyists or lobbyist
organizations support or oppose an official action other than the official
action identified in any previous registration they have filed with the
City Clerk, they shall file an additional separate registration for each
such official action supported or opposed.
a. The City Attorney shall adopt procedures for processing complaints and
notifications of violations.
b. Upon the sworn complaint of any person who has reason to believe, and
presents an affidavit listing the basis for such complaint, that there is,
or has been a violation of the Lobbyist and Lobbyist Organization
Registration and Disclosure Ordinance, the City Attorney shall
investigate the allegation when there is reason to believe such person,
lobbyist, lobbyist organization or lobbyist's employer is, or has been,
acting in violation of the Lobbyist and Lobbyist Organization
Registration and Disclosure Ordinance.18
18.Editor's Note: The Lobbyist and Lobbyist Organization Registration and Disclosure
Ordinance is codified herein as Section 2-29.
§ 2-29.2 COMPTON § 2-29.3
AO:66
§ 2-29.4. Registration Statement; Preservation as Public Record.
[Ord. #2146, § 1]
Each registration and disclosure statement as required by the Lobbyist
and Lobbyist Organization Registration and Disclosure Ordinance shall be
preserved by the City Clerk for a period of five years from the date of filing
as a public record, open to public inspection at any reasonable time. Unless
an action or prosecution is pending that requires preserving the report, it
may be destroyed five years after the date of filing.
§ 2-29.5. Compliance; Enforcement; Hearing and Appeal Process.
[Ord. #2146, § 1]
c. When the City Attorney has reason to believe that any person, lobbyist,
lobbyist organization or lobbyist's employer has violated or is violating
any provision of the Lobbyist Registration Ordinance, he shall notify the
suspected violator of the alleged violation and hold an informal meeting
before initiating further action.
a. The City Clerk shall advise and seek to educate all persons required to
perform duties pursuant to this section. This includes advising all
registered lobbyists and lobbyist organizations at least annually of the
Lobbyist and Lobbyist Organization Registration and Disclosure
Ordinance's19 deadlines for submitting registration. All prescribed
forms shall be clear and easy to complete.
b. The City Attorney may conduct thorough examinations of reports and
conduct any investigations to determine whether this section has been
violated. Any person who believes that this section has been violated
may file a written complaint with the City Attorney pursuant to the
requirements of subsection 2-29.3 of this section. The City Clerk shall
adopt procedures for processing complaints and notifications of
violations.
c. The City Attorney shall seek first to insure voluntary compliance with
the provisions of this section pursuant to subsection 2-29.3. A person
who violates this section shall be given 15 consecutive calendar days'
notice to correct the matter or request a hearing before a City Hearing
Officer before fines are imposed.
The fifteen-day notice shall begin to run on the day the notice is mailed
or served in person. The request for hearing shall be submitted to the
City Clerk.
d. Notices under this section shall be deemed properly served and
received when the notice has been personally served on the lobbyist or
lobbyist organization or sent by registered or certified mail return
19.Editor's Note: The Lobbyist and Lobbyist Organization Registration and Disclosure
Ordinance is codified herein as Section 2-29.
§ 2-29.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-29.5
AO:67
receipt requested to the last known address of the lobbyist or lobbyist
organization.
e. When the lobbyist, lobbyist organization or person who has been given
the 15 days' notice has submitted to the City Clerk a written request for
a hearing within the 15 days allowed in paragraph c of this subsection,
a hearing shall be conducted within 30 consecutive calendar days from
the day the City Clerk receives the request for hearing. The hearing
shall be conducted by a City Hearing Officer at a time and place
designated by the Hearing Officer. All witnesses shall be sworn or
affirmed and the hearing shall be recorded. The Hearing Officer shall
file all findings, conclusions and final orders with the City Clerk and
mail a copy to the City Attorney and parties to the hearing at the time of
such filing.
f. An appeal may be taken from any final order issued by the Hearing
Officer by filing a Petition for Writ of Certiorari to the District Court of
the Second Judicial District within 30 days after the Hearing Officer
files the findings, conclusions and final order with the City Clerk. The
petition shall be limited to the record of the proceedings before the
Hearing Officer. The petitioner shall file a true and correct copy of the
record of the proceedings before the Hearing Officer with the District
Court within 30 days after filing the Petition for Writ of Certiorari. The
Hearing Officer or City Clerk shall charge the petitioner a reasonable
fee for the cost of time and materials to reproduce the record. The
decision of the hearing officer shall be affirmed unless the decision is
found to be arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of discretion unsupported
by evidence in the record taken as a whole or otherwise not in
accordance with law.
g. The Hearing Officer shall prepare a written report of his or her findings
and decision within 10 City working days after the hearing and shall
provide copies to the parties and the City Attorney and shall file the
findings, conclusions and the final order with the City Clerk.
h. Any person who files a statement required by this section, including but
not limited to registration and disclosure statements, after the deadline
imposed by this section or any person who files a false or incomplete
statement shall be liable for and shall pay the City at or from the time
initially required for the filing, $25 per day for each business day after
the time required for the filing of the statement until the complete
report is filed up to a maximum of $500.
i. A violation of this section of the Municipal Code shall be an infraction.
The penalty for violation of this section is set forth in subsection 1-6.3 of
this Code. Notwithstanding the foregoing a violation of this section of
the Municipal Code may also include the lobbyist or lobbyist
organization registration being revoked or the lobbying or lobbying
campaigning activities enjoined for up to three years.
§ 2-29.5 COMPTON § 2-29.6
AO:68
§ 2-29.6. Lobbying Campaign Disclosure, Bank Account and
Expenditure Requirements and Retention of Records. [Ord. #2146,
§ 1]
a. Bank Accounts. Each lobbyist organization shall establish one and only
one campaign bank checking account for each lobbyist campaign. Each
lobbyist campaign shall be for or against only one official action.
Lobbyists participating in lobbyist campaigning shall establish one and
only one campaign bank checking account for each lobbyist campaign
when such lobbyist campaigning activity is not reported by a lobbyist
organization. All contributions received for the benefit of lobbyist
campaigning shall be deposited into the single checking account
required in this subsection and all disbursements shall be made from
that account. Each lobbyist participating in lobbyist campaigning and
each lobbyist organization shall file with the bank at which the lobbyist
campaign checking account has been established a letter authorizing
the release of information concerning that account to the City Attorney
or his designee and shall submit a copy of the letter of authorization to
the City Clerk. Upon the request of the City Attorney, the lobbyist or
lobbyist organization shall provide to the City Attorney all bank records,
cancelled checks, and any other financial information relating to the
lobbyist campaign as may be requested by the City Attorney.
b. Disclosure of Lobbyist Campaigning Activities.
1. Each lobbyist or lobbyist organization that conducts any lobbyist
campaigning shall file with the City Clerk disclosure statements,
each of which shall be cumulative, signed under oath by the
lobbyist, treasurer or chairperson of the lobbyist organization, and
set forth to 5:00 p.m. of the day preceding the filing of each
statement the following:
(a) The total of contributions, which shall include all contributions
received, regardless of whether the contribution has been
deposited in the bank checking account. This report shall show
the amount of each anonymous contribution received.
(b) The name and street address of each contributor, the
contributor's principal business or occupation, the name and
address of the contributor's employer, and the nature of the
contributor's or the contributor's employer's business,
together with the total cumulative value contributed by the
contributor.
(c) All expenditures made on behalf of the lobbyist campaign,
including any reimbursements and the nature thereof, and the
name and address of the person or business to whom payment
was made.
(d) In kind contributions shall be reported as to both contributions
to the lobbyist or lobbyist organization or any expenditure
§ 2-29.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-29.6
AO:69
made on behalf of the lobbyist or lobbyist organization. The fair
market value of such goods or services shall be reported.
(e) Lobbyist campaign loans as contributions and any subsequent
repayment of loans credited against contributions and
returned contributions as credits against contributions.
2. The statements required by this section shall be filed as follows: the
first statement shall be filed within five City working days after the
registration with the City Clerk that designates the official action
the lobbyist or lobbying organization supports or opposes. The first
statement shall show all contributions received and all
expenditures made at any time in the past up to 5:00 p.m. of the
day immediately prior to the date of filing. The first statement shall
include all expenditures made and contributions received prior to
registering with the City Clerk as well as such expenditures made
and contributions received after the registration required under
subsection 2-29.2 of this section. Additional statements shall be
filed with the City Clerk every 28 calendar days from the date of the
original registration until the lobbyist or lobbying organization
provides a final statement. In the event no expenditures have been
made and no contributions have been received during any of the
required reporting periods, the lobbyist or lobbyist organization
shall not be required to file a statement for that time period but
shall be required to submit a letter to the City Clerk stating that no
contribution and expenditure activity occurred during the
reporting period. The final disclosure statement shall include or be
accompanied by a sworn statement that all lobbying campaigning
has ceased on or before the date of such statement as to the official
action designated in the registration. The final statement shall
show all expenditures and contributions and may be filed at any
time.
3. Anonymous Contributions. No anonymous contributions shall be
accepted by a lobbyist or lobbyist organization for purposes of
conducting a lobbyist campaign. Anonymous contributions
accepted shall be given to a nonprofit charity or to the City's
General Fund. The transfer of such funds to the nonprofit charity or
the City's General Fund shall be reported in the disclosure
statement due after such transfer.
4. Retention of Records. Each lobbyist and lobbyist organization shall
keep financial records of the lobbyist campaign for a period of one
year following the certification to the City Clerk that all lobbying
campaigning has ceased and shall make available to the City or its
auditors for inspection the records of all contributions and
expenditures, cancelled checks, invoices, receipts, bank
statements, bills of sales, statements of accounts, leases, rental
agreements and all other financial records pertinent to the lobbyist
campaign.
§ 2-29.6 COMPTON § 2-30
AO:70
§ 2-30. PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSION.
§ 2-30.1. Created. [Ord. #2256]
There is hereby created and established a Public Works Commission in and
for the City of Compton which shall be known and referred to, among other
things, as the Public Works Commission of the City of Compton or as the
Public Works Commission. The authority to create and establish a Public
Works Commission is pursuant to Section 1000 of the City of Compton
Charter.
§ 2-30.2. Membership and Commission Composition. [Ord. #2256]
§ 2-30.3. Vacancies. [Ord. #2256]
Any vacancies on the Commission, from whatever cause arising, shall be
filled by appointment by the Councilmember of the Council District that
made the appointment to the vacant Commission position for the remainder
of the unexpired term.
§ 2-30.4. Meetings; Elections. [Ord. #2256]
a. The Public Works Commission shall consist of five members to be
appointed by the City Council and be subject to removal in accordance
with the provisions of Section 1002 of the Compton City Charter. Each
member of the City Council shall appoint one member of the Public
Works Commission to a term of four years and until their respective
successors are appointed and qualified.
b. The members of the Commission shall be residents of the City of
Compton and shall not be officers or employees of the City. No member
of the Commission may have any interest in any contract with the City
either during such member's term of office or for a period of one year
after the cessation of such service.
c. All members shall have an expressed interest in and knowledge of
public works projects, methods and procedures. The City shall make a
concerted effort to recruit at least one registered civil engineer with an
active license, and professionals with expertise in other areas such as
traffic engineering, structural engineering, architecture, landscape
architecture, contracting or construction, construction law, or
construction management and inspection.
a. The Public Works Commission shall schedule regular meetings on a
quarterly basis, at such time and dates as designated in the rules and
regulations adopted by the Commission to govern procedures of the
Commission. The meeting shall be held at such location designated by
the City Manager. Special meetings may be held on the call of the
Chairperson or any three members of the Commission. All meetings
shall comply with State laws governing open and public meetings.
§ 2-30 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-30.4
AO:71
§ 2-30.5. Compensation. [Ord. #2256]
The members of the Public Works Commission shall receive a stipend
of $150 not to exceed $150 per month for each meeting in attendance.
No additional compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the
members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that
the City Council may from time to time authorize in advance, expenditures
for attendance at seminars, institutes, or other meetings which the City
Council finds to be beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance
of their duties, and in accordance with the City's "Expense and
Reimbursement Policy."
§ 2-30.6. Duties of the Public Works Commission. [Ord. #2256]
The Public Works Commission shall act as an advisory commission to the
City Council and perform the following duties:
b. At the first meeting of each fiscal year, the Commission shall elect a
Chair and Vice-Chair from among the appointed members for a term of
one year. The Commission may also create and fill other offices from
among the members as they deem necessary and in accordance with
the rules and regulations adopted by the Commission.
a. To provide annual review and comment on public works capital
improvement projects and programs;
b. To receive regular updates on active capital improvement projects;
c. To review and provide input on long-term infrastructure maintenance
and repair programs;
d. To review and comment upon the following:
1. Public utility matters, including electric, telephone and gas
companies' community service levels;
2. Waste management, recycling programs and hazardous waste
disposal; and
3. Traffic safety and transportation matters (e.g. stop signs, traffic
signals, speed limits, crosswalks, bicycle routes, parking control,
bus and truck routes, etc.).
e. At the request of the City Council, to recommend policies and programs
to the City Council for efficient and cost-effective methods for providing
for the public works needs and requirements of the City;
f. To perform other related duties or studies as directed by the City
Council.
§ 2-30.4 COMPTON § 2-30.7
AO:72
§ 2-30.7. Limitations. [Ord. #2256]
The Public Works Commission may discharge its duties in the manner and
means selected by it, except as follows:
§ 2-30.8. Advisory Members. [Ord. #2256]
The City Manager or his/her designee, the Director of the Public Works/
Municipal Utilities Department or his/her designee and any other
member(s) of the City's personnel that the City Manager deems
appropriate, shall be non-voting advisory members to the Commission.
a. Unless expressly authorized to do so by the City Council, it shall not
represent itself to be, nor in any way act for or on behalf of the City
Council, nor shall it commit the officers, employees, or staff of the City
in any manner or to any course of action. To the contrary, it shall act as
a study center and clearinghouse for advisory action to the City
Council;
b. It shall not encroach upon any area preempted by State or Federal law;
and
c. It shall forward all of its findings and recommendations to the City
Council prior to public release.
§ 2-30.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-30.8
AO:73
Chapter 3
TAXATION
Editor's Note: See also Gross Receipts Tax, subsection 9-2.1a19. See
also Chapter 9: General Licensing.
§ 3-1. PROPERTY TAX.
§ 3-1.1. County System. [Ord. #856, § 2400]
The City Council, pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance 112, adopted
February 5, 1916, deeming it for the best interests of the City, and thereby
determining that the public interest and necessity demanded the action
therein taken, did thereby declare its election, and it did thereby elect to
avail itself of the provisions of an act of the Legislature of the State of
California entitled, "An Act to provide for the levy and collection of taxes
by and for the use of municipal corporations and cities incorporated under
the laws of the State of California, excepting municipal corporations of the
first class, and to provide for the consolidation and abolition of certain
municipal offices, and to provide that their duties may be performed by
certain officers of the county, and fixing the compensation to be allowed
for such county officers for the services so rendered to such municipal
corporation," approved March 27, 1895, and all acts amending the same,
excepting the provisions of section two of said act.
§ 3-1.2. Sale of Tax-Deeded Property. [Ord. #856, § 2401]
Whenever the City shall become the owner of any property sold for taxes,
or for delinquent installments of assessment liens, or by purchase thereof
in lieu of foreclosure of delinquent installments of assessment liens, and the
deed to the City has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder, the
Council may sell the property, or any part thereof, at public or private sale
in the manner set forth in this section.
§ 3-1.3. Public Sale. [Ord. #856, § 2402]
In case of public sale, notice of such sale shall be given by first publishing a
notice once a week for three consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of
the City. Such notice shall state specifically:
a. The place of and the date and hour of sale.
b. A description of the property to be sold.
c. A statement of the price below which the property cannot be sold, and
that same may be verified upon application to the City Treasurer. It
shall be the duty of the City Treasurer, within two days after the
publication of such notice of sale, to mail a copy of the notice, postage
thereon prepaid, to the party to whom the land was last assessed next
before the sale, at his last known post office address; provided that the
failure of the City Treasurer to give such notice by mailing, or of the
§ 2-30.8 COMPTON § 3-1.3
AO:74
§ 3-1.4. Private Sale. [Ord. #856, § 2403]
In case of private sale, notice of such intention to sell shall be given by first
publishing a notice thereof once a week for three consecutive weeks in the
official newspaper of the City. Such notice shall contain:
§ 3-1.5. Minimum Bids. [Ord. #856, § 2404]
No bid shall be accepted at any such public or private sale made under the
provisions of this section for less than the amount of all assessment liens
levied upon the property, together with all costs for acquiring title thereto;
provided, however, that if the Council shall, by resolution, declare that in its
opinion the property is not of a value great enough that it can be sold for a
sum equal to the aggregate of the amounts and that it would be for the best
interest of the City to sell the property for a sum to be stated in resolution,
person addressed to receive the same, shall not make void or voidable
a sale made pursuant hereto.
At the time set for such sale, the City Treasurer shall sell the property
described in the notice at public auction to the highest bidder for cash in lawful
money of the United States.
Within five days after each sale, the City Treasurer shall report the sale to the
City Council which shall, upon payment of the purchase price, cause a deed to
the purchaser to be executed by the Mayor and City Clerk.
a. A description of the property intended to be sold.
b. A statement that bids or offers therefor will be received at the office of
the City Treasurer.
c. A statement that the bids or offers shall be in writing and filed in the
office of the City Treasurer at any time within one year after the
publication of the notice.
The bids or bid shall be opened by the City Clerk publicly in the first meeting of
the City Council after the bid has been filed. At the time or at any time within
20 days the Council may accept the highest and best bid in accordance with the
provisions of this section, or reject all bids.
In the event a bid is accepted, upon payment of the purchase price the City
Council shall cause a deed to the purchaser to be executed by the Mayor and
City Clerk.
In the event an accepted bid is not for cash, the City Council shall cause a
contract of sale to the purchaser to be executed by the Mayor and City Clerk
with the provision that all deferred payments under the contract of sale shall
bear interest at the rate of 7% per annum. The contract of sale shall contain the
usual and customary provisions as set forth in the standard forms agreements
of sale and purchase, printed by the recognized title companies doing business
in the County.
§ 3-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-1.5
AO:75
less than the said aggregate sum, then the Council may accept a bid for a
sum not less than that stated in said resolution.
§ 3-2. TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX.20
§ 3-2.1. Title. [Added by Ord. #1267, § 6900; adopted June 1, 1965;
tax imposed eff. July 1, 1965]
This section shall be known as the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law
of the City.
§ 3-2.2. Definitions. [Added by Ord. #1267, § 6901]
As used in this section:
HOTEL — Shall mean any structure, or any portion of any structure, which
is occupied, or intended or designed for occupancy, by transients for
dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes and shall include any hotel, inn,
tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house,
rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile
home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure, or
portion thereof.
OCCUPANCY — Shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use
or possession, of any room or rooms, or portion thereof, in any hotel for
dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.
OPERATOR — Shall mean the person who is the proprietor of the hotel,
whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in
possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs
his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than
an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for
the purposes of this section and shall have the same duties and liabilities
as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this section by either
the principal or the managing agent, shall however, be considered to be
compliance by both.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any
other group or combination acting as a unit.
RENT — Shall mean the consideration charged, whether or not received,
for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be
received in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash,
credits, property, and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction
therefrom whatsoever.
TRANSIENT — Shall mean any person who exercises occupancy or is
entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access,
20.Editor's Note: For statutory provisions concerning the City's power to tax hotels and
lodging houses, see Gov. Code § 51030.
§ 3-1.5 COMPTON § 3-2.2
AO:76
license, or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days
or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so
occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period
of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the
operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In
determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time
extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this section
may be considered.
§ 3-2.3. Tax Imposed. [Added by Ord. #1267, § 6902; Ord. #1326;
tax imposed eff. Oct. 1, 1968; Ord. #1656, § 1]
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, such transient shall be subject
to and shall pay a tax in the amount of 7.5% of the rent charged by the
operator. Such tax shall constitute a debt owed by the transient to the City,
which debt shall be extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the
City. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at time the
rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the
tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the
transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason that tax
due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the City Controller may require
that such tax shall be paid directly to the City Controller.
§ 3-2.4. Exemptions. [Added by Ord. #1267, § 6903]
No tax shall be imposed upon:
§ 3-2.5. Operator's Duties. [Added by Ord. #1267, § 6904]
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this section to the same
extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient.
The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent
charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the
operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner,
whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be
assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent,
or that, if added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided
in this section.
a. Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the
power of the City to impose the tax provided for in this section;
b. Any Federal or State officer or employee when on official business; or
c. Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
reason of express provision of Federal law or international treaty.
No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time
the rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by
the City Controller.
§ 3-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-2.6
AO:77
§ 3-2.6. Registration. [Added by Ord. #1267, § 6905]
Within 30 days after the effective date of this section or within 30 days after
commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting
an occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the City Controller
and obtain from him a "Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate" to be
at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate
shall, among other things, state the following:
§ 3-2.7. Reporting and Remitting. [Added by Ord. #1267, § 6906;
Ord. #1656, § 3]
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of each month, or at the
close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the
City Controller, make a return to the City Controller, on forms provided
by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax
collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full
amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the City Controller. The City
Controller may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder
if he deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax, and he
may require further information in the return. Returns and payments shall
be due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes
collected by operators pursuant to this Chapter shall be held in trust for the
account of the City until payment thereof is made to the City Controller.
§ 3-2.8. Penalties and Interest. [Added by Ord. #1267, § 6907; Ord.
#1656, § 2]
a. The name of the operator;
b. The address of the hotel;
c. The date upon which the certificate was issued; and
d. A statement as follows: "This Transient Occupancy Registration
Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has
fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law
by registering with the City Controller for the purpose of collecting
from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting such tax to
the City Controller. This certificate shall not authorize any person to
conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an
unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with
all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a
permit from any board, commission, department, or office of this City.
This certificate does not constitute a permit."
a. Original Delinquency. Any operator who shall fail to remit any tax
imposed by the provisions of this section within the time required shall
pay a penalty of 15% of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount
of the tax.
§ 3-2.6 COMPTON § 3-2.8
AO:78
§ 3-2.9. Failure to Collect and Report Tax; Determination of Tax by
City Controller. [Added by Ord. #1267, § 6908]
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect such tax and to make, within
the time provided in this Chapter, any report and remittance of such tax,
or any portion thereof, required by the provisions of this section, the City
Controller shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts
and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as
the City Controller shall procure such facts and information as he is able
to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by the
provisions of this section and payable by any operator who has failed or
refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, the
City Controller shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator
the tax, interest, and penalties provided for by this Chapter. In the event
such determination is made, the City Controller shall give a notice of the
amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United
States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at
his last known place of address. Such operator may, within 10 days after
the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the
City Controller for a hearing on the amount assessed. If an application
by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed,
the tax, interest, and penalties, if any, determined by the City Controller
shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If
such an application is made, the City Controller shall give not less than
five days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the
operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why the
amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest, and
penalties. At such hearing the operator may appear and offer evidence
why such specified tax, interest, and penalties should not be so fixed.
After such hearing the City Controller shall determine the proper tax to
b. Continued Delinquency. Any operator who shall fail to remit any
delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the
date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a
second delinquent penalty of 15% of the amount of the tax in addition to
the amount of the tax and the 15% penalty first imposed.
c. Fraud. If the City Controller determines that the nonpayment of any
remittance due pursuant to the provisions of this section is due to fraud,
a penalty of 25% of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in
addition to the penalties stated in paragraphs a and b of this subsection.
d. Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who shall
fail to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this section shall pay
interest at the rate of 1 1/2% per month, or fraction thereof, on the
amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the
remittance first became delinquent until paid.
e. Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed, and such interest as
accrues pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall become a
part of the tax required to be paid by the provisions of this section.
§ 3-2.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-2.9
AO:79
be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the
manner prescribed in this section of such determination and the amount of
such tax, interest, and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall
be payable after 15 days unless an appeal is filed as provided in subsection
3-2.10.
§ 3-2.10. Appeals. [Added by Ord. #1267, § 6909]
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the City Controller with respect
to the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties, if any, may appeal to the
Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days after
the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Council shall
fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give
notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The
findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon
the appellant in the manner prescribed in this section for the service of the
notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and
payable upon the service of the notice.
§ 3-2.11. Records. [Added by Ord. #1267, § 3910]
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment
to the City of any tax imposed by the provisions of this section to keep
and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary
to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the
collection of and payment to the City, which records the City Controller shall
have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.
§ 3-2.12. Refunds. [Added by Ord. #1267, § 6911]
a. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been overpaid,
or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the City under this section, it may be refunded as provided
in paragraphs b and c of this section provided a claim in writing
therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon
which the claim is founded, is filed with the City Controller within three
years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by
the City Controller.
b. An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected
and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously
or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner
prescribed by the City Controller that the person from whom the tax
has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, neither a
refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so
collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent
subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.
c. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid, paid more than once,
or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a
claim in the manner provided in paragraph a of this subsection but only
§ 3-2.9 COMPTON § 3-2.12
AO:80
§ 3-2.13. Actions to Collect. [Added by Ord. #1267, § 6912]
Any tax required to be paid by any transient pursuant to the provisions of
this section shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any
such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall
be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money
to the City pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be liable to an
action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount.
§ 3-2.14. Violations; Misdemeanor. [Added by Ord. #1267, § 6913]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and shall be liable to the penalty established in Chapter 1,
Section 1-6.
Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required
by the provisions of this section, or to furnish any return required to be
made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other
data required by the City Controller, or who renders a false or fraudulent
return or claim shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as provided
in this section. Any person required to make, render, sign, or verify any
report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with
intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by
this section to be made shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as
provided in this section.
§ 3-3. REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX.21
§ 3-3.1. Title. [Added by Ord. #1308, § 6-1000]
This section shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Law of the
City of Compton." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part
6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State.
§ 3-3.2. Tax Imposed. [Added by Ord. #1308, § 6-1001]
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which
any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City shall be granted,
when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the City Controller, or
when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to
the satisfaction of the City Controller that the transient has been unable
to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.
d. No refund shall be paid pursuant to the provisions of this section unless
the claimant shall establish his right thereto by written records showing
entitlement thereto.
21.Editor's Note: For statutory provisions relating to the Real Property Transfer Tax, see
Revenue and Taxation Code Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2.
§ 3-2.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-3.2
AO:81
assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser
or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction,
when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed
(exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at
the time of sale) exceeds $100 a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500 or
fractional part thereof.
§ 3-3.3. Persons Responsible for Payment. [Added by Ord. #1308,
§ 6-1002]
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of subsection 3-3.1 shall be paid
by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument
subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed, or
issued.
§ 3-3.4. Debt Security Instruments Exempted. [Added by Ord.
#1308, § 6-1003]
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not apply to
any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.
§ 3-3.5. Governmental Agencies Exempted. [Added by Ord. #1308,
§ 6-1004]
The United States, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or
territory or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall
not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section
with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but
the tax collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor.
§ 3-3.6. Bankruptcies and Receiverships. [Added by Ord. #1308,
§ 6-1005]
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not apply to
the making, delivering, or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan
of reorganization or adjustment:
a. Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
b. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
railroad corporation, as defined in subsection (m) of Section 205 of Title
11 of the United States Code, as amended;
c. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
corporation, as defined in subsection (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the
United States Code, as amended; or
d. Whereby a mere change in identity, form, or place of organization is
effected.
§ 3-3.2 COMPTON § 3-3.6
AO:82
§ 3-3.7. Securities and Exchange Commission. [Added by Ord.
#1308, § 6-1006]
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not apply
to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of
the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subsection (a) of
Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if:
§ 3-3.8. Partnerships. [Added by Ord. #1308, § 6-1007]
§ 3-3.9. Administration. [Added by Ord. #1308, § 6-1008]
The County Recorder shall administer the provisions of this section in
conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue
The provisions of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery, or filing of
instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date
of such confirmation, approval, or change.
a. The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to
which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is
necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of
Title 15 of the United States Code relating to the Public Utility Holding
Company Act of 1935;
b. Such order specifies that property which is ordered to be conveyed; and
c. Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.
a. In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed
pursuant to the provisions of this section by reason of any transfer of an
interest in a partnership or otherwise if:
1. Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a
continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and
2. Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty
concerned.
b. If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of
Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for the purposes of
this section such partnership shall be treated as having executed an
instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value
(exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon),
all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.
c. Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of
this section by reason of a termination described in paragraph b of this
subsection, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the
realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.
§ 3-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-3.9
AO:83
and Taxation Code of the State and the provisions of any County ordinance
adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 3-3.10. Claims for Refunds. [Added by Ord. #1308, § 6-1009]
Claims for the refund of taxes imposed pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with
Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of
the State.
§ 3-3.11. Operative Date. [Added by Ord. #1308, § 6-1010]
The provisions of this section shall become operative upon the operative
date of any ordinance adopted by the County pursuant to the provisions of
Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State, or on November 28, 1967, whichever is the later.
§ 3-4. UTILITY USERS' TAX.22
§ 3-4.1. Title. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
This section shall be known as the Utility Users' Tax Law of the City of
Compton.
§ 3-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2118, § 1; Ord. #2139, § 1]
For the purposes of this Section 3-4, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this Section 3-4 are defined as
follows:
ANCILLARY TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES — Shall mean services
that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment
of telecommunications services, including but not limited to the following
services:
CONFERENCE BRIDGING SERVICE — Shall mean an ancillary service
that links two or more participants of an audio or video conference
call and may include the provision of a telephone number. Conference
bridging service does not include the telecommunications services used
to reach the conference bridge.
a.
DETAILED TELECOMMUNICATIONS BILLING SERVICE — shall mean
an ancillary service of separately stating information pertaining to
individual calls on a customer's billing statement.
b.
DIRECTORY ASSISTANCE — Shall mean an ancillary service of
providing telephone number information, and/or address information.
c.
22.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1341, 1719,
1843, 1887 and 1940.
§ 3-3.9 COMPTON § 3-4.2
AO:84
BILLING ADDRESS — Shall mean the mailing address of the service user
where the service provider submits invoices or bills for payment by the
service users.
CITY — Shall mean the City of Compton.
CITY MANAGER — Shall mean the City Manager, or his or her authorized
representative.
COGENERATOR — Shall mean any corporation or person employing
cogeneration (as defined in Section 218.5 of the California Public Utilities
Code) for producing power for the generation of electricity for self use of
sale to others from a qualified cogeneration facility (as defined in the federal
Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 and regulations thereunder).
EXEMPT WHOLESALE GENERATOR — Shall have the same meaning as set
forth in the Federal Power Act (15 U.S.C. Section 79z-5a) and regulations
thereunder.
GAS — Shall mean natural or manufactured gas or any alternative
hydrocarbon fuel, which may be substituted therefor.
MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — Shall have the same
meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing
Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month.
MUNICIPAL ORGANIZATION — Shall mean that statewide organization
sanctioned by the League of California Cities, or created by statute or
voluntary action, whose purpose is to facilitate the development and
dissemination of uniform rulings or interpretations regarding the
application of utility users taxes to communication services in the State of
California.
NON-UTILITY SERVICE SUPPLIER — Shall mean:
VERTICAL SERVICE — Shall mean an ancillary service that is offered
in connection with one or more telecommunications services, which
offers advanced calling features that allow customers to identify callers
and to manage multiple calls and call connections, including conference
bridging services.
d.
VOICE MAIL SERVICE — Shall mean an ancillary service that enables
the customer to store, send or receive recorded messages. Voice mail
service does not include any vertical services that the customer may be
required to have in order to utilize the voice mail service.
e.
A service supplier, other than a supplier of electric distribution services
to all or a significant portion of the City of Compton, which generates
electricity for the sale to others, and shall include but not be limited to
any publicly-owned electric utility, investor-owned utility, cogenerator,
distributed generation provider, exempt wholesale generator, (15 U.S.C.
Section 79z-5a) municipal utility district, Federal power marketing
a.
§ 3-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-4.2
AO:85
PERSON — Shall mean, without limitation, any domestic, non-profit or
foreign, corporation; firm; association; syndicate; joint stock company;
partnership of any kind; limited liability company; joint venture; club; trust:
Massachusetts business or common law trust; estate; society; cooperative;
receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of
any court; any natural individual; municipal district or municipal
corporation, other than the City of Compton.
PLACE OF PRIMARY USE — Shall mean the street address representative
of where the customer's use of the telecommunications service primarily
occurs, which must be the residential street address or the primary
business street address of the customer.
POST-PAID TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE — Shall mean the
telecommunication service obtained by making a payment on a
communication-by-communication basis either through the use of a credit
card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card, credit card, or
debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not associated
with the origination or termination of the telecommunication service.
PREPAID TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE — Shall mean the right to
access telecommunication services, which must be paid for in advance and
which enables the origination of communications using an access number
or authorization code, whether manually or electronically dialed, and that
is sold in predetermined units or dollars of which the number declines with
use in a known amount.
PRIVATE TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE — Shall mean a
telecommunication service that entitles the customer to exclusive or
priority use of a communications channel or group of channels between or
among termination points, regardless of the manner in which such channel
or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity, extension lines,
stations, and any other associated services that are provided in connection
with the use of such channel or channels. A communications channel is
agency, electric rural cooperative, or other supplier or seller of
electricity;
An electric service provider (ESP), electricity broker, marketer,
aggregator, pool operator, or other electricity supplier other than a
provider of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of
the City of Compton, which sells or supplies electricity or supplemental
services to electricity users within the City of Compton; and
b.
A gas service supplier, aggregator, marketer or broker, other than a
supplier of gas distribution services to all or a significant portion of the
City of Compton, which sells or supplies gas or supplemental services
to gas users within the City of Compton.
c.
A water service supplier, distributor, wholesaler, marketer, or broker,
which sells or supplies water to users within the City of Compton (other
than a supplier of water distribution services to all or a significant
portion of the City of Compton).
d.
§ 3-4.2 COMPTON § 3-4.2
AO:86
a physical or virtual path of communications over which signals are
transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i.e.,
the location where the customer either inputs or receives the
communications).
SERVICE ADDRESS — Shall mean the residential street address or the
business street address of the service user. For a telecommunications
service user, "service address" means either:
SERVICE SUPPLIER — Shall mean any person, including the City of
Compton, who provides or sells telecommunication, electric, gas, or water
service to a user of such services within the City of Compton. The term shall
include any person required to collect, or self-collect under subsection 3-4.6
hereof, and remit a tax as imposed by this Section 3-4, including its billing
agent in the case of electric, gas, or water service suppliers.
SERVICE USER — Shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed by
this Section 3-4.
STATE — Shall mean the State of California.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR — Shall mean the City Controller of the City of
Compton, or his or her authorized representative.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Shall mean the transmission,
conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information
or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology
used, and includes broadband service (e.g., digital subscriber line (DSL),
fiber optic, coaxial cable, and wireless broadband, including Wi-Fi, WiMAX,
and Wireless MESH) to the extent Federal and/or State law permits taxation
of such broadband services, now or in the future. The term
"telecommunications service" includes such transmission, conveyance, or
routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on
the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission,
conveyance or routing without regard to whether such service is referred
to as voice over internet protocol (VoIP) services or is classified by the
Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value added, and
includes video and/or data service that is functionally integrated with
"telecommunication services". Telecommunications services include, but is
not limited to the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on
which such services are calculated or billed: ancillary telecommunication
services; intrastate, interstate and international telecommunication
services; broadband service (to the extent Federal and/or State law permits
The location of the telecommunication equipment from which the
communication originates or terminates, regardless of where the
communication is billed or paid; or
a.
If the location in paragraph a of this definition is unknown (e.g., mobile
telecommunications service or VoIP service), the service address shall
mean the location of the service user's place of primary use.
b.
For prepaid telecommunication service, "service address" shall mean
the location associated with the service number.
c.
§ 3-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-4.2
AO:87
taxation of such service); mobile telecommunications service; prepaid
telecommunication service; post-paid telecommunication service; private
telecommunication service; paging service; 800 service (or any other tollfree
numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission);
900 service (or any other similar numbers designated by the Federal
Communications Commission for services whereby subscribers who call in
to prerecorded or live service); and value-added non-voice data service.
VALUE-ADDED NON-VOICE DATA SERVICE — Shall mean a service that
otherwise meets the definition of "telecommunications services" in which
computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content,
code, or protocol of the information or data primarily for a purpose other
than transmission, conveyance or routing.
§ 3-4.3. Telecommunications Users' Tax. [Ord. #2118, § 1; Ord.
#2139, § 2]
a. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City of Compton
using telecommunication services. The tax imposed by this section shall
be at the rate of 8.5% of the charges made for such services and shall
be collected from the service user by the telecommunication services
supplier or its billing agent. There is a rebuttable presumption that
telecommunication services, which are billed to a billing or service
address in the City of Compton, are used, in whole or in part, within the
City of Compton's boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation
under this section. If the billing address of the service user is different
from the service address, the service address of the service user shall
be used for purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the
term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits,
property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the
service user in exchange for the telecommunication services.
b. "Mobile telecommunications service" shall be sourced in accordance
with the sourcing rules set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications
Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124). The Tax Administrator may issue
and disseminate to telecommunication service suppliers, which are
subject to the tax collection requirements of this section, sourcing rules
for the taxation of other telecommunication services, including but not
limited to post-paid telecommunication services, prepaid
telecommunication services, and private telecommunication services,
provided that such rules are based upon custom and common practice
that further administrative efficiency and minimize multi-jurisdictional
taxation.
c. The Tax Administrator may issue and disseminate to telecommunication
service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements
of this section, an administrative ruling identifying those
telecommunication services, or charges therefor, that is subject to the
tax of paragraph a above. This administrative ruling shall not impose a
new tax, revise an existing tax methodology as stated in this section, or
§ 3-4.2 COMPTON § 3-4.3
AO:88
§ 3-4.4. Electricity Users' Tax. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
increase an existing tax, except as allowed by California Government
Code Section 53750(h)(2)(A).
d. To facilitate the uniform interpretation and application of similar
ordinance provisions in other local jurisdictions in the State, the Tax
Administrator may, prior to issuing and disseminating a sourcing rule or
an administrative tax ruling, submit its proposed sourcing rule or
administrative tax ruling to the municipal organization for review and
comment, according to the rules and procedures of that organization,
or its successor organization.
e. As used in this section, the term "telecommunication services" shall not
include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated
telephones except that where such coin-operated telephone service is
furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such
guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be
included in the base for computing the amount of tax due.
f. To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of telecommunication
services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof
to the Tax Administrator that the service user has previously paid the
same tax in another state or city on such telecommunication services,
shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the
amount of such tax legally imposed in such other State or City;
provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed
to the City of Compton under this section.
g. The tax on telecommunication services imposed by this section shall be
collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of
tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator,
and must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the 20th
day of the following month.
h. Upon a showing of hardship, the Tax Administrator may
administratively delay the implementation of this section until no later
than January 1, 2008. Prior to such time, the Tax Administrator may
administratively permit the telecommunications tax to be applied to
intrastate, interstate, and international telecommunication services in
the same manner as the Federal excise tax was applied to
"communication services" as defined in Sections 4251 and 4252 of the
Internal Revenue Code, and the IRS regulations and rulings pertaining
thereto, prior to May 25, 2006, and regardless of whether charges for
such services are based on time, distance, or on any other basis, and as
such sections are limited by the exceptions of Section 4252(d) and
4253.
a. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using electricity in the
City of Compton. The tax imposed by this subsection shall be at the rate
of 10% of the charges made for such electricity, and for any
§ 3-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-4.4
AO:89
supplemental services or other associated activities directly related to
and/or necessary for the provision of electricity to the service user,
which are provided by a service supplier or non-utility service supplier
to a service user.
b. As used in this subsection, the term "charges" shall apply to all services,
components and items that are: i) necessary or common to the receipt,
use and enjoyment of electric service; or, ii) currently, or historically
have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a
local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term
"charges" shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:
1. Energy charges;
2. Distribution or transmission charges;
3. Metering charges;
4. Standby, reserves, firming, voltage support, regulation, emergency,
or other similar charges for supplemental services to an electric
service user that produces electricity for self-use and is subject to
subsection 3-4.6;
5. Customer charges, late charges, service establishment or
reestablishment charges, demand charges, fuel or other cost
adjustments, power exchange charges, independent system
operator (ISO) charges, stranded investment or competitive
transition charges (CTC), public purpose program charges, nuclear
decommissioning charges, trust transfer amounts (bond financing
charges), franchise fees, franchise surcharges, annual and monthly
charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are
necessary to or common for the receipt, use and enjoyment of
electric service; and
6. Charges, fees, or surcharges for electricity services or programs,
which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission
or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such
charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis
on the customer billing.
c. As used in this subsection, the term "charges" shall include the value of
any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other
consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the
electricity or services related to the provision of such electricity.
d. The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may survey the electric
service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components
of electric retail service that they commonly provide to residential and
commercial/industrial customers in the City of Compton, and the
charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by State or
Federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such electric
service. The Tax Administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to
§ 3-4.4 COMPTON § 3-4.4
AO:90
§ 3-4.5. Gas Users' Tax. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
such electric service providers an administrative ruling identifying
those components and items which are: (i) necessary or common to
the receipt, use or enjoyment of electric service; or, (ii) currently, or
historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric
service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers.
Unbundled charges for such components and items shall be subject to
the tax of paragraph a above.
e. As used in this subsection, the term "using electricity" shall not be
construed to include the mere receiving of such electricity by an
electric public utility or governmental agency at a point within the City
of Compton for resale.
f. The tax on electricity provided by self-production or by a non-utility
service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this Section 3-4 shall be
collected and remitted in the manner set forth in subsection 3-4.6
hereof. All other taxes on charges for electricity imposed by this
subsection shall be collected from the service user by the electric
service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one
month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be received
by the Tax Administrator on or before the 20th day of the following
month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and/or remit
the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured
by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of
the service user, which must be received by the Tax Administrator on or
before the 20th day of following month, provided that the service user
shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate,
within 60 days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved
by the Tax Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax
bill that becomes due.
a. There is imposed a tax upon every person using gas in the City of
Compton which is delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The
tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 10% of the charges
made for such gas, including all services related to the storage,
transportation and delivery of such gas.
b. As used in this subsection, the term "charges" shall apply to all services,
components and items for gas service that are: i) necessary or common
to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; or, ii) currently, or
historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas
service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers.
The term "charges" shall include, but is not limited to, the following
charges:
1. The commodity charges for purchased gas, or the cost of gas
owned by the service user (including the actual costs attributed to
drilling, production, lifting, storage, gathering, trunkline, pipeline,
and other operating costs associated with the production and
§ 3-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-4.5
AO:91
delivery of such gas), which is delivered through a gas pipeline
distribution system;
2. Gas transportation charges (including interstate charges to the
extent not included in commodity charges);
3. Storage charges; provided, however, that the service provider shall
not be required to apply the tax to any charges for gas storage
services when the service providers cannot, as a practical matter,
determine the jurisdiction where such stored gas is ultimately
used; but it shall be the obligation of the service user to self-collect
the amount of tax not applied to any charge for gas storage by the
service supplier and to remit the tax to the appropriate jurisdiction;
4. Capacity or demand charges, late charges, service establishment
or reestablishment charges, marketing charges, administrative
charges, transition charges, customer charges, minimum charges,
annual and monthly charges, and any other charges which are
necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas
service; and
5. Charges, fees, or surcharges for gas services or programs, which
are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such
charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis
on the customer billing.
c. As used in this subsection, the term "charges" shall include the value of
any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other
consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the gas or
services related to the delivery of such gas.
d. The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may survey the gas service
suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of gas
retail service that they commonly provide to residential and
commercial/industrial customers in the City of Compton, and the
charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by State or
Federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such gas
service. The Tax Administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to
such gas service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those
components and items which are: (i) necessary or common to the
receipt, use or enjoyment of gas service; or, (ii) currently, or historically
have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local
distribution company to a class of retail customers. Unbundled charges
for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of paragraph
a above.
e. There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed by this
section is computed:
1. Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through a
pipeline distribution system;
§ 3-4.5 COMPTON § 3-4.5
AO:92
§ 3-4.6. Collection of Tax From Service Users Receiving Direct
Purchase of Gas or Electricity. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
2. Charges made for gas sold for use in the generation of electricity by
a public utility or a governmental agency; and
3. Charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and consumed in
the conduct of the business of gas public utilities.
f. The tax on gas provided by self-production or by a non-utility service
supplier not under the jurisdiction of this Section 3-4 shall be collected
and remitted in the manner set forth in subsection 3-4.6 hereof. All
other taxes on charges for gas imposed by this subsection shall be
collected from the service user by the gas service supplier or its billing
agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the
Tax Administrator, and must be received by the Tax Administrator on or
before the 20th day of the following month; or, at the option of the
person required to collect and/or remit the tax, such person shall remit
an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous
month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be
received by the Tax Administrator on or before the 20th day of the
following month, provided that the service user shall submit an
adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within 60 days
following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the Tax
Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that
becomes due.
a. Any service user subject to the tax imposed by subsections 3-4.4 or
3-4.5 hereof, which produces gas or electricity for self-use; which
receives gas or electricity, including any related supplemental services,
directly from a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of
this Section 3-4; or which, for any other reason, is not having the full tax
collected and remitted by its service supplier, a non-utility service
supplier, or its billing agent on the use of gas or electricity in the City of
Compton, including any related supplemental services, shall report said
fact to the Tax Administrator and shall remit the tax due directly to the
Tax Administrator within 30 days of such use. In lieu of paying said
actual tax, the service user may, at its option, remit to the Tax
Administrator within 30 days for such use an estimated amount of tax
measured by the tax billed in the previous month, or upon the payment
patter of similar customers of the service supplier using similar
amounts of gas or electricity, provided that the service user shall submit
an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within 60
days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the Tax
Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that
becomes due.
b. The Tax Administrator may require said service user to identify its
nonutility service supplier and provide, subject to audit, invoices, books
of account, or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of
gas or electricity used, including any related supplemental services,
§ 3-4.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-4.6
AO:93
§ 3-4.7. Water Users' Tax. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
and the cost or price thereof. If the service user is unable to provide
such satisfactory evidence, or, if the administrative cost of calculating
the tax in the opinion of the Tax Administrator is excessive, the Tax
Administrator may determine the tax by applying the tax rate to the
equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or
electricity used, including any related supplemental services, had been
provided by the service supplier that is the primary supplier of gas or
electricity within the City of Compton. Rate schedules for this purpose
shall be available from the City of Compton.
a. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using water in the
City of Compton which is delivered through a pipeline distribution
system. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 10% of
the charges made for such water.
b. As used in this subsection, the term "charges" shall apply to all services,
components and items that are: i) necessary or common to the receipt,
use and enjoyment of water service; or, ii) currently, or historically have
been, included in a single or bundled rate for water service by a local
distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term "charges"
shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:
1. Water commodity charges (potable and nonpotable);
2. Distribution or transmission charges;
3. Metering charges;
4. Customer charges, late charges, service establishment or
reestablishment charges, franchise fees, franchise surcharges,
annual and monthly charges, and other charges, fees and
surcharges which are necessary for or common to the receipt, use
and enjoyment of water service; and
5. Charges, fees, or surcharges for water services or programs, which
are mandated by a water district or a State or Federal agency,
whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a
bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.
c. As used in this subsection, the term "charges" shall include the value of
any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other
consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the water
services.
d. The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may survey the water service
suppliers in the City of Compton to identify the various unbundled
billing components of water retail service that they commonly provide
to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the City of
Compton, and the charges therefor, including those items that are
mandated by a water district or a State or Federal regulatory agency as
§ 3-4.6 COMPTON § 3-4.7
AO:94
§ 3-4.8. Effect of Commingling Taxable Items with Nontaxable
Items. [Ord. #2118, § 1; Ord. #2139, § 3]
Except as otherwise provided by applicable Federal or State law, if any
nontaxable charges are combined with and not separately stated from
taxable service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier,
the combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies,
by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge
that are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier's books and
records kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. The service supplier has the
burden of proving the proper apportionment of taxable and non-taxable
charges.
§ 3-4.9. Substantial Nexus/Minimum Contacts. [Ord. #2118, § 1;
Ord. #2139, § 4]
For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit
a tax under this Section 3-4, "substantial nexus" and "minimum contacts"
shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or
remittance of the utility users tax to the fullest extent permitted by State
and Federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial
interpretation or by statutory enactment. Any communication service
(including VoIP) used by a person with a service address in the City, which
service is capable of terminating a call to another person on the general
telephone network, shall be subject to a rebuttable presumption that
"substantial nexus/minimum contacts" exists for purposes of imposing a tax,
or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax, under this section.
§ 3-4.10. Constitutional and Statutory Exemptions. [Ord. #2118,
§ 1]
a condition of providing such water service. The Tax Administrator,
thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such water service providers
an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which
are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of water
service; or, (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single
or bundled rate for water service by a local distribution company to a
class of retail customers. Unbundled charges for such components and
items shall be subject to the tax of paragraph a above.
e. There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed by this
section is computed charges made for water which is to be resold and
delivered through a pipeline distribution system.
f. The tax imposed by this subsection shall be collected from the service
user by the service supplier, or its billing agent. The amount collected in
one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the
20th day of the following month, and must be received by Tax
Administrator on or before 20th day of the following month.
§ 3-4.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-4.10
AO:95
§ 3-4.10.5. Low Income Senior Citizen and Disabled Exemptions.
[Ord. #2118, § 1]
a. The taxes imposed by this Section 3-4 shall not apply to:
1. Any person or service if imposition of such tax upon that person or
service would be in violation of a Federal or State statute or the
Constitution of the State of California, or the Constitution of the
United States; or
2. The City of Compton.
b. Any person that is exempt from the tax imposed by this Section 3-4
pursuant to paragraph a above shall file an application with the Tax
Administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement
shall not apply to a service user that is a State or Federal agency or
subdivision with a commonly recognized name, or is a service user of
telephone communication services that has received a Federal excise
tax exemption certificate for such service. Said application shall be
made upon a form approved by the Tax Administrator and shall state
those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the
applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all utility
service suppliers serving the service user. If deemed exempt by the Tax
Administrator, such service user shall give the Tax Administrator timely
written notice of any change in utility service suppliers so that the Tax
Administrator can properly notify the new utility service supplier of the
service user's tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with
this section shall not be entitled to a refund of utility users' taxes
collected and remitted to the Tax Administrator from such service user
as a result of such noncompliance. Upon request of the Tax
Administrator, a service supplier or non-utility service supplier, or their
billing agent, shall provide a list of the names and addresses of those
customers which, according to their billing records, are deemed exempt
from the utility users' tax. With respect to a service user of telephone
communication services, a service supplier of such telephone
communication services doing business in the City of Compton shall,
upon request of the Tax Administrator, provide a copy of the Federal
exemption certificate for each exempt customer within the City of
Compton that is served by such service supplier.
c. The decision of the Tax Administrator may be appealed pursuant to
subsection 3-4.19 hereof. Filing an application with the Tax
Administrator and appeal to the City Manager pursuant to subsection
3-4.19 of this Section 3-4 is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.
a. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to:
(1) Any individual 62 years of age or older who uses telephone,
electric, gas or water services in or upon any residential premises
occupied by such individual, provided the gross total household
combined incomes is equal to or less than the limits for "Very Low
§ 3-4.10 COMPTON § 3-4.10.5
AO:96
Family Income" set by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) in its income limits for public housing and
Section 8 programs and median family incomes for Los Angeles
County; or
(2) Any individual who certified as meeting the criteria of disability as
established by the United States Social Security Administration for
Supplemental Income for a blind or disabled person.
b. To qualify for the exemption set forth in paragraph a of this subsection,
the individual shall file an application in a form, time and manner
prescribed by the Tax Administrator. Applications may be filed at any
time.
c. Applications shall be verified by declaration under penalty of perjury
and shall contain such information as may be required by the Tax
Administrator. The Tax Administrator shall review each application and
shall certify the service user as exempt if the eligibility requirements of
paragraph a of this subsection are met, except that no exemption shall
be granted to a service user who is receiving from a service supplier
through a master meter and no exemption shall be granted with respect
to any tax imposed by Section 3-4 which is or has been paid by a public
agency or where the service user receives funds from a public agency
specifically for the payment of such tax. The decision of the Tax
Administrator regarding an exemption may be appealed pursuant to
subsection 3-4.19 of this Section 3-4. Filing an application with the Tax
Administrator and appeal to the City Manager pursuant to subsection
3-4.19 of this Section 3-4 is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.
d. If a service user is certified as exempt, the Tax Administrator shall
promptly notify service user's service suppliers, stating the name of the
service user, the address to which such exempt service is being
supplied, the account number, if any, and such other information as may
be necessary for the service supplier to remove the exempt service user
from its tax billing procedure. Upon receipt of such notice, the service
supplier shall within 60 days discontinue billing service user for taxes
imposed by this Section 3-4.
e. Exemptions certified by the Tax Administrator shall continue as long as
the facts supporting the qualification for exemption shall exist;
provided, however, that the exemption shall automatically terminate
with the change in the service address or residence of the exempt
individual; and provided, further, such individual may nevertheless
apply for a new exemption with each change of address of residence.
Any service user who has been exempted under this subsection shall
notify the Tax Administrator within 10 days of any change in fact or
circumstance which might disqualify such individual from receiving
such exemption. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly
receive the benefits of the exemption provided by this subsection when
the basis for such exemption either does not exist or ceases to exist.
§ 3-4.10.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-4.10.5
AO:97
§ 3-4.11. Duty to Collect; Procedures. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
f. The Tax Administrator shall have the power and right to demand
evidence of continued eligibility of a service user for exemption under
the provisions of this subsection. Such evidence may include, but need
not be limited to, copies of business records, letter or statements from
the Social Security Administration and State, County, City and private
pension administrators or unemployment and welfare agencies, copies
of income tax returns, and such other evidence concerning the service
user or other members of the service user's household as may tend to
prove or disprove such eligibility. Failure to provide such evidence as is
within the control of a service user to so provide, either directly by the
service user or by the service user's consent or the consent of a member
of the service user's household when such evidence is requested of the
service user in writing by the Tax Administrator, shall be grounds for
the immediate discontinuance of the service user's eligibility for
exemption under the provisions of this section. Evidence provided to
the Tax Administrator at the Tax Administrator's request, or voluntarily
provided to the Tax Administrator by the service user without the Tax
Administrator's request, may not be used against such service as
evidence of violation of the provisions of this subsection. Such evidence
may only be used as grounds for termination of the exemption provided
by this subsection.
a. Collection by Service Suppliers. The duty of service suppliers to collect
and remit the taxes imposed by the provisions of this Section 3-4 shall
be performed as follows:
1. The tax shall be collected by service suppliers insofar as
practicable at the same time as, and along with, the collection of
the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of
the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a
service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax
which was accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of
both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid. In
those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of
refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges, subsection 3-4.14
shall apply.
2. The duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service user
shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing
period applicable to the service user where all charges normally
included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this
Section 3-4. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or
more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect
shall arise separately for each billing period.
b. Filing Return and Payment. Each person required by this Section 3-4 to
remit a tax shall file a return to the Tax Administrator, on forms
approved by the Tax Administrator, on or before the due date. The full
amount of the tax collected shall be included with the return and filed
§ 3-4.10.5 COMPTON § 3-4.11
AO:98
§ 3-4.12. Collection Penalties; Service Suppliers or Self-Collectors.
[Ord. #2118, § 1; Ord. #2139, § 5]
with the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator is authorized to
require such additional information as he or she deems necessary
to determine if the tax is being levied, collected, and remitted in
accordance with this Section 3-4. Returns are due immediately upon
cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Revenue and Tax Code
Section 7284.6, the Tax Administrator, and its agents, shall maintain
such filing returns as confidential information that is exempt from the
disclosure provisions of the Public Records Act.
a. Taxes collected from a service user, or owned by a service user subject
to subsection 3-4.6 hereof, are delinquent if not received by the Tax
Administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a
weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the Tax
Administrator on the first regular working day following the weekend or
legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and
other similar methods of electronically exchanging monies between
financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its
obligations under this subsection shall be considered timely if the
transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles
into the City's account on the following business day.
b. If the person required to collect and/or remit the utility users' tax fails
to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more
services or charges on the customer's billing) or fails to remit the tax
collected on or before the due date, or, in the case of a service user that
fails to properly self-collect and remit the tax under subsection 3-4.6
hereof on or before the due date, the Tax Administrator shall attach a
penalty for such delinquencies or deficiencies at the rate of 15% of the
total tax that is delinquent or deficient in the remittance, and shall pay
interest at the rate of and 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on
the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the
remittance first become delinquent, until paid.
c. The Tax Administrator shall have the power to impose additional
penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes pursuant to
the provisions of this Section 3-4 for fraud or gross negligence in
reporting or remitting at the rate of 15% of the amount of the tax
collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the Tax
Administrator.
d. For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest
that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become a part
of the tax herein required to be paid.
e. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Tax Administrator may, in his or her
discretion, modify the due dates and/or penalty and interest provisions
of this section to be consistent with any uniform standards or
procedures that are mutually agreed upon by UUT public agencies, or
§ 3-4.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-4.12
AO:99
§ 3-4.13. Deficiency Determination and Assessment; Tax Application
Errors. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
otherwise legally established, to create a UUT central payment location
or mechanism.
a. The Tax Administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or
she determines that any person required to collect or self-collect taxes
pursuant to the provisions of this Section 3-4 has failed to collect and
remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply the tax
to one or more taxable services or charges.
b. The Tax Administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency
determination to the person required to pay or remit the tax, which
notice shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest
at the rate of 3/4% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of
the tax from the date on which the tax should have been received by the
City of Compton.
Within 14 calendar days after the date of service of such notice, the
person may request in writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on
the matter. If the person fails to request a hearing within the prescribed
time period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a
final assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the City of
Compton.
c. If the person requests a hearing, the Tax Administrator shall cause the
matter to be set for hearing not later than 30 days after receipt of the
written request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be mailed by the Tax Administrator to such person at least 10
calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the Tax Administrator desires
said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice
may designate the records requested to be produced.
d. At the time fixed for the hearing, the Tax Administrator shall hear all
relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested
parties. At the discretion of the Tax Administrator, the hearing may be
continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the
presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following
the conclusion of the hearing, the Tax Administrator shall issue a final
assessment (or nonassessment), thereafter, by confirming, modifying or
rejecting the original deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of
such final assessment to person owing the tax. The decision of the Tax
Administrator may be appealed pursuant to subsection 3-4.19. Filing an
application with the Tax Administrator and appeal to the City Manager
pursuant to subsection 3-4.19 is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.
e. Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received
by the Tax Administrator on or before the 30th day following the date of
receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency
shall be 15% on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest
§ 3-4.12 COMPTON § 3-4.13
AO:100
§ 3-4.14. Administrative Remedy; Non-paying Service Users. [Ord.
#2118, § 1]
§ 3-4.15. Actions to Collect. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this
Section 3-4 shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the City. Any
such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the
at the rate of 3/4% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount
of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until
paid. The applicable statue of limitations regarding a claim by the City
of Compton seeking payment of a tax assessed under this subsection
3-4.13 shall commence from the date of delinquency as provided in this
paragraph e.
f. All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage
prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day
following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing.
a. Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has
deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user
from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or
whenever the Tax Administrator deems it in the best interest of the City,
he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect the taxes
due under this Section 3-4 from certain named service users for specific
billing periods. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount
of tax owed for a period of two or more billing periods, the service
supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. The
service supplier shall provide the City of Compton with the names and
addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under
the provisions of this Section 3-4.
b. In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency
penalty at the rate of 15% of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay
interest at the rate of 3/4% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the
amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid.
c. The Tax Administrator shall notify the nonpaying service user that the
Tax Administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes
due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including
penalties and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by
personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail,
postage prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which
billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the
service user have a change of address, to his or her last known address.
d. If the service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator within
30 days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, the
Tax Administrator may impose an additional penalty of 15% of the
amount of the total tax that is owed.
§ 3-4.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-4.15
AO:101
Tax Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the City of Compton by
the person required to collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of
the service user. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions
of this Section 3-4 shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the
City of Compton for the recovery of such amount, including penalties and
interest as provided for in this Section 3-4, along with any collection costs
incurred by the City of Compton as a result of the person's noncompliance
with this Section 3-4, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's
fees. In the event that a service user or service supplier owing a tax under
this Section 3-4 files bankruptcy, then such debt to the City of Compton shall
be deemed an unsecured priority excise tax obligation under 11 U.S.C.A.
Section 507(a)(8)(C).
§ 3-4.16. Additional Powers and Duties of the Tax Administrator.
[Ord. #2118, § 1]
a. The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby
directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this Section 3-4.
b. The Tax Administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations
not inconsistent with provisions of this Section 3-4 for the purpose of
interpreting, clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment,
collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such
administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the Tax
Administrator's office. The adoption of an administrative ruling by Tax
Administrator pursuant to this paragraph b shall not constitute an
"extension" or "increase" of the tax imposed by this Section 3-4,
provided that the administrative ruling does not cause the percentage
rate of the tax to exceed the percentage rates set forth in this Section
3-4 (as authorized by California Constitution Chapter XIIIC, Section 2
(d), and California Government Code Section 53750 (h)(2)).
c. Upon a proper showing of good cause, the Tax Administrator may make
administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from
the strict requirements of this Section 3-4 and thereby; (1) conform to
the billing procedures of a particular service supplier (or service user
subject to subsection 3-4.6 hereof) so long as said agreements result in
the collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and
scope of this Section 3-4; or, (2) to avoid a hardship where the
administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the
tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the Tax
Administrator's office, and are voidable by the Tax Administrator or the
City of Compton at any time.
d. The Tax Administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper
compliance with the requirements of this Section 3-4, of any person
required to collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this Section 3-4. The
Tax Administrator shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in
writing. In the absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the
audit period or review shall not exceed a period of three years next
preceding the date of receipt of the written notice by said person from
§ 3-4.15 COMPTON § 3-4.16
AO:102
§ 3-4.17. Records. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
the Tax Administrator. Upon completion of the audit, the Tax
Administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant to
subsection 3-4.13 for all taxes (and applicable penalties and interest)
owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such
person to the Tax Administrator. If said person is unable or unwilling
to provide sufficient records to enable the Tax Administrator to verify
compliance with this Section 3-4, the Tax Administrator is authorized to
make a reasonable estimate of the deficiency. Said reasonable estimate
shall be entitled to be a rebuttable presumption of correctness.
e. Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause, the
Tax Administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required
pursuant to this Section 3-4 for a period of not to exceed 45 days,
provided that the time for filing the required statement has not already
passed when the request is received. No penalty for delinquent
payment shall accrue by reason of such extension. Interest shall accrue
during said extension at the rate of 3/4% per month, prorated for any
portion thereof.
f. The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who
asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this
Section 3-4.
g. The Tax Administrator, with the written approval of the City Attorney,
may compromise a claim pursuant to this Section 3-4 where the portion
of the claim proposed to be released is equal to or less than $4,999;
and, with the approval of the City Attorney and the City Council, may
compromise such a claim where the portion proposed to be released is
greater than $4,999.
h. Notwithstanding any provision in this Section 3-4 to the contrary, the
Tax Administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a
person required to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax
imposed by this Section 3-4 if the noncollection occurred in good faith.
In determining whether the noncollection was in good faith, the Tax
Administrator shall take into consideration industry practice or other
precedence.
a. It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to
the City of Compton any tax imposed by this Section 3-4 to keep and
preserve, for a period of at least three years, all records as may be
necessary to determine the amount of such tax that such person may
have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the Tax
Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right
to inspect at a reasonable time.
b. The Tax Administrator may issue an administrative subpoena to compel
a person to deliver, to the Tax Administrator, copies of all records
deemed necessary by the Tax Administrator to establish compliance
§ 3-4.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-4.17
AO:103
§ 3-4.18. Refunds/Credits. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than
once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the
Tax Administrator under this Chapter, it may be refunded or credited as
provided in this subsection:
with this Section 3-4, including the delivery of records in a common
electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept
electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of
business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to
the Tax Administrator on or before the due date provided in the
administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such
records outside the City of Compton on or before the due date, provided
that such person shall reimburse the City of Compton for all reasonable
travel expenses incurred by the City of Compton to inspect those
records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses,
but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons
designated by the City of Compton to conduct the inspection.
c. The Tax Administrator is authorized to execute a nondisclosure
agreement approved by the City Attorney to protect the confidentiality
of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Tax Code
Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7. The Tax Administrator may request from a
person providing transportation or distribution services of gas or
electricity to service users within the City, a list of the names, billing
and service addresses, quantities of gas or electricity delivered, and
other pertinent information, of its transportation customers within the
City of Compton pursuant to Section 6354(e) of the California Public
Utilities Code.
d. If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill,
collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: (1) provide to
the Tax Administrator the name, address and telephone number of each
billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service
supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the City of Compton; and,
(2) upon request of the Tax Administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery
of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or
billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, is
necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or
remittance of such tax to the City of Compton.
e. If any person subject to record-keeping under this Section 3-4
unreasonably denies the Tax Administrator, or the Tax Administrator's
designated representative, access to such records, or fails to produce
the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the
time specified, the Tax Administrator may impose a penalty of $500 on
such person for each day following: i) the initial date that the person
refuses to provide such access; or, ii) the due date for production of
records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. This penalty shall
be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this Section 3-4.
§ 3-4.17 COMPTON § 3-4.18
AO:104
a. The Tax Administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid or
paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the Tax Administrator under this Section 3-4, provided that
no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the
claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor, or administrator
has submitted a written claim to the Tax Administrator within one year
of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such
claim must clearly establish claimant's right to the refund by written
records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the
filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.
b. The submission of a written claim, which is acted upon by the City
Council, shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See Section 935 of
the California Government Code). The Tax Administrator, or the City
Council where the claim is in excess of $4,995 shall act upon the refund
claim within the time period set forth in Government Code Section
912.4. If the City Council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within
the time prescribed by Government Section 912.4, the claim shall be
deemed to have been rejected by the City Council on the last day of the
period within which the City Council was required to act upon the claim
as provided in Government Code Section 912.4. It is the intent of the
City Council that the one year written claim requirement of this
subsection be given retroactive effect; provided, however, that any
claims which arose prior to the commencement of the one year claims
period of this subsection, and which are not otherwise barred by a then
applicable statue of limitations or claims procedure, must be filed with
the Tax Collector as provided in this subsection within 90 days following
the effective date of this section.23
c. Notwithstanding the notice provisions of paragraph a of this
subsection, a service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in
excess of the amount of tax imposed by this Section 3-4 and actually due
from a service user (whether due to overpayment or erroneous or illegal
collection of said tax), may refund such amount to the service user, or
credit to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the
service supplier, and claim credit for such overpayment against the
amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns to the Tax
Administrator, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later
than one year from the date of overpayment or erroneous or illegal
collection of said tax. The Tax Administrator shall determine the validity
of the service user's claim of credit, and the underlying basis for such
claim.
d. Notwithstanding the notice provisions of paragraph a of this
subsection, in the event that a service supplier, or a service user subject
to subsection 3-4.6 hereof, remits a tax to City in excess of the amount
of tax imposed by this Section 3-4, said service supplier, or service user
subject to subsection 3-4.6 hereof, may claim credit for such
23.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2118, codified herein as Section 3-4, was adopted February 1,
2005.
§ 3-4.18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-4.18
AO:105
§ 3-4.19. Appeals. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other
monthly returns to the Tax Administrator, provided such credit is
claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of
overpayment of said tax. The Tax Administrator shall determine the
validity of the service user's claim of credit, and the underlying basis
for such claim.
e. Notwithstanding other provisions of this subsection, whenever a
service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities
Commission, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility
services, the taxes paid pursuant to this Section 3-4 on the amount of
such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the
service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded
taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly
returns. In the event this section is repealed, the amounts of any
refundable taxes will be borne by the City of Compton.
a. The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a
decision relating to a refund pursuant to subsection 3-4.18 hereof),
deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the
Tax Administrator. Any person aggrieved by any decision (other than a
decision relating to a refund pursuant to subsection 3-4.18 hereof),
deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the
Tax Administrator, shall be required to comply with the appeals
procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a
prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See Government Code Section 935(b).)
Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a
class or group of taxpayers.
b. If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision
relating to a refund pursuant to subsection 3-4.18 hereof), deficiency
determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax
Administrator; he or she may appeal to the City Manager by filing a
notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 14 days of the date of the
decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative
ruling of the Tax Administrator which aggrieved the service user or
service supplier.
c. The matter shall be set for hearing no more than 30 days from the
receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the
time and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least
five calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued
from time to time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the
appealing party, the Tax Administrator, the City Manager, and any other
interested person may present such relevant evidence as he or she may
have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.
d. Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the
City's files, the City Manager shall issue a written notice and order
§ 3-4.18 COMPTON § 3-4.19
AO:106
§ 3-4.20. No Injunction/Writ of Mandate. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this City of
Compton or against any officer of the City of Compton to prevent or enjoin
the collection under this Section 3-4 of any tax or any amount of tax
required to be collected and/or remitted.
§ 3-4.21. Remedies Cumulative. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
All remedies and penalties prescribed by this Section 3-4 or which are
available under any other provision of law or equity, including but not
limited to the California False Claims Act (Government Code Section 12650
et seq.) and the California Unfair Practices Act (Business and Professions
Code Section 17070 et seq.), are cumulative. The use of one or more
remedies by the City of Compton shall not bar the use of any other remedy
for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Section 3-4.
§ 3-4.22. Notice of Changes to Ordinance. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
If a tax under this Section 3-4 is added, repealed, increased, reduced,
or the tax base is changed, the Tax Administrator shall follow the notice
requirements of Public Utilities Code Section 799. Prior to the effective
date of the ordinance change, the service supplier shall provide the Tax
Administrator with a copy of any written procedures describing the
information that the service supplier needs to implement the ordinance
change. If the service supplier fails to provide such written instructions,
the Tax Administrator, or his or her agent, shall send, by first class mail,
a copy of the ordinance change to all collectors and remitters of the City's
utility users taxes according to the latest payment records of the Tax
Administrator.
§ 3-4.23. Future Amendment to Cited Statute. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a State or Federal
statute in this Section 3-4 shall mean such statute as it may be amended
from time to time.
upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the
appeal is taken. The notice shall be given within 14 days after the
conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision.
The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition
for judicial review shall be filed within 90 days from the date of the
decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.
e. All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage
prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day
following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing.
§ 3-4.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-4.24
AO:107
§ 3-4.24. Penalties. [Ord. #2118, § 1]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section 3-4 shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, or an infraction at the discretion of the
City Attorney.
§ 3-4.25. Independent Audit of Tax Collection, Exemption,
Remittance and Expenditure. [Ord. #2139, § 6]
The City shall annually verify that the taxes owed under this section have
been properly applied, exempted, collected, and remitted in accordance
with this section, and properly expended according to applicable municipal
law. The annual verification shall be performed by a qualified independent
third party and the review shall employ reasonable, cost-effective steps to
assure compliance, including the use of sampling audits. The verification
shall not be required of tax remitters where the cost of the verification may
exceed the tax revenues to be reviewed.
§ 3-5. TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX.
§ 3-5.1. Title. [Ord. #2268]
This ordinance shall be known as the Compton Transactions and Use Tax
Ordinance. The City of Compton hereinafter shall be called "City." This
ordinance shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the City.
§ 3-5.2. Operative Date. [Ord. #2268]
"Operative Date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter
commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of this ordinance, the
date of such adoption being as set forth below.24
§ 3-5.3. Purpose. [Ord. #2268]
This ordinance is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes,
and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish
those purposes:
a. To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the
provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of
the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of
Division 2 which authorizes the City to adopt this tax ordinance which
shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure
vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that
purpose.
b. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State
of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
24.Editor's Note: Section 3-5 was adopted June 7, 2016 by Ordinance No. 2268.
§ 3-4.24 COMPTON § 3-5.3
AO:108
§ 3-5.4. Contract with State. [Ord. #2268]
Prior to the operative date, the City shall contract with the State Board
of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and
operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the
City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to
the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the
operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following
the execution of such a contract.
§ 3-5.5. Transactions Tax Rate. [Ord. #2268]
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City
at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all
tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the
operative date of this ordinance.
§ 3-5.6. Place of Sale. [Ord. #2268]
For the purposes of this ordinance, all retail sales are consummated at
the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property
sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination
or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The
gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such
charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place
to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of
business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or
places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under
rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of
Equalization.
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code.
c. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax
and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected
by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully
as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the
existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State
Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California
State Sales and Use Taxes.
d. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be
administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible,
consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and
use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping
upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this ordinance.
§ 3-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-5.7
AO:109
§ 3-5.7. Use Tax Rate. [Ord. #2268]
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption
in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on
and after the operative date of this ordinance for storage, use or other
consumption in said territory at the rate of 1% of the sales price of the
property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges
are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery
is made.
§ 3-5.8. Adoption of Provisions of State Law. [Ord. #2268]
Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance and except insofar as they
are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section
6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted
and made a part of this ordinance as though fully set forth herein.
§ 3-5.9. Limitations on Adoption of State Law and Collection of Use
Taxes. [Ord. #2268]
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code:
a. Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. However, the
substitution shall not be made when:
1. The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of
Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of
California;
2. The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by
or against this City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof
rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this ordinance.
3. In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections
referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California,
where the result of the substitution would be to:
(a) Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain
sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax
while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain
subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or
(b) Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would
§ 3-5.7 COMPTON § 3-5.9
AO:110
§ 3-5.10. Permit Not Required. [Ord. #2268]
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be
required by this ordinance.
§ 3-5.11. Exemptions and Exclusions. [Ord. #2268]
not be subject to tax by the State under the said provision of
that code.
4. In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711,
6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
b. The word "City" shall be substituted for the word "State" in the phrase
"retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the
definition of that phrase in Section 6203.
a. There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and
the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State
of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the
Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of
any state-administered transactions or use tax.
b. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of
transactions tax the gross receipts from:
1. Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed
principally outside the county in which the sale is made and
directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of
this State, the United States, or any foreign government.
2. Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a
point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery
to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the
retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For
the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the City
shall be satisfied:
(a) With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles)
subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing
with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft
licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public
Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under
Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle
Code by registration to an out-of-City address and by a
declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer,
stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of
residence; and
§ 3-5.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-5.11
AO:111
(b) With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out-of-City and declaration under penalty of
perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated
from that address.
3. The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to
furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered
into prior to the operative date of this ordinance.
4. A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease
prior to the operative date of this ordinance.
5. For the purposes of paragraphs b3 and 4 of this subsection, the sale
or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be
obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for
which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right
to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such
right is exercised.
c. There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this ordinance, the
storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal
property:
1. The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
transactions tax under any State-administered transactions and use
tax ordinance.
2. Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and
exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of
persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of
this State, the United States, or any foreign government. This
exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections
6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of
California.
3. If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date
of this ordinance.
4. If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the
tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a
continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for
which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount
fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this ordinance.
5. For the purposes of paragraphs b3 and 4 of this subsection,
storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of
any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be
§ 3-5.11 COMPTON § 3-5.11
AO:112
§ 3-5.12. Amendments. [Ord. #2268]
deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any
period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the
unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice,
whether or not such right is exercised.
6. Except as provided in paragraph 7 below, a retailer engaged in
business in the City shall not be required to collect use tax from the
purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or
delivers the property into the City or participates within the City in
making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to,
soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a
place of business of the retailer in the City or through any
representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in
the City under the authority of the retailer.
7. "A retailer engaged in business in the City" shall also include any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration
pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division
3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section
21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels
registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of
the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax
from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or
aircraft at an address in the City.
d. Any person subject to use tax under this ordinance may credit against
that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid
to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant
to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect
to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other
consumption of which is subject to the use tax.
a. All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance to
Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales
and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7
of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to
Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code,
shall automatically become a part of this ordinance, provided however,
that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax
imposed by this ordinance.
b. Pursuant to California Elections Code Section 9217 or any successor
statute, the City Council of the City of Compton may amend or repeal
this ordinance and any of its exhibits, but not increase the rate of tax
imposed herein, without a vote of the people.
§ 3-5.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-5.13
AO:113
§ 3-5.13. Enjoining Collection Forbidden. [Ord. #2268]
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or the
City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this ordinance, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
§ 3-5.14. Severability. [Ord. #2268]
If any provision of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
§ 3-5.15. Compton Taxpayers Committee. [Ord. #2268]
By no later than January 7, 2017, the City Council shall establish a Compton
Taxpayers Committee to review the expenditure of the revenues collected
pursuant to this ordinance. The Committee shall consist of at least five
members appointed by the City Council. The Committee members shall
be residents in the City. The terms of the Committee members and their
specific duties shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
§ 3-5.16. Independent Financial Audit. [Ord. #2268]
By no later than December 31 of each year, the City's independent auditors
shall complete a Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance Compliance and
Internal Control Audit Report. Such report shall review whether the tax
revenues collected pursuant to this ordinance are collected, managed, and
expended in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
Chapter 4
FISCAL ADMINISTRATION
§ 3-5.13 COMPTON § 3-5.16
AO:114
ARTICLE I
Funds
§ 4-1. SPECIAL GAS TAX IMPROVEMENT FUND.
§ 4-1.1. Creation of Fund. [Ord. #856, § 2510]
There is hereby created in the City Treasury a special fund to be known as
the "Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund," in order to comply with
the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of the Streets and
Highways Code with particular reference to the amendments made thereto
by Chapter 642, Statutes of 1935.
§ 4-1.2. Deposit of Funds. [Ord. #856, § 2511]
All moneys received by the City from the State under the provisions of the
Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interest
therein, or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or
highways other than State highways shall be paid into the fund.
§ 4-1.3. Expenditures. [Ord. #856, § 2512]
All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes
authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1,
Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code.
§ 4-2. CAPITAL OUTLAYS FUND.
§ 4-2.1. Creation of Sewer Construction Fund. [Ord. #856, § 2520]
There is hereby created in the City Treasury a special capital outlays fund
to be known as the Sewer Construction Fund pursuant to Section 1414 of
Article XIV of the City Charter.
§ 4-2.2. Deposit of Funds. [Ord. #856, § 2521]
The sewer connection fees established in this section may be received by
the City Treasurer from property owners whose property will be benefited
by any such sewer, and such fees shall be deposited in the Sewer
Construction Fund.
§ 4-2.3. Expenditures. [Ord. #856, § 2522]
Upon recommendation of the City Engineer and approval by resolution of
the City Council and when money is available in said Sewer Construction
Fund, sewers shall be constructed and paid for from the fund.
§ 4-2.4. Sewer Connections. [Ord. #856, § 2523]
No property shall be connected to any public sewer in the City unless the
owner thereof or his predecessor in interest has heretofore paid a sewer
§ 4-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.4
AO:115
connection fee or has heretofore paid for the construction of the sewer to
which his property is to be connected.
§ 4-2.5. Connection Fees. [Ord. #856, § 2524; Ord. #932; Ord.
#1199]
The sewer connection fees shall be as follows:
$3 per front foot for any lot fronting on any such sewer, when any such
sewer will benefit property owners on both sides of any street; provided,
however, that should any such sewer be so constructed as to benefit
property owners on only one side of any street, the sewer connection fee
shall be $5 per front foot of any property served; provided, further, that in
addition to the charges above set forth in this section, there shall be a $30
fee for house connection line from the sewer to the curb line in front of
the lot in the event it is necessary to construct any such house connection
line. Such fees shall be in addition to any and all other sewer connection or
permit fees established by this Code.
§ 4-2.6. Assessment Maps. [Ord. #856, § 2525]
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to make and maintain a sewer
assessment map and to keep such other books and records as may be
necessary to show and record the existence of any sewer connection fee
that may be established by this section or that may hereafter exist as
the result of the construction of any sewer with money from the Sewer
Construction Fund.
§ 4-3. EMPLOYEES SAVINGS BONDS TRUST FUND.
§ 4-3.1. Pay Roll Deductions. [Ord. #856, § 2540]
Any officer or employee of the City may authorize the purchase, by the City
Treasurer, from trust funds derived through voluntary pay roll deductions,
of United States Savings Bonds or similar United States obligations, on
behalf of and to the credit and for the issuance to such officer or employee.
The authorization for such pay roll deduction shall be in such form as the
City Controller may determine, shall be signed by the officer or employee
and delivered to the City Controller and thereafter, and until revoked or
cancelled by such officer or employee, shall be effective as to each and
every pay roll. Each pay roll upon which any deductions are made as
authorized herein shall be accompanied by a check or demand upon the
Salary Account against which such pay roll is issued in favor of the
"Employees Defense Bonds Trust Fund" established by this section.
§ 4-3.2. Deduction Authorized. [Ord. #856, § 2540.1]
The board, officer or employee having the management or control of any
department or office is hereby authorized and directed, when notified so
to do by the Controller, to make or cause to be made deductions from the
§ 4-2.4 COMPTON § 4-3.2
AO:116
salary of any officer or employee for the payment into the trust fund of
the amounts authorized by the officer or employee to be deducted for the
purchase of the bonds referred to in the preceding section.
§ 4-3.3. Controller's Functions. [Ord. #856, § 2541]
The controller shall perform such duties as may be necessary in the
handling of such deductions and shall perform any allied clerical work
pertaining thereto. He shall deliver to the City Treasurer the checks or
demands drawn in favor of the trust fund under the provision of this section.
§ 4-3.4. Settlements. [Ord. #856, § 2542]
The payment to any officer or employee of a pay roll check or demand
equal to the difference between the salary earned and the deductions made
pursuant to this section, shall constitute a full and complete discharge and
acquittance of all claims and demands whatever for the service rendered by
such employee during the period covered by such pay roll check or demand.
§ 4-3.5. Trust Fund. [Ord. #856, § 2543]
A trust to be designated as "Employees Savings Bonds Trust Fund" is hereby
created and established and the City Treasurer shall administer the same
in accordance with the provisions of this section. It shall be his duty to
receive all amounts deducted from pay rolls as herein provided and place
the same in the trust fund hereby established and to keep separate accounts
showing the amounts which accumulate in the name and to the credit of
each officer or employee authorizing such pay roll deductions. Whenever
there shall accumulate to the credit of any such officer or employee an
amount of money in his respective account sufficient for the purchase of a
United States Savings Bond or bonds, or similar United States obligations
as authorized by such officer or employee, the City Treasurer shall forthwith
purchase and issue to such officer or employee, or to his duly authorized
representative, a bond or bonds or other United States obligations so
purchased by him in his behalf. Before delivering any of the bonds so
purchased, the City Treasurer shall require each such officer or employee,
or his duly authorized representative, to execute proper instruments
evidencing the issuance and delivery of such bonds or similar United States
obligations.
§ 4-3.6. Termination of Employment. [Ord. #856, § 2544]
In the event any officer's or employee's term of service or employment with
the City terminates before the amount of his authorized deductions has
accumulated in his account to an amount sufficient to purchase the bond or
bonds, or in the event of any such payroll deduction is revoked or canceled,
a demand shall be drawn upon such fund for the amount then standing to
the credit of such officer or employee, and such amount shall be delivered
to him upon the closing of such account.
§ 4-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-4
AO:117
§ 4-4. AIR QUALITY IMPROVEMENT TRUST FUND.
§ 4-4.1. Establishment of Fund. [Ord. #1862, § 3]
There is hereby established in the City Treasury a separate interest-bearing
trust fund account to be known as the "Air Quality Improvement Trust
Fund", to be deposited in a financial institution authorized to receive
deposits of City funds, in order to comply with the requirements set forth
in Section 44243 of the California Health and Safety Code in order to
receive fee revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce
air pollution from motor vehicles.
§ 4-4.2. Administration of Vehicle Registration Fee and Transfer of
Funds. [Ord. #1862, § 3]
Upon receipt of additional vehicle registration fees disbursed by the
Southern California Air Quality Management District (District) and remitted
to the City, the City Controller shall deposit such funds into the Air Quality
Improvement Trust Fund. All interest earned by said Fund shall be credited
only to that account.
§ 4-4.3. Expenditure of Fund Revenues. [Ord. #1862, § 3]
All revenues received from the District and deposited in the Fund account
shall be exclusively expended on mobile source air pollution reduction
programs, as defined in Subsection 4-4.4 below. Such revenues shall be
expended within one year of the completion of the programs.
§ 4-4.4. Mobile Source Air Pollution Reduction Programs. [Ord.
#1862, § 3]
Any program or project implemented by the City to reduce air pollution
from motor vehicles which it determines will be consistent with the
California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5
(commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the Health and
Safety Code.
§ 4-4.5. Audits. [Ord. #1862, § 3]
The City consents to an audit of all programs and projects funded by vehicle
registration fee revenues received from the District pursuant to Section
44223 of the Health and Safety Code. The audit shall be conducted by an
independent auditor selected by the District as provided in Section 44244
of the Health and Safety Code.
§ 4-5. through § 4-10. (RESERVED)
§ 4-4 COMPTON § 4-5
AO:118
ARTICLE II
Purchasing
§ 4-11. PURCHASING AND PROCUREMENT SYSTEM; STORAGE
AND SALE OF CITY PERSONAL PROPERTY.25 [Ord. #856, §§ 2600
through 2606; Ord. #986; amended by Ord. #1351, §§ 2607 through
2610; Ord. #1862, § 2; Ord. #2267; 9-17-2019 by Ord. No. 2314]
§ 4-11.1. Purchase Orders.
All purchases made on behalf of the City shall be by purchase order only
issued by the City Manager.
§ 4-11.2. City Controller.
No purchase order shall be issued by the City Manager except upon a
requisition upon which the City Controller shall endorse that there exists
an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which such
purchase is to be charged.
§ 4-11.3. Budget Record.
The City Controller shall maintain a budget record reflecting at all times
the unencumbered appropriation account balances and encumbrances as
shown by unfilled outstanding purchase orders.
§ 4-11.4. Competitive Bids.
a. Informal Bids. Except as otherwise provided in this section, Section
1409 of the City Charter, state or federal law, the purchase of or
contract for supplies, materials, equipment or services having an
estimated value between $10,000 and $25,000 shall be made from the
lowest responsive and responsible bidder pursuant to the procedure set
forth below:
1. At least three vendors shall be solicited to submit bids. This
solicitation requirement may be met if price quotations have been
sought through prices listed on a vendor's Internet website,
provided that the City Manager or his/her authorized designee
reviews and approves such pricing. The names of the vendors
submitting bids and/or vendors whose prices were obtained on the
vendor's website, their respective local addresses, if any, principal
place(s) of business and the date and amount of each bid and/or
website price(s), shall be recorded and maintained as a public
record.
2. Bids and/or website price(s) shall be submitted to the soliciting
department's Manager or his/her authorized designee, who shall
25.Editor's Note: For statutory provisions governing purchase of supplies and equipment, see
Gov. Code § 54201 et seq.
§ 4-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-11.4
AO:119
§ 4-11.5. Lowest Responsible Bidder.
specify the time, place and manner in which bids are to be
submitted.
b. Formal Bids. Except as otherwise provided in this section, Section 1409
of the City Charter, state or federal law, the purchase of or contract for
supplies, materials, equipment or services having an estimated value
greater than $25,000 shall be made from the lowest responsive and
responsible bidder pursuant to the procedure set forth below:
1. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the
supplies, materials, equipment or services to be purchased, shall
state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the
time and place for opening bids. Notices inviting bids shall be
published at least 10 days before the date of the opening of the
bids. Notices shall be published at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation, printed and published in the City, or if there is
none, shall be posted in at least three places in the City that have
been designated by ordinance as the place for posting public
notices. The soliciting department's manager or his/her authorized
designee shall also solicit bids from responsible prospective
suppliers whose names are on the bidders' list or who have made a
written request that their names be added to the bidders' list.
2. When deemed appropriate or otherwise required by local, state
and/or federal laws or regulations, bidder's security shall be
prescribed in the notices inviting bids. The bid security shall be
returned to bidders; provided, however, that a successful bidder
shall forfeit its bid security upon failure to execute the purchase
contract within 10 days after mailing of the notice of award of the
contract.
3. When deemed appropriate or otherwise required by local, state
and/or federal laws or regulations, performance and/or payment
bond(s) shall be required as a condition to the award of a contract.
If a performance and/or payment bond is required, the form and
amount of the bond shall be described in the bid invitation notice.
4. The City Council shall have the right to accept any bid or portion of
bid which it deems to be for the best interests of the City; provided,
however, the City Council may reject any and all bids and in its
discretion re-advertise for bids or, if appropriate, order the
purchase made on the open market.
a. In addition to price, in determining the lowest responsible bidder,
consideration shall be given to the quality and performance of the
supplies to be purchased or services by the vendor. The criteria for
determining the low bid shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
§ 4-11.4 COMPTON § 4-11.5
AO:120
1. The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the contract
or provide the supplies or services required.
2. The ability of the bidder to provide the supplies or services
promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or
interference.
3. The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and
efficiency of the bidder.
4. The quality of the bidder's performance on previous purchases or
contracts with the City.
5. The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance, repair
parts, and services for the use of the supplies or equipment
purchased.
6. Current compliance by the bidder with federal acts and executive
orders and state statutes governing the subject of
nondiscrimination in employment; provided, however, the City
Manager shall recognize as proof of noncompliance only the final
decisions and orders of those federal and state agencies
empowered under the law to make such findings.
7. Certification by the bidder that the bidder shall pursue an
affirmative course of action as required by the affirmative action
guidelines adopted by the City Council reasonably pertaining to the
work of the contract and to the nature and size of the bidder's work
force to ensure that applicants are sought and employed, and that
employees are treated during employment, without regard to their
race, color, national origin or ancestry, or religion. Such specific
guidelines will be adopted by Council resolution from time to time,
identifying the nature and scope of the affirmative action desired
by the City. Such guidelines shall be made available to all persons
desiring to bid on City business.
8. Each bidder shall enclose with its bid a certificate stating whether
the bidder is currently in compliance with all federal and state laws
covering nondiscrimination in employment, and that the bidder will
pursue an affirmative course of action as required by the
affirmative action guidelines provided for in Subsection a6 above of
this section, and resolutions adopted pursuant thereto, and that, if
awarded the contract, it will not discriminate in the employment of
any person under the contract because of the race, color, national
origin or ancestry, or religion of such person, and that the bidder
will participate, if requested, in a pre-award review of his/her/its
qualifications under the provisions of this section.
b. Pursuant to Section 1411 of the Charter, and in accordance with
applicable state or federal law, when making purchases for the City,
local merchants shall be given the preference, quality and price being
equal.
§ 4-11.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-11.6
AO:121
§ 4-11.6. Penalties for Violations of Discrimination and Affirmative
Action Provisions.
§ 4-11.7. Exceptions to Competitive Bidding Requirements.
Except as otherwise provided in Section 1409 of the City Charter, state or
federal law, the competitive bidding requirements of this section shall not
apply in the following circumstances:
a. Any contractor who shall be found in violation of the nondiscrimination
provisions of the Fair Employment Practices Act of the state,26 or
similar provisions of federal law, or executive order in the performance
of any contract with the City thereby shall be found to be in material
breach of such contract, and thereupon the City shall have the power to
cancel, terminate or suspend the contract, in whole or in part, or to
deduct from the amount payable to such contractor the sum of $25 for
each person for each calendar day during which such person was
discriminated against as damages for the breach of contract, or both.
Only a finding of the Fair Employment Practices Commission of the
State or the equivalent federal agency or officer shall constitute
evidence of a violation of contract pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
b. Any contractor who shall be found by the City to be in violation of the
agreement to pursue an affirmative course of action or in violation of
any provisions of the affirmative action guidelines pertaining to the
contract shall be found in material breach of such contract, and
thereupon the City shall have the power to cancel, terminate or suspend
the contract, in whole or in part, or to deduct from the amount payable
to such contractor the sum of $250 for each calendar day during which
the contractor is found to have been in noncompliance as damages for
said breach of contract, or both.
a. Where an emergency is deemed to exist and it is determined that
supplies, materials, equipment or services involving the public health,
safety or welfare would be interrupted if the normal procedures were
followed, provided that all emergency purchases which would
otherwise require bidding procedures made pursuant to this section
shall be submitted to the Council for ratification, if required, at the next
regular Council meeting after the purchase and/or services are
authorized.
b. Where competition is determined to be inadequate or nonexistent; such
as membership in professional organizations, attendance at meetings
or conventions, travel, and when it is determined that only one vendor
is qualified to do the work or provide the product. Use of this exception
shall be justified and documented.
26.Editor's Note: See Gov. Code § 12900 et seq.
§ 4-11.6 COMPTON § 4-11.7
AO:122
§ 4-11.8. Payment of Prevailing Wages Required for Public Works
Projects.
§ 4-11.9. Storage of Materials.
The City Manager shall provide proper facilities for the storage of all
materials, supplies, equipment and other personal property owned by the
City. No such materials, supplies, equipment or other personal property
shall be withdrawn except upon requisition as required by the City
Controller.
§ 4-11.10. Sale of City Personal Property.
Whenever the City has any materials, supplies, equipment or other personal
property which it no longer needs for municipal purposes, or which has
become unfit for use for municipal purposes, the City Manager shall provide
c. The purchase of or contract for supplies, materials, equipment or
services entered into with another governmental or quasi-governmental
entity.
d. Any contract for professional services; such as, but not limited to,
attorneys, physicians, architects, engineers, consultants, accountants,
specialized printers or other individuals or organizations possessing a
high degree of professional, unique, specialized or technical skill or
expertise. Selection of professional services providers shall be on the
basis of demonstrated competence and professional qualifications
necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required at a
fair and reasonable price.
a. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the general rate of per
diem wages, as set forth in Labor Code Section 1770 et seq. or any
successor provision thereto ("prevailing wages"), shall be paid on all
City public works projects. As used in this section, the term 'public
works' shall have the same meaning and shall refer to the same term as
used in Labor Code Section 1782. All notices inviting bids for such
public works projects shall incorporate and provide notification of the
provisions of this section. Nothing in the City Charter, including Section
1409, shall affect the provisions of this section.
b. In accordance with the provisions of Labor Code Section 1782, the
requirement to pay prevailing wages, as set forth above in this section,
does not apply to the following:
1. A contract of $25,000 or less when the contract is for construction
work;
2. A contract of $15,000 or less when the contract is for alteration,
demolition, repair, or maintenance work; or
3. A public works contract that was advertised or awarded prior to
January 1, 2015.
§ 4-11.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-11.10
AO:123
for the sale, donation or destruction of such materials, supplies, equipment
or other personal property by such means as he or she shall find most
advantageous to the City. In the event such materials, supplies, equipment
or other personal property has a sale value of more than $500, the City
Manager shall obtain the consent and approval of the City Council before
authorizing the sale, donation or disposal thereof.
§ 4-12. CONTRACTS; CONTENTS; AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
PROGRAM.
§ 4-12.1. Contracts; City Council Authorization, Execution
Requirements. [Ord. #2245]
a. The City shall not be and is not bound by any contract, except as
otherwise provided herein, unless the same is made in writing, by order
or authorization of the City Council and signed by the City Manager or
by another officer authorized to do so by the City Council. Pursuant to
Section 702 of the Compton City Charter, the approval of the form of
the contract by the City Attorney shall be endorsed thereon before the
same shall be signed on behalf of the City by the City Manager and
attested to by the City Clerk. The City Council, by ordinance or
resolution duly adopted, may authorize the City Manager to bind the
City by written contract or purchase order without previous specific
action of the City Council for the acquisition of equipment, materials,
supplies, labor, services or other items included within the budget
approved by the City Council and may impose a monetary limit upon
such authority.
b. Legislative actions of the City Council awarding a contract shall not
constitute a contract. No contract shall be binding or of any force or
effect until approved by the City Attorney pursuant to Section 702 of
the City Charter and signed by the City Manager.
c. The requirements for City Council approval specified in Paragraph a
above shall apply to all expenditures, extensions, amendments or
renewals of an existing or expired contract or term agreement
whenever the aggregated expenditures under the original contract or
term agreement, or extensions, renewals or amendments exceed (1) the
City Manager's contract approval limit, or (2) the total contract amount
approved by the City Council for such extension, amendment or
renewal in a City resolution.
d. Notwithstanding the aforementioned provisions, it is the intent of this
legislation that the above paragraphs shall not be construed so as to
minimize or diminish in any way the City Council's discretionary
authority to ratify a prior action of the City Manager or his or her
designated City staff.
§ 4-11.10 COMPTON § 4-13
AO:124
§ 4-13. RETURNED CHECKS. [Added by Ord. #1409, § 1205; Ord.
#1570, § 1; Ord. #1658, § 1; Ord. #1862, § 2]
If payment of an amount due the City is tendered by a check or other
commercial paper which fails to clear through the banks and is returned to
the City Treasurer, there shall be assessed a service charge of $10 pursuant
to the established rules and regulations. In addition, the City Treasurer may
refuse to accept personal checks from any payor who has previously made
payment by a check which was returned because of insufficient funds.
§ 4-14. PAYMENT OF CLAIMS AND DEMANDS.27
§ 4-14.1. Damage Claims. [Ord. #856, § 2530; Ord. #1862, § 2]
Whenever it is claimed that any person has been injured or any property
damaged as a result of the dangerous or defective condition of any public
street, highway, building, park, grounds, works or property, a verified claim
for damages must be presented and filed with the City Controller within 60
days after such accident has occurred. Such verified claim shall specify the
name and address of the claimant, the date and place of the accident and
the extent of the injuries or damages received by such person or to such
property and the amount claimed.
§ 4-14.2. Negligence Claims. [Ord. #856, § 2531; Ord. #1862, § 2]
Whenever it is claimed that any person has been injured or any property
damaged as a result of the dangerous or defective condition of any public
street, highway, building, park, grounds, works or property, or the
negligence or carelessness of any officer of the City, a verified claim for
damages must be presented and filed with the City Controller within 60
days after such accident has occurred. Such verified claim shall specify the
name and address of the claimant, the date and place of the accident and
the extent of the injuries or damages received by such person or to such
property and the amount claimed.
§ 4-14.3. Suits on Claims. [Ord. #856, § 2532; Ord. #1862, § 2]
The presentment and filing of such verified claim as herein provided shall be
a condition precedent to the commencement of any action hereunder, and
the failure to present and file such verified claim shall relieve the City and
its officers from any liability and shall constitute a complete defense to any
action for the recovery of any damages claimed.
§ 4-15. FIRST SOURCE HIRING PROGRAM.28
27.Editor's Note: For statutory provisions regarding claims against public entities and
presentation of claims, see §§ 905, 910 et seq.; § 53910 et seq.
28.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ord. #2242.
§ 4-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-15.1
AO:125
§ 4-15.1. Legislative Purpose and Findings. [Ord. #2287]
The City Council finds that the City's low unemployment rate has hampered
the economic vitality of the community and has decreased the social welfare
of local residents. In order to combat the presence of urban blight and
prevent the destabilization of the City at large, the declared purpose of this
section is to increase employment opportunities for qualified local residents
by establishing a First Source Hiring Program that requires certain
contractors to employ up to 50% of qualified local residents for eligible
infrastructure developments within the City as stated in this section.
§ 4-15.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2287]
The following terms and phrases, whenever used in this section, shall be
construed as defined in this section:
CITY — Shall mean the City of Compton, California.
CITY-FUNDED CONSTRUCTION PROJECT — Shall mean any construction
project costing in excess of $1,000,000 that is funded by the City, in whole
or in part, in any form or from any source (i.e. local, county, state, or federal
funding), unless such source of funding contains provisions that expressly
prohibit the application of any provisions of this section.
CONSTRUCTION PROJECT — Shall mean the construction, enlargement,
expansion, improvement (excluding maintenance and repair), or
rehabilitation of any public building, street, drain, sewer, park, playground,
utility or any other City infrastructure, or any portion thereof, and includes,
without limitation, alterations of existing public building, street, drain,
sewer, park, playground, utility or any other City infrastructure, where
such work both requires: (1) any applicable permits; and (2) includes work
performed by contractors that are subject to the California Contractors'
State License Law (California Business and Professions Code § 7000 et
seq.).
CONTRACTOR — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
joint venture or other legal entity that proposes to undertake and execute
activities as related to a construction project.
FIRST SOURCE HIRING AGREEMENT — Shall mean an agreement entered
into between a contractor and the City that implements the First Source
Hiring Program provisions set forth in this section.
FIRST SOURCE HIRING PROGRAM — Shall mean the provisions of this
section and any guidelines or policies adopted by the City to implement this
section.
LOCAL RESIDENT — Shall mean any person whose primary residence is
located in the City of Compton.
LOCAL RESOURCE CENTER — Shall mean that City department,
designated by the City Manager, which is responsible for the administration
of the First Source Hiring Program, including, but not limited to monitoring
§ 4-15.1 COMPTON § 4-15.2
AO:126
compliance with the Program for applicable City-funded construction
projects.
§ 4-15.3. The First Source Hiring Program. [Ord. #2287]
§ 4-15.4. The First Source Hiring Agreement — Contractors
Obligations. [Ord. #2287]
a. The First Source Hiring Program requires all contractors hired by the
City for City-funded construction projects to make a good faith effort to
employ up to 50% of local qualified residents for available job openings.
b. Contractors for City-funded construction projects participating in the
First Source Hiring Program shall enter into a First Source Hiring
Agreement for the duration of the proposed construction project.
c. Contractors who are required to participate in the First Source Hiring
Program may achieve their local qualified resident hiring goal by either
utilizing the Local Resource Center or their own hiring methodology,
provided that such approach can reasonably achieve their hiring goal.
d. Contractors who fail to adhere to the policies and procedures of the
First Source Hiring Program set forth in the First Source Hiring
Agreement may be considered in breach of contract.
a. Prior to the hiring of employees for City-funded construction projects,
the contractor shall notify the Local Resource Center of the following
information:
1. The number of available job openings;
2. A description of such vacancies including, but not limited to job
qualifications and expectations, work salary and schedule, duration
of employment, required standards of appearance, and any other
special requirements (e.g. language skills, drivers' license, etc.);
and
3. Whether it is requested that the Local Resource Center provide the
contractor with a pool of job applicants who are local residents and
qualified to meet the specific needs of contractors for the Cityfunded
Construction Project.
b. Should the contractor decide to use their own hiring processes in order
to comply with the program, the Local Resource Center shall not be
responsible for the recruitment of targeted local resident applicants.
However, the Local Resource Center shall continue to ensure that the
contractor is adhering to the policies and procedures of the First
Source Hiring Program as set forth in the First Source Hiring
Agreement.
c. Once the Local Resource Center has been notified, the contractor and a
specified City designee shall meet and confer to review the rules and
§ 4-15.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-15.4
AO:127
§ 4-15.5. The First Source Hiring Agreement - Local Resource
Center Obligations. [Ord. #2287]
regulations the contractor must follow in order to comply with the First
Source Hiring Agreement.
d. The First Source Hiring Agreement shall at minimum address the
following:
1. The minimum percentage of construction-related payroll that must
be accomplished with local resident employee hours;
2. Definition of "good faith efforts," compliance and required
procedures the contractor must follow in order to fulfill the
requirements of the First Source Hiring Program;
3. Required record-keeping, documentation, and reporting frequency
for demonstrating a contractor's compliance with the First Source
Hiring Agreement; and
4. The schedule within which the above referenced procedures must
be completed.
e. In the event that the contractor has not met the hiring goal, as
established between City and the contractor, the City may require the
contractor to provide reasons why it has not met the goal and the City
may determine, considering the totality of the circumstances, whether
the contractor has nonetheless breached the agreement.
a. Once a contractor of a City-funded construction project has notified the
Local Resource Center of the requisite information and has met and
conferred with a City designee, as stated in Subsection 4-15.4, the
Local Resource Center must abide by the rules and regulations as set
forth by the First Source Hiring Agreement.
b. The First Source Hiring Agreement, as it applies to the Local Resource
Center, shall address at minimum the following:
1. Developing effective outreach, education, and recognition of
contractors that participate in the First Source Hiring Program;
2. The process of how the targeted local resident hiring applicants
that qualify for job openings will be referred to the contractor, and
subsequently hired;
3. Requisite procedures that must be followed in the implementation
of a customized job training program that would provide
specialized training, requested by the contractor, for applicants
they intend to hire tailored to the employer's particular needs;
4. How to monitor the progress of local-resident employees in the
First Source Hiring Program;
§ 4-15.4 COMPTON § 4-15.5
AO:128
§ 4-15.6. Existing Nonconforming Uses. [Ord. #2287 adopted
7-5-2017]
Any contracts for City-funded construction projects existing with the City
prior to the adoption of this section are not required to comply with the First
Source Hiring Program and are not subject to the rules and regulations of
the First Source Hiring Agreement.
§ 4-16. through § 4-21. (RESERVED)
5. The process of assisting contractors with reporting documentation
and responsibilities; and
6. A schedule of when the preparation and submission of compliance
reports are due.
c. Failure of the City to implement any of the activities described in this
section shall not excuse the performance of a contractor of the
obligations set forth in the applicable provisions of the First Source
Hiring Agreement.
§ 4-15.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-16
AO:129

ARTICLE III
Billing Practices
§ 4-22. BILLING PROCEDURE FOR DRUGS OR ALCOHOL RELATED
TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS.
§ 4-22.1. Preparation of Paperwork. [Ord. #1736, § 1; Ord. #1862,
§ 2]
Appropriate paperwork for billing purposes shall be prepared by Police and
Fire personnel responding to all driving under the influence of alcohol and/
or drugs traffic collision accidents.
§ 4-22.2. Billing and Collection. [Ord. #1736, § 2; Ord. #1862, § 2]
After completion the appropriate paperwork will be forwarded to
designated personnel of the Office of the Controller for appropriate billing
and collection of costs related to the driving under the influence of alcohol
and/or drug traffic collision accidents.
§ 4-22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-22.2
AO:131
Chapter 5
PERSONNEL POLICIES
Editor's Note: For statutory provisions regarding the hiring and
promotional practices of municipal employees, see Gov. Code
§§ 50084, 50085, also see § 8310 regarding applications for
employment noting race, sex or marital status. For statutory
provisions granting power to City Council to prescribe the time
and method of paying salaries and wages, see Gov. Code
§§ 37206 — 37208. For statutory provisions authorizing Cities to
establish personnel or civil service systems, see Gov. Code § 45000 et
seq.
§ 5-1. LEAVES OF ABSENCE.
§ 5-1.1. Military Leave. [Ord. #856, § 2210]
All employees of the City who have been or shall be called into, or shall
volunteer for, the army, naval, marine, or other military service branch of
the United States shall be given an indefinite leave of absence from their
employment and shall, during such period of service, retain all of their Civil
Service and seniority rights. Such employees so called into such service
shall, upon the completion thereof, be reinstated to their former positions
or offices and to their former Civil Service standing and seniority provided:
§ 5-2. RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.
§ 5-2.1. Residency Requirements for Certain Personnel. [Added by
Ord. #1484, § 2230]
Every person not employed by the City on September 4, 1975, who is
appointed in any manner to a position in the City service, shall reside,
on the date of such appointment, and shall continue to reside during the
entire period of such employment, within a seven mile radius of the new
Compton City Hall presently under construction in the 200 Block South on
Willowbrook Avenue in the City of Compton.
§ 5-3. SALARY PLAN.
a. An application for reinstatement shall be made within three months
after the date of discharge or release from such service; and
b. Such employee is physically and mentally able to perform the duties
required by such position or office. No such employee shall be entitled
to reinstatement unless he has been honorably discharged or released
from such service.
§ 4-22.2 COMPTON § 5-3.1
AO:132
§ 5-3.1. Salary Schedule. [Ord. #856, §§ 2220 — 2220.1; Ord. #1026;
Ord. #1410, eff. July 1, 1972]
The salary of the classification of the Compton Civil Service System, from
which regular appointments may be made, shall be established in
accordance with the Salary Schedule of the City.
Salary Schedule shall be established by resolution of the Council.
§ 5-3.2. Compensation. [Ord. #856, § 2221; Ord. #1026]
Each officer and employee in the service of the City (other than those
whose compensation is otherwise fixed by Charter, ordinance, or resolution)
shall be entitled to receive, and there shall be paid to him, for his services
the applicable rate of compensation shown in the Basic Five-Step Salary
Schedule prescribed for the range in which his position is allocated.
§ 5-3.3. Original and Promotional Appointments; Rate of
Compensation. [Ord. #856, § 2222; Ord. #1026]
On and after December 16, 1950, in case of original appointment to any
position coming within the purview of the Basic Five-Step Salary Schedule,
the beginning rate of compensation shall be the minimum step; provided,
however, the beginning rate of compensation for such original appointment
may be fixed by the City Manager at any one of the steps within the range
to which such position is allocated if he shall find that the person appointed
a. Basic Five-Step Salary Schedule. The Salary Schedule established by
the Council shall consist of a sequence of ranges, with each range
containing five steps. The steps in each range shall be designated "A",
"B", "C", "D", and "E". Step "A" shall identify the minimum amount of
compensation which shall be the minimum amount in the range. Step
"B" shall identify an amount greater than Step "A"; Step "C" shall be
greater than Step "B"; Step "D" shall be greater than Step "C"; and Step
"E" shall be greater than Step "D". Each step in a range shall relate to
each other step in the range so as to provide an equitable progression
in compensation from Step "A" through Step "E".
The ranges shall be ordered such that the range with the least amount
of compensation for Step "A" shall be designated Range 1, and Range
2 shall be the range with the next lowest compensation prescribed for
Step "A", and Range 3 shall be the range with the next lowest amount
of compensation prescribed for Step "A". This pattern for the order of
ranges shall be continued until all ranges have been placed in proper
sequence. The relationship between ranges shall be such that there is
an equitable progression in compensation from Range 1 through the
highest range.
All amounts of compensation in all steps and in all ranges shall be
related to each other so that there is a consistent and identifiable
pattern to the Basic Five-Step Schedule.
§ 5-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-3.3
AO:133
thereto, because of his experience and ability, is reasonably entitled to a
rate above the minimum, or if he shall find that it is impossible to obtain
qualified appointees for such position at the minimum step. In the case
of promotional appointment to a position allocated to a higher range, the
beginning rate of compensation shall be fixed by the City Manager at a
step within such higher range, which step shall represent an increase in
compensation for the officer or employee so appointed.
§ 5-3.4. Step Advancement. [Ord. #856, § 2223; Ord. #1026; Ord.
#1235]
Advancement from one schedule step to another shall be made effective
automatically at six month intervals from the anniversary date of the officer
or employee affected. "Anniversary date" shall mean the date of the
probationary appointment of the officer or employee in the Classified
Service of the City.
a. Hereafter all step increases shall be made effective at the
commencement of a regular pay period. An advancement from one
scheduled step to another shall occur at the following intervals after
due consideration of the increased service value of the employee to the
City as determined by his conduct, performance, and length of service
and other pertinent facts. Advancements shall be automatic except
where the appointing authority or power evidences in writing that there
is cause for denial of a salary advancement. The time interval for award
of step advancements from the anniversary date of the officer or
employee affected shall be:
Step A Beginning rate
Step B After 6 months in next lower step
Step C After 6 months in next lower step
Step D After 1 year in next lower step
Step E After 1 year in next lower step
"Anniversary date" is defined to mean the date of the probationary
appointment of the officer or employee in the Classified Service of the
City.
b. In such cases wherein an employee shall demonstrate exceptional
ability and proficiency, such person may be advanced to the next higher
step on recommendation by the appointing authority or power and
approval of the City Manager without regard to the minimum length of
service provisions contained in this section. Advancements under this
section shall not change the employee's anniversary date.
c. The salary of any employee may be reduced by one or more steps within
the salary range upon the recommendation of the appointing authority
or power and approval of the City Manager. As respects Department
Heads, such discretion shall be vested solely in the City Manager.
§ 5-3.3 COMPTON § 5-3.4
AO:134
§ 5-3.5. Allocation by Resolution. [Ord. #856, § 2224; Ord. #1026;
amended 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2304]
The Council shall, by resolution that is separate from any resolution of the
City Council adopting the City's fiscal year budget(s), establish and fix the
range for each of the classifications and positions of the City falling within
the purview of the Basic Step Salary Schedule. Such resolution shall also
establish and fix the compensation for such other officers and employees as
may be needed and shall contain such other provisions in regard to standby
pay, hourly rates, overtime pay, and related matters as may be necessary to
establish a fair and equitable compensation plan for all City employees.
§ 5-3.6. New Salary Range. [Ord. #856, § 2225; Ord. #1026;
amended 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2304]
The Council, by resolution that is separate from any resolution of the City
Council adopting the City's fiscal year budget(s), may fix and establish the
salary range of any new or different classification or position at any of the
salary ranges set forth in the Basic Five-Step Salary Schedule.
§ 5-3.7. Changing Salary Range. [Ord. #856, § 2226; Ord. #1026;
amended 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2304]
The Council is hereby authorized and empowered to change by resolution,
that is separate from any resolution of the City Council adopting the City's
fiscal year budget(s), the salary range or ranges for any or all classifications
or positions in the City employment to any other salary range or ranges set
forth in the Basic Five-Step Salary Schedule.
§ 5-3.8. Training of Law Enforcement Officers. [Added by Ord.
#1192, § 2228]
Pursuant to Section 13522 of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California
Penal Code, the City of Compton, while receiving aid from the State of
California pursuant to said Chapter 1, will adhere to the standards for
recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace
Officer Standards and Training.
§ 5-3.9. Training of Public Safety Dispatchers. [Added by Ord.
#1827, § 1]
The provisions of Subsection 5-3.4 shall be applicable as respects appointments
occurring prior to the adoption hereof and shall continue in effect until such
time as each such employee is assigned to the Range Number in Paragraph a
of this subsection as the same is provided for above in Paragraph a.
a. The City of Compton will adhere to the standards for recruitment and
training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer
Standards and Training for the Public Safety Dispatcher Program while
§ 5-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-3.9
AO:135
§ 5-4. RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
§ 5-4.1. California Public Employee's Retirement System. [New;
Ord. #1716; Ord. #1748; Ord. #1807; Ord. #2060]
The City of Compton has entered into a contract with the Board of
Administration of the California Public Employee's Retirement System.
These contracts and contract amendments are on file in the Office of the
City Clerk.
§ 5-5. ANTI-NEPOTISM POLICY.
§ 5-5.1. Hiring on Basis of Merit. [Ord. #1704, § 1; Ord. #1791, § 1]
The City of Compton shall not permit the hiring of any person as an
employee on the basis of consanguinity or favoritism to the appointing
authority.
§ 5-5.2. Restrictions on Family Members. [Ord. #1704, § 2; Ord.
#1791, § 1; Ord. #2030, § 1]
No person shall be appointed, promoted, demoted, reemployed, reinstated
or transferred to a salaried position in which he/she is directly supervised
by or would be the direct supervisor of a member of his/her immediate
family. In the event that a direct supervisory relationship is established by
marriage, the City Manager shall ascertain whether such an employment
relationship would present a conflict of interest between the City and the
related employees, and otherwise make a decision as to any appropriate
personnel action on an individual case basis.
§ 5-5.3. Restrictions on Family Members of the City Council and
City Manager. [Ord. #1704, § 3; Ord. #1791, § 1; Ord. #2030, § 2]
The City Council shall not appoint any person to the position of City
Manager if that person is a member of the immediate family of the Mayor
or the City Council.
§ 5-5.4. (Reserved)29
receiving aid from the State of California pursuant to Chapter 1 of Title
4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code.
b. The Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training or its
representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate to
ascertain that the City of Compton's Police Department public safety
dispatcher personnel are adhering to standards for selection and
training established by the Commission.
§ 5-3.9 COMPTON § 5-5.5
AO:136
§ 5-5.5. Exemption. [Ord. #1791, § 1]
Notwithstanding Subsection 5-5.4, IDB's or loans to individuals or
businesses where the City of Compton retains no financial interest or
management say so over the business are exempt from this section.
§ 5-5.6. Section Shall be Prospective. [Ord. #1791, § 1]
This section shall be prospective and not retroactive.
§ 5-5.7. Definition of Immediate Family. [Ord. #1791, § 1; Ord.
#2030, § 4]
IMMEDIATE FAMILY – Shall include the following: spouse, mother, father,
sister, brother, child, grandchild, aunt, uncle, niece and nephew.
Chapter 6
ELECTION PROCEDURE
§ 6-1. PROVIDING FOR ELECTIONS. [Ord. #856, § 2700]
Except as otherwise provided by the Constitution of the State, the City
Charter, or by the provisions of this Chapter, all elections shall be held in
accordance with the provisions of the Elections Code of the State applicable
to municipal elections.
§ 6-2. CALLING ELECTIONS; ESTABLISHING ELECTION
PRECINCTS. [Ord. #856, § 2701; Ord. #923]
The Council shall by ordinance order the holding of all primary nominating,
general municipal, and special elections. Every such ordinance shall specify
the object and time of holding any such election and shall establish the
election precincts, designate the polling places therefor, and name the
officers of election for each precinct, who shall be residents and qualified
electors thereto, to conduct the holding of and make returns of such
elections; provided, however, that when two or more municipal elections
are consolidated by the City Council it shall not be necessary to set forth
the precinct, polling places and officers of election in more than one of
the ordinances calling the election, and in case a municipal election is
consolidated with a State or County election it shall not be necessary to
set forth the precinct, polling places and officers of elections, but reference
may be made to the ordinance of the authority calling said election and
fixing precincts, polling places and officers of election and unless otherwise
designated in the ordinance adopted by the Council calling an election, the
voting precincts of such election shall be the precincts provided by law for
the holding of State and County elections in said City.
29.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 5-5.4, Conflict of Interest, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 1791 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
2030.
§ 5-5.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-3
AO:137
§ 6-3. APPOINTING ELECTION OFFICERS. [Ord. #856, § 2702]
The officers of election for each precinct shall consist of at least one
inspector, one judge and two clerks and the City Clerk shall select and
appoint such officers of election with the approval of the City Council.
§ 6-4. CANVASS OF RETURNS. [Ord. #856, § 2703]
The Council shall canvass the returns at their next regular or adjourned
regular meeting after all returns have been received or accounted for by the
City Clerk or at any special meeting held for that purpose.
§ 6-5. EMPLOY EXTRA HELP. [Ord. #856, § 2704]
The City Clerk shall employ such persons in addition to the persons
regularly employed in his office as may be necessary to assist him in the
performance of any duty imposed upon him by the Charter of the City, this
Chapter or the Council in connection with the conduct of any election.
§ 6-6. through 6-7. (RESERVED)30
§ 6-8. PUBLISHING NOTICE OF ELECTION. [Ord. #856, § 2707;
Ord. #1573; Ord. #1864, § 2; Ord. #1925, § 1; Ord. #1927, § 1]
Not earlier than the 113th day nor later than the 86th day before the
primary nominating election to be held on the third Tuesday in April, and
not earlier than the 10th day before any general municipal election, the
City Clerk shall cause a notice of the same to be published at least once in
an official newspaper in the City; provided, however, that where a special
municipal election is consolidated with a primary nominating election or
a general municipal election, notice thereof may be consolidated with the
notice of such primary nominating election or general municipal election,
otherwise such notice shall be published not earlier than the 60th nor later
than the 12th day prior to the holding of such special municipal election. An
ordinance calling an election shall be published at least once in the official
newspaper within 15 days after its adoption.
§ 6-9. FORM OF NOMINATION PAPERS AND AFFIDAVITS. [Ord.
#856, § 2708]
The name of no candidate for nomination shall be printed upon the primary
nominating election ballot unless a petition for nomination substantially in
the form provided in the Election Code for the nomination of candidates
for municipal offices shall have been filed with the City Clerk. Provided,
however, that the Affidavit of Nominee shall be substantially in the following
form:
30.Editor's Note: Former Sections 6-6 and 6-7 pertaining to municipal judges, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 856, were repealed in their
entirety by Ordinance No. 1864.
§ 6-3 COMPTON § 6-9
AO:138
AFFIDAVIT OF NOMINEE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA as.
COUNTY OF
______________________ being duly sworn, says;
That he is the above-named nominee for the office of
__________________________, that he will accept the office in the event of his
election, and that he desires his name to appear on the ballot as follows:
(Print name above)
Signature
Subscribed and sworn to before me this ____________ day of ____________,
20_______
Notary Public in and for said County
and State.
A candidate who is running for the same elective office as he then holds
may at the time of the taking out of his nominating petition, file a written
request that immediately underneath his name and not separated therefrom
by any line be printed, the word "Incumbent" or the words designating such
elective office; and no candidate excepting an incumbent shall have any
designation other than his name.
The name of the incumbent shall appear first upon a list of all candidates
for any office, and all other candidates for such office shall appear in
alphabetical order.
§ 6-10. SIGNATURES REQUIRED. [Ord. #856, § 2709; Ord. #1573]
Each candidate shall be nominated by not less than 20 nor more than
30 qualified electors but only one candidate shall be named in any one
nomination paper. No elector may sign more than one nomination paper for
the same office, but each seat on the Council shall be deemed a separate
office. Any qualified elector may circulate a nomination petition. In the
event there are full terms and short terms to be filled, the same must be so
specified.
§ 6-11. DATE OF FILING. [Ord. #856, § 2710; Ord. #1573; Ord.
#1864, § 2; Ord. #1925, § 1; Ord. #1927, § 1]
The nomination petitions shall be presented to the City Clerk not earlier
than the 113th day nor later than 5:00 p.m. of the 86th day prior to the
primary nominating election.
§ 6-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-12
AO:139
§ 6-12. PETITIONS CHECKED BY CITY CLERK. [Ord. #856, § 2711;
Ord. #1864, § 2]
The City Clerk or his/her designee, shall, immediately upon the presentation
to him/her of a petition, ascertain and determine whether or not the petition
is signed by the requisite number of qualified electors, and shall within
five days after the presentation of such petition to him/her, compare the
signatures affixed to the nominating petition with those on the affidavit of
record on file in the Los Angeles County Registrar-Recorder's Office and
void any signature on the nomination paper which does not compare with
that on the affidavit of record on file with the Los Angeles County Registrar-
Recorder's Office. After such examination has been completed, but within
five days of presentation of the nominating petition, the City Clerk shall affix
his/her certificate showing the results of said examination.
§ 6-13. AMENDED PETITION. [Ord. #856, § 2712]
If by the City Clerk's certificate it shall appear that the petition has not
been signed by the requisite number of qualified electors it may be amended
within five days from the date of said certificate by the further addition of
names. Said City Clerk shall within five days after such amendment make
like examination of the amended petition and shall certify as to the result
of his examination of the amended petition, but no further amendment shall
be allowed; and provided, further, that no amendment to such petition shall
be allowed after the expiration of the time for filing nomination petitions as
herein provided.
§ 6-14. PETITIONS FILED. [Ord. #856, § 2713]
If either the original or amended petition shall be found to be sufficiently
signed as herein provided the same shall be filed by the City Clerk. Said
petition when filed shall not be withdrawn or added to and no signature
shall be withdrawn after presentation to the City Clerk.
§ 6-15. (RESERVED)31
§ 6-16. PROCESSING FEES. [Ord. #856, § 2715; Ord. #1462; Ord.
#1517; Ord. #2129, §§ 1, 2]
At the time a nominating petition is taken out by a candidate for any elective
office, such candidate shall pay to the City Clerk a processing fee of $300.
If a candidate chooses not to pay the candidate processing fee provided
for in this section, such candidate shall, at the time of filing his or her
declaration of intention to become a candidate for office, declare in writing,
upon a form prepared by the City Clerk, the intention to submit an
additional petition containing the signatures of 300 qualified, registered
31.Editor's Note: Former Section 6-15, Judicial Offices Designated, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance No. 856, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 1864.
§ 6-12 COMPTON § 6-16
AO:140
electors of the City supporting his or her candidacy for such office. In
the case of a candidate for the office of a member of the Council, such
signatures shall also be those of qualified, registered electors of the district
from which such person seeks to be elected.
Such petitions and the signatures thereon shall be in addition to the
nominating petitions and signatures required by the City Charter, and no
name which appears on a candidate's nominating petition and is counted to
meet the requisite number of qualified electors which must appear thereon
shall be counted as a part of the additional petition. Such petitions shall
be prepared in a form substantially similar to those of nominating petitions
and shall be issued to those candidates who elect not to pay the processing
fee provided for in this section. Such petitions shall be prepared, issued,
circulated, signed, filed, checked, certified, supplemented, and otherwise
handled within the same times and subject to the same procedures,
limitations, and requirements as nominating petitions. In determining the
sufficiency of the number of signatures on a candidate's additional petition,
the City Clerk shall include thereon those signatures of qualified, registered
electors which appear on the candidate's nominating petition but which
are in excess of the required 300 signatures and which otherwise meet the
requirements of this section.
In the event a candidate who initially chooses not to pay the processing
fee determines not to file the additional petition with the City Clerk, such
candidate may, at or before the time of filing the nominating petition, pay
the full $300 processing fee.
No person who fails to comply with the requirements of this section shall
have his or her name placed on the ballot as a candidate for City office.
The $300 processing fee is non-refundable.
§ 6-17. ELECTION SUPPLIES. [Ord. #856, § 2716]
The City Clerk shall provide all ballots, blanks, and other supplies to be
used in any election, and all the necessary expenses therefor shall be paid
out of the City Treasury in the same manner and by the same officers as is
provided by the City Charter.
§ 6-18. SAMPLE BALLOTS. [Ord. #856, § 2717]
Sample ballots need not be printed or distributed for a primary nominating,
general, or special municipal election, except when such election pertains
to an initiative, referendum, or recall measure, or when so instructed by the
Council.
§ 6-19. POLLING PLACE CARDS. [Ord. #856, § 2718]
Except when so instructed by the Council, polling place cards need not
be printed or distributed for a primary nominating, general, or special
municipal election, unless it is intended, for the holding of that election, to
§ 6-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-19
AO:141
consolidate some of the regular election precincts last established for State
or County election purposes, in which event the City Clerk shall prepare
polling place cards and mail them to the voters in the same manner as at
general elections.
§ 6-20. CANDIDATES ELECTED AT PRIMARY NOMINATING
ELECTIONS. [Ord. #856, § 2719]
Any candidate who, at the primary nominating election, shall receive a
majority of all the ballots cast for candidates for the office for which such
candidate seeks nomination shall be elected to such office.
§ 6-21. CANDIDATE RESIDENCY. [Ord. #856, § 2720; Added by Ord.
#1678]
Each candidate for City Council shall be a resident of the district for which
he/she seeks election, for at least 30 days prior to filing their nomination
papers.
Each candidate seeking election to the offices of Mayor, City Clerk, City
Treasurer and City Attorney shall be a resident of the City of Compton at
least 30 days prior to filing their nomination petition.
§ 6-22. SPECIAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS ON CHARTER
PROPOSALS.
§ 6-22.1. Charter Proposals. [Ord. #2290]
A Special Municipal Election on a Charter proposal is not required to be
held on the date of an established statewide general election, an established
statewide primary election, or a regularly scheduled General Municipal
Election, and may be held on any established election date as provided by
California Elections Code Section 1000.
§ 6-22.2. Conduct of Election. [Ord. #2290]
In all particulars not recited in this Ordinance No. 2290 or in a Council
resolution ordering a Charter proposal to be submitted to the voters of the
City, the Special Municipal Election on such a proposal shall be held and
conducted as provided by law for holding municipal elections.
Chapter 7
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 7-1. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
§ 6-19 COMPTON § 7-1.1
AO:142
§ 7-1.1. Declaration of Purpose and Intent. [Added by Ord. #1577,
§ 4700]
This Chapter provides minimum standards in order to safeguard the
environment, general health, safety, welfare and peace and tranquility of
the Citizens of the City of Compton. It is the intent of the City Council to
recognize the rights of its citizens to be protected from visual blight, from
destruction or depreciation of property values, private and public, real and
personal; and from destruction of the beauty of the City.
§ 7-1.2. (Reserved)32
§ 7-1.3. Supplemental to Other Codes and Statutes. [Added by Ord.
#1577, § 4700.2]
This Chapter is not the exclusive regulation of public or private nuisances.
It shall be supplemental and in addition to other regulatory codes, statutes
and resolutions heretofore enacted by the City, state or other legal entity or
agency having jurisdiction.
§ 7-1.4. Public Nuisance.33 [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4701]
The Commission of an act or acts forbidden by this Chapter, or the failure
to act where required by this Chapter to so act, shall constitute a public
nuisance, as defined in § 7-13 and is punishable as set out in Subsection
7-1.6a and b.
§ 7-1.5. Penalties for Violations. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4701.1]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be liable to the penalty
established in Chapter 1, § 1-6.
§ 7-1.6. Enforcement. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4701.2]
The provisions of this Chapter may be enforced by the alternative remedies
of:
a. Summary Abatement of the Nuisance. Any act, acts or failures to act
which constitute a public nuisance, as defined above, may be summarily
abated by the Building and Safety Department at the direction of the
Police Department, the Fire Department, the Public Works Department,
Los Angeles Health Department, of the office of the City Attorney, at the
expense of the person committing, maintaining or causing the nuisance;
and the expense may be defrayed by a placing of a lien against the
property on which the nuisance was maintained or committed and a
32.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 7-1.2, Administration, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1577 and 2085, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2173. See § 8-2 for Municipal Law Enforcement Departments.
33.Editor's Note: Authority of city governments to provide for the summary abatement of
nuisances, Gov. Code § 38773.
§ 7-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-1.6
AO:143
§ 7-1.7. Procedure for Levying Against Real Property. [Added by
Ord. #1577, § 4701.3]
The procedure for levying against real property to recover the costs
incurred by the abatement of a nuisance shall be set out in § 7-20, Weed and
Rubbish Abatement.
§ 7-1.8. Permit: City Council Approval; Procedures. [Added by Ord.
#1577, § 4701.4]
Unless otherwise indicated herein, where a permit is required to carry on
a designated activity, the City Council may issue a permit upon the written
application of any person or group. Such application shall contain the name,
address, telephone number, purpose and duration of the permit period, and
any other information which the Council may use to consider issuing a
permit. The Council may deny such permit if facts or evidence are presented
by others which tend in fact to show that the issuance of such permit may
harm the health, welfare or safety of the citizens.
§ 7-2. MINORS — LOITERING AND CURFEW.34
§ 7-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2054, § 1]
The definitions set forth in this section shall govern the application and
interpretation of this section.
personal obligation against the property owner becomes outstanding;
or
b. Commencement of Civil or Criminal Proceedings. The City Attorney, at
the direction of the City Council, shall commence civil or criminal
proceedings to abate a public nuisance in accordance with applicable
provisions of the Civil and Penal Code of the State of California.
a. EMERGENCY – Shall mean an unforeseen circumstance or
circumstances or the resulting situation that calls for immediate action
to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. The term includes, but is
not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or
loss of life.
b. ESTABLISHMENT – Shall mean any privately owned place of business
to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of
amusement, entertainment, or recreation.
c. GUARDIAN – Shall mean:
1. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
34.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1, 780, 856,
1401, 1417, 1681, 1970, 1982 and 1993.
§ 7-1.6 COMPTON § 7-2.1
AO:144
§ 7-2.2. Curfew Restrictions. [Ord. #2054, § 1]
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to be in any public
place within the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the
date immediately following, except as provided under Subsection 7-2.3.
§ 7-2.3. Curfew Restrictions — Exemptions. [Ord. #2054, § 1]
A minor under the age of 18 years shall not be in violation of Subsection
7-2.2 if, at the time the minor was stopped by a peace officer, the minor was:
2. A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court; or
3. A person who is at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent
or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
d. MINOR – Shall mean any person under 18 years of age.
e. PARENT – Shall mean a person who is a natural parent, adoptive
parent, or stepparent of a minor.
f. PUBLIC PLACE – Shall mean:
1. Any out-of-door area to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access, including, but not limited to, streets,
highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public
grounds; and
2. The out-of-doors common areas of establishments, including, but
not limited to, entryways and parking lots.
g. SCHOOL – As used herein, shall mean and has reference to the actual
school the minor is assigned to under the State of California
Compulsory Education System or the school to which he or she should
be assigned and otherwise attending pursuant to the State of California
Compulsory Education System.
h. SERIOUS BODILY INJURY – Shall mean bodily injury that creates a
substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent
disfigurement, or protracted loss of impairment of the function of any
bodily member or organ.
a. Accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian or other adult person
having the legal care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse 18
years of age or older; or
b. On an errand directed by his or her parent or legal guardian or other
adult person having legal care or custody of the minor, or by his or her
spouse 18 years of age or older; or
c. Driving or riding in a motor vehicle or riding on public transportation;
or
§ 7-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-2.3
AO:145
§ 7-2.4. Daytime Loitering by Minors. [Ord. #2054, § 1]
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years, who is subject to
compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education to be in any
public place within the City between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. of
the same day, on days when the minor's school is in session.
§ 7-2.5. Daytime Loitering — Exemptions. [Ord. #2054, § 1]
A minor under the age of 18 years shall not be in violation of Subsection
7-2.4 if, at the time the minor was stopped by a peace officer, the minor was/
is:
d. Engaged in a lawful volunteer or paid employment activity, or going to
or returning home from a lawful volunteer or paid employment activity;
or
e. In active military service of the United States; or
f. Acting in response to an emergency; or
g. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence which is immediately adjacent to the minor's residence; or
h. Attending or going to or returning home from a school, religious,
cultural, sports, amusement, entertainment, or recreation activity; or
any organized rally, demonstration, meeting or similar activity; or
i. Waiting at a train or bus station for transportation; or
j. Emancipated in accordance with the California Family Code or other
applicable state law.
a. Accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person
having the care or custody of the minor; or
b. On an errand directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult
person having care or custody of the minor; or
c. Going to or coming directly from or to their place of lawful volunteer or
paid employment activity or to or from a medical appointment; or
d. In possession of a valid, school issued, off-campus permit; giving
permission to leave school campus for lunch or school related activity;
or
e. In possession of a written excuse from his or her parent, guardian or
other adult person having care or custody of the minor; or
f. Attending or going directly to or returning from a school, religious,
cultural, sports, amusement, entertainment, or recreation activity; or
any organized rally, demonstration, meeting or similar activity;
provided such meeting, event or activity is a school-approved activity
§ 7-2.3 COMPTON § 7-2.5
AO:146
§ 7-2.6. Constitutional Rights. [Ord. #2054, § 1]
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to preclude minors from being
in a public place for the purpose of exercising the rights guaranteed by the
United States Constitution and by the California Constitution, including the
free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, the right of assembly, and the
right to petition.
§ 7-2.7. Enforcement, Penalties — Infraction. [Ord. #2054, § 1]
§ 7-2.8. Truancy Program. [Ord. #2079, § 1]
§ 7-3. GRAFFITI PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REMOVAL.35
§ 7-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1968, § 1]
GRAFFITI — Shall mean any unauthorized inscription, word, figure or
design which is marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any
structural component or any building structure, or other facility regardless
of the nature of the material of that structural component.
for the minor or is otherwise supervised by school personnel of the
minor's school; or
g. Receiving instruction by a qualified tutor pursuant to California
Education Code § 48224, or is otherwise exempt from attendance at a
public or private full-time day school as set forth in the Education Code;
or
h. During such time the minor is not required to be in school.
a. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a peace officer
shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public
place.
b. The peace officer shall not take enforcement action under this section
unless the officer has probable cause to believe that neither Subsection
7-2.3, 7-2.5 or 7-2.6 applies.
c. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, when a person under
the age of 18 years is charged with a violation of this Code, and a peace
officer issues a notice to appear in Superior Court to that minor, the
charge shall be deemed an infraction unless the minor requests that a
petition be filed under section 601 or 602 of the Welfare and Institutions
Code. The amount of the fine imposed shall be set by the Court.
a. The Truancy Program is for youth ages 6-18.
b. The enrollment fee of $25 is due within 48 hours of being referred by
the juvenile court system.
35.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 1578.
§ 7-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-3.1
AO:147
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT — Shall mean a marking pen with a tip exceeding
four millimeters in width containing anything other than a solution which
can be removed with water after it dries; a paint stick; any spray container
containing any fluid which will leave a permanent mark after it dries; other
than an aerosol container of paint; or a deodorant stick, or a deodorant rollon,
which has been modified with an opaque colorant.
LOT — Shall mean a lot, parcel, tract, premises or piece of land, improved
or unimproved, in the City.
OWNER — As used in this section, shall mean any person so designated on
the last equalized assessment roll and also any person having or claiming to
have any legal interest in the premises.
POSTED — Shall mean a sign placed in a reasonable location or locations
stating it is a misdemeanor to possess a graffiti implement in such public
facility, park, playground, swimming pool, or recreational area without valid
authorization.
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY — Shall mean and include, but is not
limited to, block and wood fences, garages, single and multiple dwellings,
office buildings and stores.
§ 7-3.2. Declaration of Nuisance. [Ord. #1968, § 1]
Pursuant to California Government Code § 38771, the City Council hereby
declares the maintenance of graffiti visible from a public street or alley to
constitute a nuisance, the abatement of which shall be provided as set forth
within.
§ 7-3.3. Duty of Lot Owner. [Ord. #1968, § 1]
It shall be the duty of both the owner of the lot and any person who may
be in possession or who has a right to such possession, to at all times keep
such lot clean and free from graffiti.
§ 7-3.4. Defacing Public and Private Property. [Ord. #1968, § 1]
No person shall paint, mar or use other liquid substances to maliciously
deface any public property. Nor shall any person maliciously deface
privately owned property by use of paint or other liquid substance, whether
such property be occupied, vacated or abandoned, without consent of the
owner of such property or the person with right of possession.
§ 7-3.5. Sale and Possession of Aerosol Cans Containing Paint or
Other Liquid Substance Capable of Defacing Property Prohibited.
[Ord. #1968, § 1]
a. Sale or Purchase of Spray Paint. It is unlawful for any person to sell,
exchange, give or loan, or cause or permit to be sold, exchanged, given
or loaned, any pressurized can containing any substance commonly
known as paint, dye, or other liquid substance as defined above to
anyone under the age of 18 years. It is unlawful for anyone under the
§ 7-3.1 COMPTON § 7-3.5
AO:148
§ 7-3.6. Regulation of Aerosol Container Sales; Storage
Requirements. [Ord. #1968, § 1]
Any business or establishment offering for sale to the public aerosol paint
containers shall keep, maintain and store such aerosol paint containers in a
place that is locked and secure or otherwise made unavailable to the public.
§ 7-3.7. Prohibition of Spray Paint in Public Parks and Building.
[Ord. #1968, § 1]
It is unlawful for any person to have in his possession any pressurized
can containing any substance commonly known as paint or dye while in
any public park, playground, swimming pool, recreation facility (other than
a highway, street, alley or way), except authorized employees of the City
of Compton or an individual or company under contract with the City of
Compton.
§ 7-3.8. Graffiti Implements — Public Areas. [Ord. #1968, § 1]
It is unlawful for any person to carry on his or her person and in plain view
to the public a graffiti implement while in any posted public facility, park,
playground, swimming pool or recreational area, other than a highway,
street, alley or way, unless he or she has first received valid authorization
from the governmental entity which has jurisdiction over the public area.
§ 7-3.9. Graffiti Implements — Minors. [Ord. #1968, § 1]
It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess a
graffiti implement for the purpose of defacing property while on any public
highway, street, alley, or way, or other public place, regardless of whether
that person is in any automobile, vehicle, or other conveyance.
§ 7-3.10. Responsibility of Perpetrator. [Ord. #1968, § 1]
Any person applying graffiti on City-owned property or within the
unincorporated area of the City shall have the duty to remove same within
24 hours after notice by the City or the private owner of the property
involved. The removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the
designated agent of the City Manager and may be deemed by the City to
satisfy any payment or penalty that might otherwise be imposed.
age of 18 years to purchase any pressurized can containing paint or
dye.
b. Possession of Spray Paint by Minors. It is unlawful for any person under
the age of 18 to have in his possession any pressurized can containing
any substance commonly known as paint, dye or other liquid substance,
as defined above, while on any public highway, street, alley or way,
park, playground, swimming pool or other public place whether such
person is or is not in any automobile, vehicle or other conveyance.
§ 7-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-3.11
AO:149
§ 7-3.11. Responsibility of Parents. [Ord. #1968, § 1]
§ 7-3.12. Abatement by the City — Private Property; Businesses.
[Ord. #1968, § 1]
If there is graffiti on private property of a business that is visible from the
street, upon written notice, the property owner, or individual in possession
of the property, has 24 hours to remove the graffiti at the property owner's
expense. In the event the graffiti is not removed or otherwise eliminated or
abated by the date specified in the notice, the City, or its contractor, may
enter upon the parcel and remove the graffiti.
§ 7-3.13. Abatement by the City — Private Property; Residences.
[Ord. #1968, § 1]
If there is graffiti on the private property of a residence that is visible
from the street, upon written notice, the property owner, or individual
in possession of the property, has 72 hours to remove the graffiti at the
property owner's expense. In the event the graffiti is not removed or
otherwise eliminated or abated by the date specified in the notice or
posting, the City, or its contractor, may enter upon the parcel and remove
the graffiti.
a. Pursuant to Section 1714.1 (b) of the California Civil Code, every parent
or legal guardian having custody or control of a minor who defaces
property by inscribing graffiti thereon shall be jointly and severally
liable with the minor for such damages not to exceed $10,000 for each
act of defacement. In addition, such parent or legal guardian shall be
jointly and severally responsible for any fine, restitution and/or
community service imposed resulting from liability.
b. Any parent or guardian found liable for this offense shall perform 20
hours of community service per count which shall be determined by the
City of Compton. Any minor found liable for this offense shall perform
40 hours of community service per count which shall be determined by
the City of Compton. All community service hours shall be in addition
to, and/or include, any fines and/or restitution imposed.
a. If the graffiti abatement is performed by a City department, the City
shall bill the owner for the cost of removal, or other elimination or
abatement of the nuisance, including administrative costs. An itemized
report showing the date and cost of abatement work done by the City
together with a proposed assessment with respect to the parcel
involved, shall be submitted to the department. Payment for the cost of
abatement and recovery of the cost from the property owner shall be
pursuant to Subsection 7-1.7 and § 7-20 of this Code.
b. The aforementioned abatement procedures are in addition to any other
remedy the department may choose to pursue to eliminate the nuisance
conditions.
§ 7-3.11 COMPTON § 7-3.13
AO:150
§ 7-3.14. Funds for Graffiti Removal. [Ord. #1968, § 1]
The City may appropriate money from the General Fund to be used to
remove graffiti or other inscribed material from public or privately owned
permanent structures located on public or privately owned real property
within the City.
§ 7-3.15. Limited Use. [Ord. #1968, § 1]
The funds authorized by the provisions of Subsection 7-3.8 shall be used
only for the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material itself and not
for the painting or repair of a more extensive area.
§ 7-3.16. Findings Necessary. [Ord. #1968, § 1]
The removal of graffiti may be performed only after a finding by the City
that the graffiti or other inscribed material is obnoxious and, in the case of
a publicly-owned structure, only after securing the consent of the owner.
Failure of any person to remove the graffiti or to pay for its removal shall
constitute an additional violation of this Chapter. Every person who defaces
property by inscribing graffiti thereon shall be liable for any resulting
damages incurred by the property owner in an amount not to exceed
$10,000 for each such act of defacement.
§ 7-3.17. (Reserved)
§ 7-3.18. Remedy Cumulative. [Ord. #1968, § 1]
The remedies provided in this Chapter are in addition to other remedies and
penalties available under the Compton Municipal Code and the laws of the
State of California.
§ 7-3.19. Misdemeanor. [Ord. #1968, § 1]
Any violation of the foregoing sections shall be a misdemeanor, punishable
by fine or imprisonment or both as set out in Chapter 1, § 1-6.
§ 7-4. FIREARMS.
§ 7-4.1. Discharge of Firearms Prohibited; Exceptions. [Ord. #856,
§ 3600]
No person shall discharge any firearm loaded with a missile. This Chapter
shall not apply to police officers in the discharge of their duties nor to
c. If at the time of removal of the graffiti the owner or occupants object,
then the City will immediately obtain the necessary consent, warrants,
or court order prior to completion of the graffiti removal. This section
should not be administered in any way that would violate the
constitutional rights of any person.
§ 7-3.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-4.1
AO:151
any person acting in self-defense. This section shall not apply to shooting
galleries or rifle ranges being operated under a permit and license duly
issued by the City under the licensing Chapter of this Code.
§ 7-4.2. Rifle Range Permit. [Ord. #856, § 3601]
Any person desiring to maintain a rifle range shall make application to the
Chief of Police for a permit to maintain such rifle range. The application
shall set forth in particular the proposed location. If, upon investigation
by the Chief of Police, it appears that the rifle range could be maintained
without danger to the public, the Chief of Police may issue a permit therefor,
upon such terms and conditions as in his opinion will properly safeguard
persons and property.
§ 7-4.3. Air Weapons. [Ord. #856, § 3602]
No person shall fire, discharge or use any air rifle, pistol or other weapon
operated or controlled by means of air compression or plunger.
§ 7-4.4. Sale to Minors. [Ord. #856, § 3603]
No person shall sell, exchange, give or loan to any person under 18 years
of age any gun, revolver, pistol or firearm of any description or any spring
or air gun designed or intended to discharge any shot or other deadly
or dangerous missile, or any ammunition, cartridge, shell, or other device
containing any explosive substance designed and intended for use in any
weapons enumerated herein.
§ 7-4.5. Possession of Firearms by Minors. [Ord. #856, § 3603.1]
No person under 18 years of age shall have in his possession, care, custody
or control any article or thing mentioned in the preceding section.
§ 7-4.6. Threats with Replica Firearms. [Ord. #1756, § 1]
a. Definitions. As used in this subsection:
1. REPLICA FIREARM – Shall include any device or object made of
plastic, wood, metal or any other material which is a facsimile or
toy version of, or is otherwise recognizable as, a pistol, revolver,
shotgun, sawed-off shotgun, rifle, machine gun, rocket launcher, or
any other firearm as that term is used under the provisions of
Sections 12001, 12001.5, 12020(d)(1), and 12570 of the State
Penal Code.
2. FIREARM – Shall be the same as the meaning of that term under
the State Dangerous Weapons Control laws and shall include air
rifles, pellet guns or BB guns.
b. Every person who, except in self defense, in the presence of any other
person, draws, exhibits or brandishes a replica firearm or who
simulates a firearm in a rude, angry and threatening manner, or who in
§ 7-4.1 COMPTON § 7-4.6
AO:152
§ 7-4.7. Ammunition Sales. [Added by Ord. #1835, § 2]
§ 7-4.8. (Reserved)36
§ 7-5. LOITERING BY CRIMINAL STREET GANGS.
§ 7-5.1. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. #2078, § 1]
any manner, unlawfully uses the same in any fight or quarrel and causes
the victim to reasonably believe that the person is actually in possession
of any operable firearm is guilty of a misdemeanor.
a. The term "firearm ammunition" as used in this section, shall include any
ammunition for use in pistols, revolvers, rifles, shot guns, or any other
device designed to be used as a weapon from which is expelled a
projectile by the force of any explosion or other form of combustion.
b. Except as specified in Paragraph c and d, no person, including retail
gun dealers, shall sell, give, lend or transfer ownership of any firearm
ammunition during the period of seven days prior to the first day of
January of each year, or on the first day of January of each year or
during the seven days prior to the Fourth of July of each year or on the
Fourth day of July of each year.
c. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the sale or transfer of
ownership of firearm ammunition by a wholesale gun dealer to a retail
gun dealer, or of ammunition requested by Section 12324 of the Penal
Code of the State of California.
d. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit sale to or acquisition by any
person described in Section 12302 or 12322 of the Penal Code of the
State of California.
e. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the sale of any
firearm ammunition when such sale is prohibited by Sections 12303,
12303.6, 12304 or 12321 of the Penal Code of the State of California, or
is otherwise prohibited by Chapter 2.5, - Title 2, Part 4, of the Penal
Code of the State of California.
a. It is unlawful for any person who is a member of a "criminal street
gang" as that term is defined in California Penal Code § 186.22(f) or
who is in the company of or acting in concert with a member of a
"criminal street gang" to loiter or idle in a "public place" as defined in
Subsection 7-5.1b under any of the following circumstances:
1. With the intent to publicize a criminal street gang's dominance over
certain territory in order to intimidate non-members of the gang
36.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 7-4.8, Saturday Night Specials - Sale Prohibited,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1948, was repealed in
its entirety by Ordinance No. 2082.
§ 7-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-5.1
AO:153
§ 7-5.2. Powers of Law Enforcement Officers Not Limited. [Ord.
#2078, § 1]
Nothing in this section shall be construed in any way to limit the power
or right of a law enforcement officer to make any investigation, detention
or arrest as such law enforcement officer would be permitted to make in
absence of this section.
§ 7-5.3. Parental Control. [Ord. #2078, § 1]
Any parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by
said parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of a minor, who
knowingly permits or by insufficient control allows a minor to violate the
provisions of this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 7-5.4. Penalty. [Ord. #2078, § 1]
Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000
or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both.
§ 7-6. GAMBLING.
§ 7-6.1. Definitions. [Ord. #856, § 4200.1; Ord. #997]
As used in this section:
POOL ROOM — Shall mean a room, place, or portion thereof, where betting
or laying of wagers upon the result of races or contests is carried on as a
business.
§ 7-6.2. Gambling Devices. [Ord. #856, §§ 4200 — 4201; Ord. #997]
Any machine, contrivance, appliance, device, game, ticket, chance, share,
interest, instrument or article operated, used, kept, possessed, placed or
maintained in violation of the provisions of:
from entering, remaining in, or using the public place or adjacent
area;
2. With the intent to conceal ongoing commerce in illegal drugs or
other unlawful activity.
b. For the purposes of this section, a "public place" means the public way
and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately
owned, including, but not limited to any street, sidewalk, avenue,
highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground or other public ground
or public building, any common area of a school, hospital, apartment
house, office building, transport facility, shop, privately owned place of
business, to which the public is invited, including any place of
amusement, entertainment, or eating place. Any "public place" also
includes the front yard area, driveway and walkway of any private
residence, business or apartment house.
§ 7-5.1 COMPTON § 7-6.2
AO:154
§ 7-6.3. Abatement. [Ord. #856, § 4202; Ord. #997]
Any article declared by Subsection 7-6.2 to be a nuisance as a result of the
operation, use, keeping, possession, playing, or maintaining of which any
person has been convicted, or has pleaded guilty to any violation of any
law of this state, or any of the provisions of this Code, or any ordinance of
this City, shall be destroyed by the Chief of Police after such plea or after
judgment of conviction becomes final. Such article and the contents thereof
shall be destroyed, provided, however, that any money so declared to be a
nuisance shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City.
If any article subject to destruction, as herein provided, is in the custody
of any court within the City, the Chief of Police shall cause an application
to be made to such court for an order releasing such article to him for the
purpose of complying with this section.
§ 7-6.4. Gambling. [Ord. #856, § 4203; Ord. #997]
No person shall play or bet at or against any game not mentioned in Section
330 or 330a of the Penal Code of the State of California, which is played,
operated, conducted, dealt, or carried on with cards, dice, billiard balls,
pool balls, cues, or other devices for money, checks, chips, credit, or any
other representative of value, or for any merchandise, or any other thing of
value.
§ 7-6.5. Use of Premises. [Ord. #856, § 4202; Ord. #997]
No person either as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, shall permit
any house, room, apartment, office, or place owned by him or under his
charge, management, or control, in the City to be used in whole or in
part for playing, operating, conducting, dealing, or carrying on therein, any
game or device not mentioned in Section 330 or 330a of the Penal Code of
the State of California with cards, dice, billiard balls, cues, or other device
for money, checks, chips, credit, or any other representative of value, or for
merchandise, or any other thing of value.
§ 7-6.6. Maintaining Premises. [Ord. #856, § 4205; Ord. #997]
No person either as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, shall keep,
conduct, or maintain within the City any house, room, apartment, office
or place used in whole or in part as a place where any game or device
not mentioned in Section 330 or 330a of the Penal Code of the State of
California is played, operated, conducted, dealt, or carried on with cards,
a. Section 330a of the Penal Code of the state; or
b. Any section enumerated in Part 1, Title 9 of the Penal Code of the State
of California; or
c. The provisions of this Chapter; hereby is declared to be a nuisance and
shall be subject to abatement as provided in this Chapter.
§ 7-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-6.6
AO:155
dice, billiard balls, pool balls, cues, or other device, for money, checks,
chips, credit, or any other representative of value, or for any merchandise
or any other thing of value.
§ 7-6.7. Frequenting Premises. [Ord. #856, § 4206; Ord. #997]
No person shall visit, frequent, or be present at or within any house, room,
apartment, office or place used in whole or in part as a place where any
game or device is played, operated, conducted, dealt, or carried on with
cards, dice, billiard balls, pool balls, or other devices for money, checks,
chips, credit or any other representative of value or for any merchandise or
any other thing of value, including but not limited to the games prohibited
by Section 330 of the Penal Code of the State of California and including
but not limited to the games and devices prohibited by Section 330a of said
Code.
§ 7-6.8. Lookouts. [Ord. #856, § 4207; Ord. #997]
No person shall act as a yard lookout, doorman, or watchman of or for
any house, room, apartment, office, or place used in whole or in part as a
place where any game or device is played, operated, conducted, dealt, or
carried on with cards, dice, billiard balls, pool balls, cues, or other device
for money, checks, chips, credit, or any other representative of value or
for any merchandise or any other thing of value including but not limited
to the games prohibited by Section 330 of the Penal Code of the State of
California and including but not limited to the games and devices prohibited
by Section 330a of this Code; nor shall any person give any signal intended
to warn, for the purpose of warning, or calculated to warn, or give any
warning of the approach of any peace officer to any person in or about any
card club, or such house, room, apartment, office, or place so used.
§ 7-6.9. Mechanically or Electronically Operated Amusement
Machines. [Ord. #856, § 4208; Ord. #997; Ord. #1103; Ord. #1227;
Ord. #1635, § 1; Ord. #1646, § 1; Ord. #1720, § 1]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to operate
any mechanically or electronically operated amusement machine in any
liquor store as defined in § 30-3 unless accompanied by a parent or
guardian.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or possess any
mechanically or electronically operated amusement machine in any
place of business or in any place of public resort without having first
obtained a Conditional Use Permit for Amusement machines —
accessory use, amusement machine sales, or an arcade under the
provisions of § 9-4 shall be obtained for an arcade.
c. The following provisions shall apply to any place of business or to any
place of public resort that has first obtained a conditional use permit for
amusement machines — accessory use under the provisions of § 30-26.
§ 7-6.6 COMPTON § 7-6.9
AO:156
§ 7-6.10. Bookmaking; Leasing of Property For. [Ord. #856, § 4209;
Ord. #997]
No person shall let or lease any telegraph or telephone line or wire knowing
that it is to be used for the purpose of conducting or carrying on a pool
1. No person shall keep, maintain or possess more than two of the
same or different kinds of mechanically or electronically operated
amusement machines in the place of business or public resort
licensed for amusement machines — accessory use; and
2. No person shall keep, maintain or possess any mechanically or
electronically operated amusement machine within 15 feet of any
public entrance to such place of business or public resort.
d. No more than five arcades shall be permitted within the City, the
location of which shall be regulated in the following manner:
1. No more than one arcade shall be permitted in the Central
Business District; and
2. No more than two arcades shall be permitted in any Councilmatic
District provided that no arcade, other than that referred to in
Paragraph d1 above, shall be located within one mile of the
intersection of Willowbrook Avenue and Compton Boulevard.
e. For any place of business or public resort that has first obtained a
conditional use permit under the provisions of § 30-26 and a permit of
the Council under the provisions of § 9-4 for an arcade, no person shall
keep, maintain or possess less than 20 of the same or different kinds of
mechanically or electronically operated amusement machines (in
operable condition) in the place of business or public resort licensed as
an arcade.
f. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or possess in any
place of business or public resort any mechanically or electronically
operated amusement machine without a City of Compton license sticker
affixed thereto and clearly visible.
g. In the event that a conditional use permit for amusement machine sales
has first been obtained under the provisions of § 30-26 the provisions of
this section shall not apply to the keeping, possession, or exhibiting of
any such mechanically or electronically operated amusement machines
in any mercantile store in which such amusement machines are kept
solely for sale and which amusement machines members of the public
are not permitted or allowed to operate, manipulate, or play except as
incident to a demonstration for the purpose of sale of such amusement
machines.
h. Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this section shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 per day
per machine found to be in violation.
§ 7-6.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-6.10
AO:157
room, or for the purpose of conducting the business of making book or
selling pools on races or other contests, or of betting or laying wagers upon
the result of any race or contest. No person shall transmit any message over
any telephone or telegraph line or wire owned, controlled or leased by any
person engaged in conducting or carrying on a pool room or in conducting
the business of making book or selling pools on races or other contests, or of
betting or laying of wagers upon the result of any race or contest, knowing
that such message is to be used in conducting or carrying on such pool room
or business.
§ 7-6.11. Tip Sheets. [Ord. #856, § 4210; Ord. #997]
No person engaged in conducting or carrying on a pool room or in
conducting the business of making book or selling pools or races, or the
betting or laying of wagers upon the results of any race or contest, shall
have in possession any written or printed form, chart, table, list sheet,
circular or publication of any kind giving or purporting to give, any list
of entries for any horse race or other contest thereafter anywhere to take
place, if there be written or printed or published as part thereof, any tip,
information, prediction, or selection of, or advice as to, or any key, cipher, or
cryptogram indicating, containing or giving any tip, information, publication
or selection of, or advice as to the winner or probable winner, or a loser or
probable loser, or the result or probable result of any such race or other
contest or the standing or probable standing of any horse or contestant
therein or any statement as to, or comment upon, or reference to, the
form, condition or standing of any horse or other contestant, or the actual,
probable or possible result of any race or contest, or the actual, probable or
possible state, past, present or future, of the betting, wagering or odds upon
or against any horse or other contestant named in such list, or probable or
possible list, or entries unless the names of such horses or other contestants
shall be arranged in such list, or probable or possible list, in alphabetical
order, and shall all be printed in type of the same size and face and of
identical appearance, and shall all be printed flush with the left side of the
column in which the same are printed, or all an equal distance therefrom.
§ 7-6.12. Paraphernalia. [Ord. #856, § 4211; Ord. #997]
No person shall have in his possession any book, paper, apparatus, device
or paraphernalia for the purpose of recording or registering any bet or
any purported bet or wage, or any purported wager, upon the result, or
purported result, of any trial, or purported trial, or contest or purported
contest, of skill, speed, power or endurance of man or beast, or between
men, beasts, or mechanical apparatus, or upon the result, or purported
result of any lot, chance, casualty, or contingent event whatsoever.
§ 7-6.13. Keeping and Maintaining of Fighting Animals and
Gamecocks. [Ord. #1866, §§ 1 — 5]
a. Definition. Fighting animals or birds shall mean any bird or animal that
engages in an exhibition of fighting with the like kind of animals or
§ 7-6.10 COMPTON § 7-6.13
AO:158
§ 7-7. IMMORALITY.
§ 7-7.1. Obscene Pictures, Etc. [Ord. #856, § 4400]
No person shall write, compose, stereotype, print, publish, sell, distribute,
keep for sale, or exhibit any obscene or indecent writing, paper or book;
or design, copy, draw, engrave, paint or otherwise prepare any obscene or
indecent picture or print; or mold, cut, cast, or otherwise make any obscene
or indecent figure.
§ 7-7.2. Public Lodgings, Registrations Required. [Ord. #2241]
creature or causes any such animal to fight with a different kind of
animal or creature including but not limited to:
1. Cock - the male of the chicken; rooster.
2. Gamecock - a specifically bred rooster trained for cockfighting.
3. Birds of prey - any of a number of birds as the eagle, hawk, owl, etc.
that feed upon mammals and other birds, which they capture and
kill.
4. Dogs.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the fighting of animals or
birds to include cock fighting on any premises under his charge or
control; and any person who aids, abets or is present at such fighting as
a spectator.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in his
possession or under his control within the City to include the Richland
Farms area; any fighting cock, fighting animals, or fighting birds,
gamecock, or birds of prey.
d. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in his
possession or under his control cock fighting implements commonly
known as gaffs or slashers or any other sharp implement designed to be
attached in place of the natural spur of a gamecock or other fighting
bird.
e. The penalty for the violation of this subsection is a misdemeanor and
will include the confiscation of the fighting cocks animals, and fighting
implements.
a. Register Required. Every person conducting any motel, hotel or lodging
house in the City shall at all times keep and maintain therein a register,
in which shall be inscribed with ink or indelible pencil, the name, and
complete residence address of each guest or person renting or
occupying a room therein. Such register shall be signed by each person
renting or occupying a room, and the proprietor or the proprietor's
agent of such motel, hotel, or lodging house, shall thereupon write
§ 7-6.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.2
AO:159
§ 7-7.3. Declaration of Policy Against Prostitution. [Ord. #2124, § 1]
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City that the existence of
prostitution is a public nuisance and creates a visible negative impact on
the community. Prostitution is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare
of the citizenry and in the public interest shall be prohibited.
§ 7-7.4. Definitions. [Ord. #2124, § 1]
For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
opposite such name or names so registered the number of each room
assigned to or occupied by such guest or occupant, together with the
time when such room is rented; and until all of such entries shall
have been made in such register, no such person shall be suffered or
permitted to occupy any room in such motel, hotel, or lodging house.
When the occupant or occupants of each room so rented shall quit and
surrender the same, it shall be the further duty of the proprietor or
proprietor's agent to enter the time thereof in such register opposite
the name of such occupant or occupants. Such register shall be
preserved for at least three years after it is filled with registrations or
after the discontinuance of its use as a register.
b. Alterations, Inspection of Register. It shall be unlawful to erase a name
or names or address or addresses or to permit such an erasure or to
otherwise alter any entry on the register required by Compton
Municipal Code Subsection 7-7.2 made for any purpose. Such register
shall be at all times open to the inspection of any duly authorized
representative of the City.
c. Registering Under Fictitious Name Prohibited. No person shall write or
cause to be written or knowingly permit to be written in any register in
any motel, lodging house or hotel, any name or designation other than
the true name of the person registering therein, or the name by which
such person is generally known.
d. Repeated Use Prohibited. No person conducting any motel, hotel or
lodging house shall permit more than one rental or occupancy of any
room in said hotel, motel, or lodging house to commence between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. of one day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
e. Hourly Rates Prohibited. No person or agent of such person conducting
any hotel, motel or other lodging house shall let any room for sleeping
or lodging purposes for hourly or other short-term rates (less that 24
hours) or in any way advertise that any room is available at hourly or
other short-time rate.
f. Subletting Prohibited. No person hiring a room in any hotel, motel, or
other lodging house in the City shall rent or sublet said room to any
other person.
§ 7-7.2 COMPTON § 7-7.4
AO:160
§ 7-7.5. Prostitution Prohibited. [Ord. #2124, § 1]
Any person who solicits or agrees to engage in an act of prostitution is in
violation of this section. A person agrees to engage in an act of prostitution
when, with specific intent to so engage, he or she manifests an acceptance
of an offer or solicitation to so engage, regardless of whether the offer or
solicitation was made by a person who also possessed the specific intent
to engage in prostitution. An agreement to engage in an act of prostitution
shall not constitute a violation of this section unless some act, in addition to
the agreement, is done within this City in furtherance of the commission of
an act of prostitution by the person agreeing to engage in that act.
§ 7-7.6. Loitering for Prostitution Prohibited. [Ord. #2124, § 1]
a. COMMIT PROSTITUTION – Shall mean to engage in sexual conduct for
money or other consideration, but does not include sexual conduct
engaged in as part of any stage performance, play, or other
entertainment open to the public.
b. PUBLIC PLACE – Shall mean an area open to the public, or an alley,
plaza, park driveway, or a parking lot, or an automobile, whether
moving or not, or a building open to the general public, including one
which serves food or drink, or provides entertainment, or the doorways
and entrances to a building or dwelling, or the grounds enclosing a
building or dwelling.
c. LOITER – Shall mean to delay or linger without a lawful purpose for
being on the property and for the purpose of committing a crime as
opportunity may be discovered.
d. CITY ATTORNEY – Shall mean the City Attorney for the City of Compton
or a duly authorized Deputy City Attorney.
a. It is unlawful for any person to loiter in any public place with the intent
to commit prostitution. This intent is evidenced by acting in a manner
and under the circumstances, which openly demonstrate the purpose of
inducing, enticing, or soliciting prostitution, or procuring another to
commit prostitution.
b. Among the circumstances that may be considered in determining
whether a person loiters with the intent to commit prostitution are if
the person:
1. Repeatedly beckons to, stops, engages in conversations with, or
attempts to stop or engage in conservations with passersby,
indicative to soliciting for prostitution.
2. Repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicles by hailing the
drivers, waving arms, or making any other bodily gestures, or
engages or attempts to engage the drivers or passengers of the
motor vehicles in conversation, indicative of soliciting for
prostitution.
§ 7-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.6
AO:161
§ 7-7.7. Supervising or Otherwise Aiding a Prostitute. [Ord. #2124,
§ 1]
3. Has been convicted of violating this section, Subsection 7-7.5 or
California Penal Code subdivision (a) or (b) of § 647, or any other
offense relating to or involving prostitution, within five years of the
arrest under this section.
4. Circles an area in a motor vehicle and repeatedly beckons to,
contacts, or attempts to contact or stop pedestrians or other
motorist, indicative of soliciting for prostitution.
5. Has engaged, within six months prior to the arrest under this
section, in any behavior described in this paragraph, with the
exception of Paragraph 3, or in any other behavior indicative of
prostitution activity.
c. The list of circumstances set forth in Paragraph b is not exclusive. The
circumstances set forth in Paragraph b should be considered
particularly salient if they occur in an area that is known for
prostitution activity. Any other relevant circumstances may be
considered in determining whether a person has the requisite intent.
Moreover, no one circumstance or combination of circumstances is in
itself determinative of intent. Intent must be determined based on an
evaluation of the particular circumstances of each case.
a. It is unlawful for any person to do either of the following:
1. Direct, supervise, recruit, or otherwise aid another person in the
commission of a violation of Subsection 7-7.5 or 7-7.6a.
2. Collect or receive all or part of the proceeds earned from an act or
acts of prostitution committed by another person in violation of
Subsection 7-7.5.
b. Among the circumstances that may be considered in determining
whether a person is in violation of Subsection 7-7.7a are that the person
does the following:
1. Repeatedly speaks or communicates with another person who is
acting in violation of Subsection 7-7.6a.
2. Repeatedly or continuously monitors or watches another person
who is acting in violation of Subsection 7-7.6a.
3. Repeatedly engages or attempts to engage in conversation with
pedestrians or motorists to solicit, arrange, or facilitate an act of
prostitution between pedestrians or motorists and another person
who is acting in violation of Subsection 7-7.6a.
4. Repeatedly stops or attempts to stop pedestrians or motorists to
solicit, arrange, or facilitate an act of prostitution between
§ 7-7.6 COMPTON § 7-7.7
AO:162
§ 7-7.8. Multiple Convictions. [Ord. #2124, § 1]
pedestrians or motorists and another person who is acting in
violation of Subsection 7-7.6a.
5. Circles an area in a motor vehicle and repeatedly beckons to,
contacts, or attempts to contact or stop pedestrians or other
motorists to solicit, arrange, or facilitate an act of prostitution
between the pedestrian or motorists and another person who is
acting in violation of Subsection 7-7.6a.
6. Receives or appears to receive money from another person who is
acting in violation of Subsection 7-7.6a.
7. Engages in any of the behavior described in Paragraphs 1 to 6,
inclusive, in regard to or on behalf of two or more persons who are
in violation of Subsection 7-7.6a.
8. Has been convicted of violating this section, subdivision (a) or (b) of
California Penal Code § 647, subdivision (a) of California Penal
Code §§ 653.22, 266(h), or 266(i), or any other offense relating to or
involving prostitution within five years of the arrest under this
subsection.
9. Has engaged, within six months prior to the arrest under
Paragraph a, in any behavior described in Subsections 7-7.5, 7-7.6
and 7-7.7, with the exception of Paragraph a8 of Subsection 7-7.7,
or in any other behavior indicative of prostitution activity.
c. The list of circumstances set forth in Subsection 7-7.7b is not exclusive.
The circumstances set forth in Subsection 7-7.7b should be considered
particularly salient if they occur in an area that is known for
prostitution activity. Any other relevant circumstances may be
considered. Moreover, no one circumstance or combination of
circumstances is in itself determinative. A violation of Subsection 7-7.7a
shall be determined based on an evaluation of the particular
circumstances in each case.
d. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the prosecution of a suspect
for a violation of California Penal Code §§ 266h or 266i or for any other
offense, or for a violation of this section in conjunction with a violation
of California Penal Code §§ 266h or 266i or any other offense.
a. In any accusatory pleading charging a violation of Subsection 7-7.5,
Subsection 7-7.6 or California Penal Code § 647(b), if the defendant has
been once previously convicted of a violation of one of these
subsections, the previous conviction may be charged in the accusatory
pleading. If the previous conviction is found to be true by the jury, upon
a jury trial, or by the court, upon a court trial, or is admitted by the
defendant, the defendant shall be imprisoned in a county jail for a
period of not less than 45 days and shall not be eligible for release upon
completion of sentence, on probation, on parole, on work furlough or
§ 7-7.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.8
AO:163
§ 7-7.9. Release of Case Information. [Ord. #2124, § 1]
Any case prosecuted under § 7-7 of this Code, the City Attorney may release
public information regarding the case to the citizens of Compton through,
but not limited to, City Council meetings, local newspapers and local cable
television.
work release, or on any other basis until he or she has served a period
of not less than 45 days in a county jail. In all cases in which probation
is granted, the court shall require as a condition thereof that the person
be confined in a county jail for at least 45 days. In no event does the
court have the power to absolve a person who violates this paragraph
from the obligation of spending at least 45 days in confinement in a
county jail.
b. In any accusatory pleading charging a violation of Subsection 7-7.5,
Subsection 7-7.6 or California Penal Code § 647(b), if the defendant has
been previously convicted two or more times of a violation of one of
these subsections, each of these previous convictions may be charged
in the accusatory pleading. If two or more of these previous convictions
are found to be true by the jury, upon a jury trial, or by the court, upon a
court trial, or are admitted by the defendant, the defendant shall be
imprisoned in a county jail for a period of not less than 90 days and shall
not be eligible for release upon completion of sentence, on probation,
on parole, on work furlough or work release, or on any other basis until
he or she has served a period of not less than 90 days in a county jail. In
all cases in which probation is granted, the court shall require as a
condition thereof that the person be confined in a county jail for a least
90 days. In no event does the court have the power to absolve a person
who violates this paragraph from the obligation of spending at least 90
days in confinement in a county jail.
c. In addition to any punishment prescribed by this subsection, a court
may suspend, for not more than 30 days, the privilege of the person to
operate a motor vehicle pursuant to Section 13201.5 of the Vehicle
Code for any violation of Subsection 7-7.5, Subsection 7-7.6, or
California Penal Code § 647(b) that was committed within 1,000 feet of
a private residence and with the use of a vehicle. In lieu of the
suspension, the court may order a person's privilege to operate a motor
vehicle restricted, for not more than six months, to necessary travel to
and from the person's place of employment or education. If driving a
motor vehicle is necessary to perform the duties of the person's
employment, the county may also allow the person to drive in that
person's scope of employment.
§ 7-7.8 COMPTON § 7-7.10
AO:164
§ 7-7.10. Declaration of Public Nuisance of Vehicles Used in
Commission of Prostitution.37 [Ord. #2217]
A vehicle used in the commission or attempted commission of an act that
violates Sections 266h, 266i, or 647(b) of the California Penal Code, is
declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to seizure and
impoundment for a period of up to 30 days if the owner or operator of the
vehicle has had a prior conviction for the same offense within the past three
years.
§ 7-7.11. Seizure and Impoundment of Vehicle. [Ord. #2217]
§ 7-7.12. Notice to Owner; Post-Storage Hearing. [Ord. #2217]
a. A vehicle shall be seized and impounded pursuant to this subsection
upon the occurrence of both of the following:
1. A valid arrest of the driver of a vehicle for the commission or
attempted commission of an act that violates Sections 266h, 266i,
or 647(b) of the California Penal Code; and
2. At the time of the arrest, the owner or operator of the vehicle has
had a prior conviction for the same offense within the past three
years.
b. Impoundment shall be for a period of up to 30 days. Any period during
which a vehicle is subjected to storage pursuant to this subsection shall
be included as part of the period of impoundment.
a. Within two working days after impoundment, the City shall send by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the legal and
registered owner(s) of the vehicle at the address obtained from the
Department of Motor Vehicles that the vehicle has been impounded.
The notice shall also inform the owner of an opportunity for a poststorage
hearing to determine the validity of the storage or to determine
mitigating circumstances establishing that the vehicle should be
released.
b. The notice shall include all of the following information:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the agency providing
the notice;
2. The location of the place of storage and description of the vehicle
that shall include, if available, the model or make, the
manufacturer, the license plate number, and the mileage;
3. The authority and purpose for the removal of the vehicle; and
37.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 7-7.10 through 7-7.22 previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 2124 were repealed in their entirety by Ordinance
No. 2217.
§ 7-7.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.12
AO:165
§ 7-7.13. Release to Registered Owner Prior to End of Impoundment
Period. [Ord. #2217]
4. A statement that, in order to receive a post-storage hearing, the
owner(s), or their agent(s), shall request the hearing in person,
writing or by telephone within 10 days of the date appearing on the
notice.
c. The City shall be prohibited from charging for more than five days of
storage if it fails to notify the legal owner within two working days after
the impoundment when the legal owner redeems the impounded
vehicle.
d. The post-storage hearing shall be conducted within 48 hours of the
request for hearing, excluding weekends and holidays. Failure of the
legal and registered owners, or their respective agents, to request or to
attend a scheduled hearing shall satisfy the post-storage hearing
requirement.
e. The City may designate one of its own officers or employees to conduct
the hearing if that hearing officer is not the same person who directed
the seizure of the vehicle.
f. The hearing officer shall establish whether there are reasonable
grounds for the storage of the vehicle and mitigating circumstances
establishing that the vehicle should be released. If it is determined at
the post-storage hearing that there are not reasonable grounds for the
storage of the vehicle, the City shall be responsible for the costs
incurred for towing and storage.
g. The City shall maintain a published telephone number that provides
information 24 hours a day regarding the impoundment of vehicles and
the rights of legal and registered owners to request a hearing.
a. A vehicle impounded pursuant to Subsection 7-7.11 shall be released to
the registered owner, or the registered owner's agent, prior to the end
of the impoundment period under any of the following circumstances:
1. The driver of the impounded vehicle was arrested without probable
cause;
2. The vehicle is a stolen vehicle;
3. The vehicle is subject to bailment and was driven by an unlicensed
employee of a business establishment including a parking service
or repair garage;
4. The driver of the vehicle is not the sole registered owner of the
vehicle and the vehicle is being released to another registered
owner of the vehicle who agrees not to allow the driver to use the
vehicle until after the end of the impoundment period;
§ 7-7.12 COMPTON § 7-7.13
AO:166
§ 7-7.14. Release to Legal Owner Prior to End of Impoundment
Period. [Ord. #2217]
5. The registered owner of the vehicle was neither the driver nor
passenger of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, or was
unaware that the drive was using the vehicle to engage in activities
subject to Sections 266h, 266i, or 647(b) of the California Penal
Code; or
6. A spouse, registered domestic partner, or other affected third party
objects to the impoundment of the vehicle on the grounds that it
would create a hardship if the subject vehicle is the sole vehicle in a
household, and that hardship outweighs the seriousness and
severity of the act in which the vehicle was used.
b. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if a motor vehicle is
released prior to the end of the impoundment period because the driver
was arrested without probable cause, neither the arrested person nor
the registered owner of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the
towing and storage charges.
c. Except as provided herein in Subsection 7-7.13b, the registered owner
or his or her agent shall be responsible for all towing and storage
charges related to the impoundment of the vehicle.
a. A vehicle impounded pursuant to Subsection 7-7.11 shall be released to
the legal owner, or the legal owner's agent, prior to the end of the
impoundment period if both the following conditions are met:
1. The legal owner is a motor vehicle dealer, bank, credit union,
acceptance corporation, or other licensed financial institution
legally operating in California, or is another person who is not the
registered owner and holds a security interest in the vehicle; and
2. The legal owner, or the legal owner's agent, pays all of the towing
and storage fees related to the seizure and impoundment of the
vehicle.
b. No lien sale processing fees shall be charged to the legal owner who
redeems the vehicle prior to the 15th day of the impoundment period.
Neither the City, the impounding agency, nor any person having
possession of the vehicle shall collect from the legal owner as described
in Subsection 7-7.14a1 of this section, or the legal owner's agent, any
administrative charges imposed pursuant to Section 22850.5 of the
California Vehicle Code, unless the legal owner voluntarily requested a
post-storage hearing.
c. The legal owner, or the legal owner's agent, shall present the following
documentation to the City, its law enforcement agency, impounding
agency, person in possession of the vehicle, or any person acting on
behalf of those agencies:
§ 7-7.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.14
AO:167
1. A copy of the assignment as defined in subdivision (b) of Section
7500.1 of the Business and Professions Code;
2. A release of liability from the City of Compton (if required by the
City);
3. A government-issued photographic identification card; and
4. Any one of the following as determined by the legal owner or the
legal owner's agent:
(a) A certificate of repossession for the vehicle;
(b) A security agreement for the vehicle; or
(c) Title (whether or not paperless or electronic) showing proof of
legal ownership for the vehicle.
d. Any documents presented may be originals, photocopies, or facsimile
copies, or may be transmitted electronically. The City, its law
enforcement agency, impounding agency, or any person acting on
behalf of those agencies shall not require any documents to be
notarized.
e. Agent of Legal Owner. The City, its law enforcement agency (including
Code Enforcement), or any person acting on behalf of these agencies
may require the agent of the legal owner to produce a photocopy or
facsimile copy of its repossession agency license or registration issued
pursuant to Chapter 11 (commencing with Section 7500) of Division 3
of the Business and Professions Code, or to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the City, its law enforcement agency (including Code
Enforcement), or any person acting on behalf of those agencies that the
agent is exempt from licensure pursuant to Section 7500.2 or 7500.3 of
the Business and Professions Code.
f. A city, county, city and county, or state agency shall not require a legal
owner or a legal owner's agent to request a post-storage hearing as a
requirement for release of the vehicle to the legal owner or the legal
owner's agent.
g. The City, its law enforcement agency, the impounding agency, another
governmental agency, or any person acting on behalf of those agencies
shall not require any documents other than those specified in
Subsection 7-7.14c for the release of the vehicle. The legal owner or the
legal owner's agent shall be given a copy of any documents he or she is
required to sign, except for a vehicle evidentiary hold log book.
h. The City, its law enforcement agency, the impounding agency, or any
person acting on behalf of these agencies, or any person in possession
of the vehicle may photocopy and retain the copies of any documents
presented by the legal owner or legal owner's agent.
§ 7-7.14 COMPTON § 7-7.14
AO:168
§ 7-7.15. Release to Rental Car Agency Prior to End of
Impoundment Period. [Ord. #2217]
§ 7-7.16. Operators of Storage Facilities. [Ord. #2217]
i. The legal owner shall indemnify and hold harmless a storage facility
from any claims arising out of the release of the vehicle to the legal
owner or the legal owner's agent and from any damage to the vehicle
after its release including the reasonable costs associated with
defending any such claims.
j. The legal owner, who meets the requirements for release of a vehicle
pursuant to Subsection 7-7.14a, or the legal owner's agent, shall not
release the vehicle to the registered owner of the vehicle, or the
registered owner's agent (unless the registered owner is a rental car
agency) until after the termination of the impoundment period.
k. Prior to relinquishing the vehicle to the registered owner, the legal
owner may require the registered owner to pay all towing and storage
charges related to the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle.
a. A vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to Subsection 7-7.11 shall be
released to a rental car agency prior to the end of the impoundment
period if:
1. The agency is either the legal owner or registered owner of the
vehicle; and
2. The agency pays all towing and storage fees related to the seizure
and impoundment of the vehicle.
b. The rental car agency may continue to rent the vehicle upon recovery of
the vehicle. The rental car agency, however, shall not rent another
vehicle to the driver of the vehicle that was seized until the
impoundment period has expired.
c. The rental car agency may require the person to whom the vehicle was
rented to pay all towing and storage charges related to the seizure and
impoundment of the vehicle.
a. A person operating or in charge of a storage facility where vehicles are
stored pursuant to Subsection 7-7.11 shall accept a valid bank credit
card or cash for payment of towing, storage and related fees by a legal
or registered owner, or the owner's agent, claiming the vehicle. A credit
or debit card shall be in the name of the person presenting the card. For
purposes of this subsection, "credit card" is defined as in Subsection (a)
or Section 1747.02 of the Civil Code and does not include a credit card
issued by a retail seller.
b. A person operating or in charge of a storage facility, as described in
Subsection 7-7.16(a), who violates Subsection 7-7.16a shall be civilly
§ 7-7.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.16
AO:169
§ 7-7.17. Costs and Fees. [Ord. #2217]
Costs and fees incurred by the City, or at the discretion of the City, pursuant
to this section shall be set by resolution, or ordinance as authorized by
Section 22850.5 of the California Vehicle Code.
§ 7-7.18. Non-Exclusive Remedy. [Ord. #2217]
This section is not the exclusive regulation or penalty for prostitution. It
supplements and is in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and
ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, state or any other
legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
§ 7-8. INTOXICATION, DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
§ 7-8.1. Intoxication; Public Places. [Ord. #856, §§ 4600 — 4600.1]
No intoxicated person shall wilfully appear, remain, or be in or on any public
street, park, playground, or other public place in the City, whether such
person is or is not in or upon any automobile, street or inter-urban car,
vehicle, or conveyance.
No intoxicated person shall wilfully appear, remain or be in or on any place
open to public view, or in any store, railway depot, stadium, or other place
to which the public is admitted or invited or in any private premises or in
any private house to the annoyance of any other person.
§ 7-8.2. Disorderly. [Ord. #856, § 4600.2]
No person shall lie and sleep on any of the sidewalks, streets, or other
public places, within the City, or appear therein in such a state of
intoxication or drunkenness as to be unable to take proper care of himself,
or disturb the peace or quiet of any person, family or neighborhood, by
liable to the owner of the vehicle or the person who tendered the fees
for four times the amount of the towing, storage and related fees.
c. A person operating or in charge of a storage facility, as described in
Subsection 7-7.16a, shall have sufficient funds on the premises of the
primary storage facility during normal business hours to accommodate,
and make change for, a reasonable monetary transaction.
d. Credit charges for towing and storage services shall comply with
Section 1748.1 of the Civil Code. Law enforcement agencies may
include the costs of providing for payment by credit when making
agreements with towing companies on rates.
e. A failure by a storage facility to comply with any applicable conditions
of this subsection shall not affect the right of the legal owner, or the
legal owner's agent, to retrieve the vehicle if all conditions required of
the legal owner, or the legal owner's agent, for the release of the vehicle
are satisfied.
§ 7-7.16 COMPTON § 7-8.2
AO:170
drunkenness or by making loud and unusual noises, or by violent or
offensive language, or by boisterous, tumultuous or offensive conduct, or
by threatening, traducing, quarreling, fighting or offering or challenging to
fight, or in any other way or manner whatever shall disturb the peace, quiet
and decency of any person, street, or neighborhood.
§ 7-8.3. Drinking Alcoholic Beverages in Public or Public View.
[Added by Ord. #935, § 4600.3; Ord. #1894, § 1; Ord. #1917, § 1;
Ord. #2022, § 1]
§ 7-8.4. Disorderly House. [Ord. #856, § 4601]
No person shall keep a riotous or disorderly house, or permit any riotous
or disorderly conduct in his house, yard or premises connected with his
house, or be guilty of any riotous or disorderly conduct in any house, yard
or premises, whereby the peace, quiet or decency of the neighborhood of
such house or of any person may be disturbed.
§ 7-8.5. Indecent Shows. [Added by Ord. #985, § 4602]
§ 7-8.6. through § 7-8.14. (Reserved)
a. No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage: (1) on any public street,
sidewalk, parkway or alley, City park, City recreation area, City open
space, or playground, or in any railroad depot or bus station, or any
public place unless authorized by the City Manager; or (2) in any place
open to the patronage of the public, which premises are not licensed for
the consumption of such liquor or alcoholic beverage on the premises;
or (3) on private property open to public view without the express
permission of the owner, his or her agent, or the person in lawful
possession thereof.
b. "Alcoholic Beverage" includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and
every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which
contains 1/2% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for
beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined
with other substances.
c. Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
a. No person, either as owner, manager, producer, director, actor, or
agent, or who acts in any other capacity, shall give, direct, present or
participate in any obscene, indecent, immoral, or impure drama, play,
exhibition, show or entertainment, or any obscene, indecent, immoral,
impure scene, tableau, incident, part or portion of any drama, play,
exhibition, show or entertainment, which tends to corrupt the morals of
youth or others, or which depicts or deals with the subject or theme of
sex degeneracy or sex perversion, or sex inversion.
b. No person shall exhibit or perform, or participate in the possession of
any obscene, indecent or lewd play or representation.
§ 7-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-8.15
AO:171
§ 7-8.15. Indecent Motion Pictures. [Added by Ord. #985, § 4612]
§ 7-8.16. Urinating/Defecating in Public Prohibited. [Ord. #2009,
§ 1]
§ 7-9. LITTER AND ILLEGAL DUMPING.
§ 7-9.1. Definitions. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4702]
As used in this section:
CITY — Shall mean the City of Compton.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Shall mean any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature:
a. No person shall show, exhibit, display, rent, sell, loan or give to any
person, any motion picture or the projection of any picture, which
pictures illustrate, or depict any immoral, indecent, lewd, lascivious or
unlawful act, suggestion, business or purpose or any murder, suicide,
robbery or holdup, shooting, stabbing, clubbing, or beating of any
human being in such a manner as to offend public morals or decency, or
which delineates any other matter in such a manner as to offend public
morals or decency.
b. Any person authorized or enjoined to arrest any person for the violation
of Paragraph a of this subsection, is equally authorized and enjoined to
seize any motion picture or film, the exhibition and display of which is
by this section prohibited, in the possession or under the control of the
person so arrested, and deliver the same to the judge before whom the
person so arrested is required to be taken.
a. No person shall urinate or defecate in or upon any public street,
sidewalk, parkway or alley, City park, City recreation area, public
building or publicly maintained facility, or any place open to the public,
or on private property open to public view.
b. This section shall not apply to urination or defecation which is done in
any restroom or other facility designed for the sanitary disposal of
human waste.
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
a.
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing; or
b.
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission
fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms
c.
§ 7-8.15 COMPTON § 7-9.1
AO:172
GARBAGE — Shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Shall mean leaves from shrubs and trees, grass and lawn
cuttings; garbage, refuse, rubbish, and all other waste material which, if
thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public
health, safety and welfare.
NEWSPAPER — Shall mean any newspaper of general circulation as defined
by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office
Department of the United States in accordance with federal statute or
regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer
as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include
any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than
four issues per year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Shall mean any printed or written
matter; any sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper,
magazine, paper, booklet; or any other printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copy of any matter of literature not included in the definitions of
"commercial handbill" or "newspaper."
PERSON — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Shall mean any dwelling, house, building or other
structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps,
vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house,
building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards,
alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds and buildings.
of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a
collection is taken for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to
such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind,
when either of the same is held or given or takes place in connection
with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the
ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good
order; provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to
authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license where
such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any
ordinance of this City; or
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
d.
§ 7-9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-9.1
AO:173
REFUSE — Shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes
(except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings,
dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial
wastes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding,
crockery, and similar materials.
§ 7-9.2. Litter in Public Places. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4702.1;
Ord. #1894, § 1]
§ 7-9.3. Placement of Litter in Receptacles As to Prevent Scattering.
[Added by Ord. #1577, § 4702.2]
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized receptacles
shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited
by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place.
§ 7-9.4. Sweeping Litter Into Gutters Prohibited. [Added by Ord.
#1577, § 4702.3]
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the City the accumulation of litter from any building or lot
or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.
§ 7-9.5. Merchant's Duty to Keep Sidewalks Free of Litter. [Added
by Ord. #1577, § 4702.4]
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or public place within the City the accumulation
of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the City
shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter.
a. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the City except in public receptacles, or in
authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official City dumps.
Nor shall any person post, scatter, daub or leave any paint, paste, glue
or other materials or substance used in painting or affixing advertising
matter upon any public street or sidewalk or scatter or throw or permit
to be scattered or thrown any bills, waste matter, paper, cloth or
materials of any kind removed from advertising structures on any
public thoroughfare or on private property without permission of the
owner of said private property.
b. Any violation of this section is an infraction of the Compton Municipal
Code.
§ 7-9.1 COMPTON § 7-9.6
AO:174
§ 7-9.6. Dropping Litter from Aircraft. [Added by Ord. #1577,
§ 4702.5]
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the City any
litter, handbill, or other object.
§ 7-9.7. Litter Thrown by Persons in Vehicles. [Added by Ord.
#1577, § 4702.6]
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the City.
§ 7-9.8. Truck Loads Causing Litter. [Added by Ord. #1577,
§ 4702.7]
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicles within the City
unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded as to prevent any load or
contents of litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the City the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any
street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances or foreign
matter of any kind.
§ 7-9.9. Litter in Parks. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4702.8]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the City except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park
or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park or by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
§ 7-9.10. Litter in Lakes and Fountains. [Added by Ord. #1577,
§ 4702.9]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
creek, channel, bay or other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the
City.
§ 7-9.11. Prohibited. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4703.1]
a. Occupied Property. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any
occupied private property within the City, whether owned by such
person or not, except that the owner or persons in control of private
property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in
such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place or upon any private property.
§ 7-9.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-9.11
AO:175
§ 7-9.12. Owners to Maintain Premises Free of Litter. [Added by
Ord. #1577, § 4703.2]
The owner or person in control of any private property, vacant or occupied,
shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, the
provision of this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized
receptacles for collection.
§ 7-9.13. Posting Commercial Signs on Public Property; Permit
Required. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4704.1]
§ 7-9.14. Throwing or Distributing Commercial and Noncommercial
Handbills on Private Property. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4704.2]
b. Vacant Property. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or
vacant private property within the City, whether owned by such person
or not.
a. No person, except a public officer or employee in performance of a
public duty, shall paste, print, nail, tack, wire or otherwise fasten any
card, banner, pennant, handbill, sign, poster or advertisement or notice
of any kind, or cause the same to be done, on any vehicle, pavement,
sidewalk, step, curbstone, lamppost, pole, utility pole or appurtenances
thereto, signpost, hydrant, bridge, wall or tree located upon a street or
upon any other public property, except as may be permitted by
ordinance or law.
b. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
City, nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial
handbill in any public place.
a. Inhabited.
1. Nonposted premises. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute
any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private
premises which are inhabited except by handing or transmitting
such handbills directly to the owner, occupant or other person then
present in or upon such private premises; providing, however, in
the case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as
provided in Paragraph b below, unless required by anyone upon
such premises not to do so, [such person] shall have the authority
to place or deposit such handbills in or upon such inhabited private
premises if such handbill is so placed, deposited or secured to
prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such
premises or the sidewalks, streets or other public places, and
except that mailboxes may not be used when prohibited by federal
postal laws or regulations.
2. Posted premises. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any
commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises,
§ 7-9.11 COMPTON § 7-9.14
AO:176
§ 7-9.15. Exemptions. [Added by Ord. #1336, § 4704.3; adopted
December 12, 1978, § 1]
§ 7-9.16. Declaration of Public Nuisance of Vehicles Used in
Commission of Illegal Dumping. [Ord. #2216]
A vehicle used in the commission or attempted commission of an act that
violates Section 374.3(h) of the California Penal Code is declared to be
a public nuisance and shall be subject to seizure and impoundment for a
period of up to 30 days if the owner or operator of the vehicle has had a
prior conviction for the same offense within the past three years.
if required by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed in
said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof,
a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or
Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in
any manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to
be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any
such handbills left upon such premises.
b. Uninhabited Premises. No person shall throw or deposit any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises
which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
c. Vehicles. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle. Provided, however, that
it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or
distribute without charge to the receiver thereof a noncommercial
handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
a. Mail and Newspapers. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
the distribution of mail by the United States nor to newspapers as
defined in Subsection 7-9.1.
b. Noncommercial Handbills. The provisions of this Chapter shall not
apply to the distribution of noncommercial handbills on any public
sidewalk, street or other public place without charge to any person
willing to receive it.
c. Political Literature. The provisions of this section do not apply to
permits granted to erect signs, cards, posters or pictures relating to
forthcoming elections for public office or public ballot issues whether
national, state or local, or to distribute political literature on the public
streets. Nothing contained in this section, however, shall be interpreted
as exempting or otherwise relieving any candidate, political campaign
or finance committee or other similarly responsible person or
committee from the duty and responsibility for causing the complete
removal of any such campaign matter and fastening devices from the
public streets after the election day to which such matter relates and as
may be provided for in Subsection 7-17.5.
§ 7-9.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-9.17
AO:177
§ 7-9.17. Seizure and Impoundment of Vehicle. [Ord. #2216]
§ 7-9.18. Notice to Owner, Post-Storage Hearing. [Ord. #2216]
a. A vehicle shall be seized and impounded pursuant to this section upon
the occurrence of both of the following:
1. A valid arrest of the driver of a vehicle for the commission or
attempted commission of an act that violates Section 374.3(h) of
the California Penal Code; and
2. At the time of the arrest, the owner or operator of the vehicle has
had a prior conviction for the same offense within the past three
years.
b. Impoundment shall be for a period of up to 30 days. Any period during
which a vehicle is subjected to storage pursuant to this subsection shall
be included as part of the period of impoundment.
a. Within two working days after impoundment, the City shall send by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the legal and
registered owner(s) of the vehicle at the address obtained from the
Department of Motor Vehicles that the vehicle has been impounded.
The notice shall also inform the owner of an opportunity for a poststorage
hearing to determine the validity of the storage or to determine
mitigating circumstances establishing that the vehicle should be
released.
b. The notice shall include all of the following information:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the agency providing
the notice;
2. The location of the place of storage and description of the vehicle
that shall include, if available, the model or make, the
manufacturer, the license plate number, and the mileage;
3. The authority and purpose for the removal of the vehicle; and
4. A statement that, in order to receive a post-storage hearing, the
owner(s), or their agent(s), shall request the hearing in person,
writing or by telephone within 10 days of the date appearing on the
notice.
c. The City shall be prohibited from charging for more than five days of
storage if it fails to notify the legal owner within two working days after
the impoundment when the legal owner redeems the impounded
vehicle.
d. The post-storage hearing shall be conducted within 48 hours of the
request for hearing, excluding weekends and holidays. Failure of the
legal and registered owners, or their respective agents, to request or to
§ 7-9.17 COMPTON § 7-9.18
AO:178
§ 7-9.19. Release to Registered Owner Prior to End of Impoundment
Period. [Ord. #2216]
attend a scheduled hearing shall satisfy the post-storage hearing
requirement.
e. The City may designate one of its own officers or employees to conduct
the hearing if that hearing officer is not the same person who directed
the seizure of the vehicle.
f. The hearing officer shall establish whether there are reasonable
grounds for the storage of the vehicle and mitigating circumstances
establishing that the vehicle should be released. If it is determined at
the post-storage hearing that there are no reasonable grounds for the
storage of the vehicle, the City shall be responsible for the costs
incurred for towing and storage.
g. The City shall maintain a published telephone number that provides
information 24 hours a day regarding the impoundment of vehicles and
the rights of legal and registered owners to request a hearing.
a. A vehicle impounded pursuant to Subsection 7-9.17 shall be released to
the registered owner, or the registered owner's agent, prior to the end
of the impoundment period under any of the following circumstances:
1. The driver of the impounded vehicle was arrested without probable
cause;
2. The vehicle is a stolen vehicle;
3. The vehicle is subject to bailment and was driven by an unlicensed
employee of a business establishment including a parking serviced
or repair garage;
4. The driver of the vehicle is not the sole registered owner of the
vehicle and the vehicle is being released to another registered
owner of the vehicle who agrees not to allow the driver to use the
vehicle until after the end of the impoundment period;
5. The registered owner of the vehicle was neither the driver nor the
passenger of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, or was
unaware that the driver was using the vehicle to engage in
activities subject to Section 374.3(h) of the California Penal Code;
6. A spouse, registered domestic partner, or other affected third party
objects to the impoundment of the vehicle on the grounds that it
would create a hardship if the subject vehicle is the sole vehicle in a
household, and that hardship outweighs the seriousness and
severity of the act in which the vehicle was used.
b. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if a motor vehicle is
released prior to the end of the impoundment period because the driver
was arrested without probable cause, neither the arrested person nor
§ 7-9.18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-9.19
AO:179
§ 7-9.20. Release to Legal Owner Prior to End of Impoundment
Period. [Ord. #2216]
the registered owner of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the
towing and storage charges.
c. Except as provided herein in Subsection 7-9.19b, the registered owner
or his or her agent shall be responsible for all towing and storage
charges related to the impoundment of the vehicle.
a. A vehicle impounded pursuant to Subsection 7-9.17 shall be released to
the legal owner, or the legal owner's agent, prior to the end of the
impoundment period if both of the following conditions are met:
1. The legal owner is a motor vehicle dealer, bank, credit union,
acceptance corporation, or other licensed financial institution
legally operating in California, or is another person who is not the
registered owner and holds a security interest in the vehicle; and
2. The legal owner, or the legal owner's agent, pays all of the towing
and storage fees related to the seizure and impoundment of the
vehicle.
b. No lien sale processing fees shall be charged to the legal owner who
redeems the vehicle prior to the 15th day of the impoundment period
Neither the City, the impounding agency, nor any person having
possession of the vehicle shall collect from the legal owner as described
in Subsection 7-9.20a1 of this section, or the legal owner's agent, any
administrative charges imposed pursuant to Section 22850.5 of the
California Vehicle Code, unless the legal owner voluntarily requested a
post-storage hearing.
c. The legal owner, or the legal owner's agent, shall present the following
documentation to the City, its law enforcement agency, impounding
agency, person in possession of the vehicle, or any person acting on
behalf of those agencies:
1. A copy of the assignment as defined in subdivision (b) of Section
7500.1 of the Business and Professions Code;
2. A release of liability from the City of Compton (if required by the
City);
3. A government-issued photographic identification card; and
4. Any one of the following as determined by the legal owner or the
legal owner's agent:
(a) A certificate of repossession for the vehicle;
(b) A security agreement for the vehicle; or
§ 7-9.19 COMPTON § 7-9.20
AO:180
(c) Title (whether or not paperless or electronic) showing proof of
legal ownership for the vehicle.
d. Any documents presented may be originals, photocopies, or facsimile
copies, or may be transmitted electronically. The City, its law
enforcement agency, impounding agency, or any person acting on
behalf of those agencies shall not require any documents to be
notarized
e. Agent of Legal Owner. The City, its law enforcement agency (including
Code Enforcement), or any person acting on behalf of these agencies
may require the agent of the legal owner to produce a photocopy or
facsimile copy of its repossession agency license or registration issued
pursuant to Chapter 11 (commencing with Section 7500) of Division 3
of the Business and Professions Code, or to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the City, its law enforcement agency (including Code
Enforcement), or any person acting on behalf of those agencies that the
agent is exempt from licensure pursuant to Section 7500.2 or 7500.3 of
the Business and Professions Code.
f. A city, county, city and county, or state agency shall not require a legal
owner or a legal owner's agent to request a post-storage hearing as a
requirement for release of the vehicle to the legal owner or the legal
owner's agent.
g. The City, its law enforcement agency, the impounding agency, another
governmental agency, or any person acting on behalf of these agencies
shall not require any documents other than those specified in
Subsection 7-9.20c for the release of the vehicle. The legal owner or the
legal owner's agent shall be given a copy of any documents he or she is
required to sign, except for a vehicle evidentiary hold log book.
h. The City, its law enforcement agency, the impounding agency, or any
person acting on behalf of these agencies, or any person in possession
of the vehicle may photocopy and retain the copies of any documents
presented by the legal owner or legal owner's agent.
i. The legal owner shall indemnify and hold harmless a storage facility
from any claims arising out of the release of the vehicle to the legal
owner or the legal owner's agent and from any damage to the vehicle
after its release including the reasonable costs associated with
defending any such claims.
j. The legal owner, who meets the requirements for release of a vehicle
pursuant to Subsection 7-9.20a, or the legal owner's agent, shall not
release the vehicle to the registered owner of the vehicle, or the
registered owner's agent (unless the registered owner is a rental car
agency) until after the termination of the impoundment period.
k. Prior to relinquishing the vehicle to the registered owner, the legal
owner may require the registered owner to pay all towing and storage
charges related to the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle.
§ 7-9.20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-9.21
AO:181
§ 7-9.21. Release to Rental Car Agency Prior to End of
Impoundment Period. [Ord. #2216]
§ 7-9.22. Operators of Storage Facilities. [Ord. #2216]
a. A vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to Subsection 7-9 17 shall be
released to a rental car agency prior to the end of the impoundment
period if:
1. The agency is either the legal owner or registered owner of the
vehicle; and
2. The agency pays all towing and storage fees related to the seizure
and impoundment of the vehicle.
b. The rental car agency may continue to rent the vehicle upon recovery of
the vehicle The rental car agency, however, shall not rent another
vehicle to the driver of the vehicle that was seized until the
impoundment period has expired.
c. The rental car agency may require the person to whom the vehicle was
rented to pay all towing and storage charges related to the seizure and
impoundment of the vehicle.
a. A person operating or in charge of a storage facility where vehicles are
stored pursuant to Subsection 7-9.17 shall accept a valid bank credit
card or cash for payment of towing, storage and related fees by a legal
or registered owner, or the owner's agent, claiming the vehicle. A credit
or debit card shall be in the name of the person presenting the card. For
purposes of this subsection, "credit card" is defined as in Subsection (a)
of Section 1747.02 of the Civil Code and does not include a credit card
issued by a retail seller.
b. A person operating or in charge of a storage facility, as described in
Subsection 7-9 22a, who violates Subsection 7-9.22a shall be civilly
liable to the owner of the vehicle or the person who tendered the fees
for four times the amount of the towing, storage and related fees.
c. A person operating or in charge of a storage facility, as described in
Subsection 7-9.22a, shall have sufficient funds on the premises of the
primary storage facility during normal business hours to accommodate,
and make change for, a reasonable monetary transaction.
d. Credit charges for towing and storage services shall comply with
Section 1748.1 of the Civil Code. Law enforcement agencies may
include the costs of providing for payment by credit when making
agreements with towing companies on rates.
e. A failure by a storage facility to comply with any applicable conditions
of this subsection shall not affect the right of the legal owner, or the
legal owner's agent, to retrieve the vehicle if all conditions required of
§ 7-9.21 COMPTON § 7-9.22
AO:182
§ 7-9.23. Costs and Fees. [Ord. #2216]
Costs and fees incurred by the City, or at the discretion of the City, pursuant
to this section shall be set by resolution or ordinance as authorized by
Section 22850.5 of the California Vehicle Code.
§ 7-9.24. Nonexclusive Remedy. [Ord. #2216]
This section is not the exclusive regulation or penalty for illegal dumping or
any related thereto. It supplements and is in addition to the other regulatory
codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City,
state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
§ 7-10. LOST PROPERTY.
§ 7-10.1. Delivery of Lost or Stolen Property to Chief of Police. [Ord.
#846, § 3604]
It is hereby made the duty of all officers and employees of the City whenever
they find within the City, or whenever there comes into their possession
any personal property which the finder or possessor thereof has reason to
believe may have been stolen, lost, or abandoned, to deliver the same to the
Chief of Police.
§ 7-10.2. Sale at Auction. [Ord. #856, § 3604.1]
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to take charge of and keep in his
possession all such property, and he must within a reasonable time inform
the owner thereof, if known, and make restitution to him of such property
upon demand and without compensation. Should any such property remain
unclaimed by its true owner for a period of six months from the date of
finding, the Chief of Police is hereby authorized and required to cause the
same to be sold at public auction to the highest bidder. Notice of such sale
shall be given by the Chief of Police at least five days before the time fixed
therefor, by publication in the official newspaper of the City a statement of
the time and place fixed therefor, together with a schedule of the property
to be offered for sale. Immediately after the completion of any such sale the
Chief of Police shall give to the City Controller a statement of the proceeds
thereof together with the expense incurred in conducting such sale. The
Chief of Police shall forthwith pay such proceeds to the City Controller
and the City Controller after deducting the necessary expenses actually
incurred shall deposit the balance thereof in the General Fund.
§ 7-10.3. If No Bids. [Ord. #856, § 3604.2]
If there be no bids for any such property offered for sale at auction, the
property shall again be offered for sale together with other such unclaimed
property at the next auction sale. If such property is not sold at the second
the legal owner, or the legal owner's agent, for the release of the vehicle
are satisfied.
§ 7-9.22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-10.3
AO:183
auction sale it shall be turned over to the City Manager who shall make such
disposition thereof in the public interest as he shall deem fit.
§ 7-11. MINORS.38
§ 7-11.1. False Representation of Age. [Ord. #856, § 4502; Ord.
#915]
No person under the age of 21 years shall make any false declaration or
representation of his age or present any false credentials of his age or any
false identification for the purpose of circumventing or in any way avoiding
any of the provisions or prohibitions of this Code.
§ 7-11.2. Prize Fights. [Added by Ord. #915, § 4503.3]
§ 7-11.3. Minors in Billiard Rooms. [Added by Ord. #915, §§ 4504 —
4506; Ord. #1248]
a. Minor to Attend with Parents. No minor under the age of 16 years shall
attend any prize fight or boxing, sparring, or wrestling exhibition
carried on within the City unless such minor is accompanied by his
parent or legal guardian.
b. Parents or Guardian Not to Permit Attendance. No parent or legal
guardian of any such minor shall knowingly permit such minor to attend
any such exhibition without being accompanied by his parent or legal
guardian.
c. Promoters or Agents Not to Permit Minors. No person, either as owner,
promoter, agent, employee, or otherwise of such exhibition, carried on
within the City shall knowingly permit any such minor to attend any
such exhibition without such minor being accompanied by his parent or
legal guardian.
d. Proof of Age Required. Any minor whose age is questioned and who is
not accompanied by his parent or legal guardian shall be denied
admittance to any such exhibition until such minor shall have
established by satisfactory proof that he is over the age of 16 years.
a. Minors Under 15 Years Prohibited. No person under the age of 15 years
shall be in, remain in, enter, or visit any public billiard room unless such
minor person is accompanied by one of his parents or by his legal
guardian.
b. Further Limitations.
1. No person under the age of 21 years shall be in, remain in, enter, or
visit any public billiard room in which any alcoholic beverages are
sold, offered for sale, dispensed, or permitted to be consumed.
38.Editor's Note: See also § 7-2, Curfew; Loitering by Minors Prohibited.
§ 7-10.3 COMPTON § 7-11.3
AO:184
2. No person under the age of 18 years shall be in, remain in, enter, or
visit any public billiard room in which any card games are
permitted, played, operated, or taught in any manner.
3. No person under the age of 21 years shall be in, remain in, enter, or
visit any public billiard room between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
the time of sunrise the following day when not accompanied by his
or her parent or legal guardian having legal custody and control of
such person, or by the spouse of such person, which spouse is 21 or
more years of age.
c. Persons Responsible for Violation. No owner, manager, proprietor, or
other person in charge of or having control of any public billiard room
shall allow or permit any person under the age of 15 years to be in,
remain in, enter, or visit such place unless such minor person is
accompanied by one of his parents or his legal guardian.
d. Persons Responsible for Violation — Further Limitations.
1. No owner, manager, proprietor, or other person in charge of, or
having control of, a public billiard room in which any alcoholic
beverages are sold, offered for sale, dispensed, or permitted to be
consumed shall allow or permit any person under the age of 21
years to be in, remain in, enter, or visit such billiard room.
2. No owner, manager, proprietor, or other person in charge of, or
having control of, a public billiard room in which any card games
are permitted or suffered to be played, operated, or taught in any
manner shall allow or permit any person under the age of 18 years
to be in, remain in, enter, or visit such billiard room.
3. No owner, manager, proprietor, or other person in charge of, or
having control of, a public billiard room shall allow or permit any
person under the age of 21 years to be in, remain in, enter, or visit
any public billiard room between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and the
time of sunrise the following day when not accompanied by his or
her parent or legal guardian having legal custody and control of
such person, or by the spouse of such person, which spouse is 21 or
more years of age.
e. Billiard Room Defined. For the purposes of this section, "public billiard
room" is defined to be any place open to the public where billiards,
bagatelle, or pool is played, or in which any billiard, bagatelle, or pool
table is kept and persons are permitted to play or do play thereon,
whether any compensation or reward is charged for the use of such
table or not.
f. Social Billiard Club Defined. As used in this section, "social billiard
club" means a bona fide social club with a limited membership into
which admission cannot be obtained by any person at his pleasure, and
the sole or main purpose of which is to furnish to its members and to the
§ 7-11.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-11.3
AO:185
§ 7-12. NOISE.
Part I: General Provisions
§ 7-12.1. Declaration of Policy. [Added by Ord. #1587, § 4706]
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to prohibit unnecessary,
excessive and annoying noises from all sources subject to its police power.
At certain levels, noises are detrimental to the health and welfare of the
citizenry and in the public interest shall be systematically proscribed.
§ 7-12.2. Definitions. [Added by Ord. #1587, § 4706.1]
As used in this section:
SUPPLEMENTARY DEFINITIONS AND TECHNICAL TERMS — Definitions
of technical terms not defined herein shall be obtained from the American
National Standards Institute's Acoustical Terminology S1-1-1971 or the
most recent revision thereof.
AMBIENT NOISE — Shall mean the all-encompassing noise associated
with a given environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many
sources, near and far. For the purpose of this section, ambient noise level
is the level obtained when the noise level is averaged over a period of 15
minutes without inclusion of noise from isolated identifiable sources, at the
location and time of day near that at which a comparison is to be made.
COMMERCIAL PURPOSE — Shall mean and include the use, operation
or maintenance of any sound-amplifying equipment for the purpose of
advertising any business, or any goods, or any services, or for the purpose
of attracting the attention of the public to, or advertising for, or soliciting
patronage or customers to or for any performance, show, entertainment,
exhibition or event, or for the purpose of demonstrating such sound
equipment.
DECIBEL (dB) — Shall mean a unit of level which denotes the ratio between
two quantities which are proportional to power; the number of decibels
corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is 10 times the
logarithm to the base 10 of this ratio.
EMERGENCY WORK — Shall mean work made necessary to restore
property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to
protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger or work
by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.
FREQUENCY — Of a function periodic in time shall mean the reciprocal of
the smallest increment of time for which the function repeats itself. The unit
is the cycle per second or hertz.
guests of such members a place in which to play billiards, bagatelle, or
pool.
Any place which is a "public billiard room", as defined in Subsection
7-11.3e is not a "social billiard club."
§ 7-11.3 COMPTON § 7-12.2
AO:186
MOTOR VEHICLES — Shall include, but not be limited to, minibikes and gocarts.
NONCOMMERCIAL PURPOSE — Shall mean the use, operation or
maintenance of any sound equipment for other than a "commercial
purpose." "Noncommercial purpose" shall mean and include, but shall not
be limited to, philanthropic, political, patriotic and charitable purposes.
PERSON — Shall mean a person, firm, association, copartnership, joint
venture, corporation or any entity, public or private in nature.
SOUND LEVEL (NOISE LEVEL) — In decibels is sound measured using the
A-weighting network of a sound level meter. Slow response of the sound
level meter needle shall be used except where the sound is impulsive or
rapidly varying in nature, in which case fast response shall be used.
SOUND LEVEL METER — Shall mean an instrument, including a
microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting
networks for the measurement of sound levels which satisfies the pertinent
requirements in American National Standards Institute's Specification
51.4-1971 or the most recent revision thereof for type S-2A general purpose
sound level meters.
SOUND TRUCK — Shall mean any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle
regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having
mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound-amplifying equipment.
SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT — Shall mean any machine or device
for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. "Soundamplifying
equipment" shall not include standard automobile radios when
used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the automobile
radio is installed. "Sound-amplifying equipment," as used in this section,
shall not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or
horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety
purposes.
§ 7-12.3. Sound Level Measurement Criteria. [Added by Ord. #1587,
§ 4706.2]
Any sound level measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall be measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighting.
§ 7-12.4. Presumed Ambient Noise Level. [Added by Ord. #1587,
§ 4706.3]
When "ambient noise level" is referred to in this section, it shall mean the
higher of the following: (1) actual ambient noise level, or (2) presumed
ambient noise level as determined from the chart below:
§ 7-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-12.4
AO:187
Sound Level A, Decibels Community Environment
Classification
Very Quiet Quiet Slightly Noisy
Zone Time Rural Suburban Suburban Suburban Urban
R1 and R2 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
35 50 40 55 45
R1 and R2 7:00 p.m. to 10:00
p.m.
40 55 45 60 50
R1 and R2 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
45 65 50 65 55
R3 and R4 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
40 70 45 70 50
R3 and R4 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
45 50 55
Commercial 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Commercial 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
M1 Anytime
M2 Anytime
§ 7-12.5. Violations. [Added by Ord. #1587, § 4706.4]
a. Misdemeanors. Any person violating any of the provisions of § 7-12 et
seq. shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined as established in Chapter 1, § 1-6.
b. Additional Remedies: Injunctions. As as additional remedy, the
operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or
machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter, which operation
or maintenance causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons
of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health
or peace of residents in the area, shall be deemed and is declared to be
a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a
restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
c. Severability. If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this
section or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall
be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or
applications of the provisions of this section which can be given effect
without the invalid provisions or application; and, to this end, the
provisions of this section are hereby declared to be severable.
Part 2: Special Noise Sources
§ 7-12.4 COMPTON § 7-12.6
AO:188
§ 7-12.6. Radios, Television Sets and Similar Devices. [Added by
Ord. #1587, § 4706.5]
§ 7-12.7. Hawkers and Peddlers. [Added by Ord. #1587, § 4706.6;
Ord. #1732, § 3]
It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to sell anything by outcry.
The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the
selling by outcry of merchandise, food and beverages at licensed sporting
events, parades, fairs, circuses and other similar licensed public
entertainment events.
§ 7-12.8. Drums. [Added by Ord. #1587, § 4706.7]
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any drums or other instrument
or device of any kind for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation
of noise within the City. This section shall not apply to any person who is
a participant in a school band or duly licensed parade or who has been
otherwise duly authorized to engage in such conduct.
§ 7-12.9. Schools, Hospitals and Churches. [Added by Ord. #1587,
§ 4706.8]
It shall be unlawful for any person to create any noise on any street,
sidewalk or public place adjacent to any school, institution of learning or
church while the same is in use or adjacent to any hospital, which noise
unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or which
disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous
signs are displayed in such streets, sidewalk or public place indicating the
presence of a school, church or hospital.
§ 7-12.10. Animals and Fowl. [Added by Ord. #1587, § 4706.9]
No person shall keep or maintain, or permit the keeping of, upon any
premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person any animal or
fowl otherwise permitted to be kept which, by any sound, cry or behavior,
a. Use Restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person within any
residential zone of the City to use or operate any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, television set or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound (between the hours of
10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day) in such a
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring
residents or any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in
the area.
b. Prima Facie Violation. Any noise level exceeding the ambient noise level
at the property line of any property (or, if a condominium or apartment
house, within any adjoining apartment) by more than five decibels shall
be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of
this section.
§ 7-12.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-12.10
AO:189
shall cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal
sensitiveness in any residential neighborhood.
§ 7-12.11. Machinery, Equipment, Fans and Air Conditioning.
[Added by Ord. #1587, § 4706.10]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any machinery, equipment,
pump, fan, air conditioning apparatus or similar mechanical device in any
manner so as to create any noise which would cause the noise level at the
property line of any property to exceed the ambient noise level by more
than five decibels. For the purposes of this section, "noise level" shall mean
measured sound level with the following values added as corrections for
time duration and character of the noise:
§ 7-12.12. Special Sound Prohibition. [Added by Ord. #1587,
§ 4706.11]
a. Add one and only one of the following corrections for time duration:
1. Noise persists for more than five minutes out of any one hour.
2. Noise persists for more than one minute but not more than five
minutes out of any one hour.
3. Noise persists for one minute or less out of any one hour.
b. Add one and only one of the following corrections for unusual
character:
1. Noise has no unusual character.
2. Noise contains a piercing pure tone.
3. Noise is impulsive or rattling in nature.
4. Noise carries speech, music or other information content.
a. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, and in addition
thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue,
or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual
noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which
causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal
sensitiveness residing in the area.
b. The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a
violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
1. The level of the noise;
2. The intensity of the noise;
3. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
§ 7-12.10 COMPTON § 7-12.12
AO:190
§ 7-12.13. Purpose. [Added by Ord. #1587, § 4706.12]
The Council enacts this legislation for the sole purpose of securing and
promoting the public health, comfort, safety and welfare of its citizenry.
While recognizing that the use of sound-amplifying equipment is protected
by the constitutional rights of freedom of speech and assembly, the Council
nevertheless feels obligated to reasonably regulate the use of soundamplifying
equipment in order to protect the correlative constitutional
rights of the citizens of this community to privacy and freedom from public
nuisances of loud and unnecessary noise.
§ 7-12.14. Registration Required. [Added by Ord. #1587, § 4706.13]
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than personnel of law enforcement
or governmental agencies, to install, use or operate within the City a
loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable position
or mounted upon any sound truck for the purposes of giving instructions,
directions, talks, addresses, lectures or transmitting music to any persons
or assemblages of persons in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, place
or public property without first filing a registration statement and obtaining
approval thereof as set forth in this section.
§ 7-12.15. Requirements and Duties. [Added by Ord. #1587,
§ 4706.14]
4. Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;
5. The level and intensity of the background noise, if any;
6. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;
7. The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
8. The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise
emanates;
9. The time of the day or night the noise occurs;
10. The duration of the noise;
11. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; and
12. Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial
activity.
a. Registration Statements; Filing. Every user of sound-amplifying
equipment shall file a registration statement with the Police Chief 14
days prior to the date on which the sound-amplifying is intended to be
used, which statement shall contain the following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of both the owner, user
and operator of the sound-amplifying equipment;
§ 7-12.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-12.15
AO:191
2. The maximum sound-producing power of the sound-amplifying
equipment, which shall include the wattage to be used, the volume
in decibels of sound which will be produced and the approximate
distance for which sound will be audible from the sound-amplifying
equipment;
3. The license and motor number if a sound truck is to be used;
4. A general description of the sound-amplifying equipment which is
to be used;
5. Whether the sound-amplifying equipment will be used for
commercial or non-commercial purposes.
b. Registration Statement Amendment. All persons using or causing to be
used sound trucks for noncommercial purposes shall amend any
registration statement filed pursuant to Paragraph a of this subsection
within 48 hours after any change in the information therein furnished.
c. Registration and Identification. The Police Chief shall return to each
applicant under Paragraph a of this subsection, one copy of the
registration statement duly certified by the Police Chief as a correct
copy of the application. The certified copy of the application shall be in
the possession of any person operating the sound truck at all times
while the sound truck's sound-amplifying equipment is in operation,
and said copy shall be promptly displayed and shown to any policeman
of the City of Compton upon request.
d. Regulations for Use. Noncommercial use of sound trucks in the City of
Compton with sound-amplifying equipment is in operation shall be
subject to the following regulations:
1. The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.
2. Operations are permitted for four hours each day, except on
Sundays and legal holidays when no operations shall be authorized.
The permitted four hours of operation shall be between the hours of
11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. and between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and
6:30 p.m.
3. Sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the
sound truck upon which equipment is mounted is operated at a
speed of at least 10 miles per hour except when the truck is
stopped or impeded by traffic. Where stopped by traffic the sound
amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one
minute at each such stop.
4. Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of hospitals, schools,
churches or courthouses.
5. No sound truck with its amplifying device in operation shall be
operated on streets designed as the Downtown Business District.
§ 7-12.15 COMPTON § 7-12.15
AO:192
§ 7-12.16. Commercial Advertising by Sound Truck. [Added by Ord.
#1587, § 4706.15]
§ 7-12.17. Exemptions. [Added by Ord. #1598, § 4708]
The provisions of Subsection 7-12.18 et seq. shall not apply to construction,
operation, maintenance and repairs of equipment, apparatus or facilities
of essential public services and facilities, including those public utilities
subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities
Commission.
6. The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd,
indecent or slanderous.
7. The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be
audible for a distance in excess of 100 feet from the sound truck
and so that the volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring,
disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility.
8. No sound-amplifying equipment shall be operated with an excess of
15 watts of power in the last stage of amplification.
a. License Required. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any
sound truck in the City for commercial advertising purposes with
sound-amplifying equipment in operation unless a license has been
obtained from the City Clerk. The fee for said license shall be $100
annually, $30 monthly or $10 per day.
b. Application for License. Persons applying for the license required under
Paragraph a shall file with the Police Chief an application in writing,
giving in said application the information required in the registration
statement under Subsection 7-12.15a.
c. Issuance of License. The City Treasurer shall issue a license under
Paragraph a of this subsection upon payment of the required license fee
unless the application required in Paragraph b of this subsection
reveals that the applicant would violate the regulations prescribed in
Paragraph d of this subsection or the provisions of some other
ordinance of this City.
d. Possession and Display of License. A licensee shall keep such license in
his possession in the sound truck during the time the sound truck's
sound-amplifying equipment is in operation. The license shall be
promptly displayed and shown to any policeman of the City upon
request.
e. Regulations for Use. No person shall operate or cause to be operated
any sound truck for commercial sound advertising purposes in violation
of the regulations set forth in Paragraph d of this subsection.
Part 3: Other Noise-Making Devices or Noise-Producing Activities
§ 7-12.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-12.18
AO:193
§ 7-12.18. Horns, Signaling Devices. [Added by Ord. #1577,
§ 4708.1]
No person shall sound any horn or signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle, streetcar or other vehicle on any street or public place of the
City, except in the performance of a duty imposed by law, or as a warning of
danger.
§ 7-12.19. Steam Whistle. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4708.2]
No person shall blow any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle
attached to any stationary boiler except in the performance of a duty
imposed by law, or as a warning of danger, or as a signal of the time to
commence or stop work.
§ 7-12.20. Exhaust Mufflers. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4708.3]
No person shall discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam engine
or stationary internal-combustion engine except through a muffler or other
device which effectively will reduce such loud or explosive noises.
§ 7-12.21. Motorcycle Noises. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4708.4]
§ 7-12.22. Construction or Repairing of Buildings, Pile Drivers,
Hoists, Steam Shovels. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4708.5]
No person shall cause or permit any work to be done or do any work on the
erection (including excavation), unless the noise caused thereby is confined
within a building, or use any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer,
derrick, steam or electric hoist, unless the noise caused thereby is confined
within a building, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
on Monday through Saturday, except in cases of urgent necessity in the
interest of public health and safety and then only with a permit from the
Building Official. No such permit shall be granted for a period of more than
three days, but may be renewed from time to time so long as the emergency
exists.
§ 7-12.23. Manufacturing Operations. [Ord. #856, § 4708.6]
No person shall cause or permit any manufacturing operation, process or
work incident thereto to be done in any M-1 Zone in the City, as this zone
a. Excessive Muffler and Exhaust Noise. Modification or alteration of
motorcycle mufflers or exhaust chamber is prohibited where such
modification or alteration produces noise in excess of the noise emitted
when the motorcycle was new.
b. Excessive Noise While Idling. It shall be a nuisance for a motorcycle
operator to cause excessive noise while stopped, whether at traffic
signals or in the process of starting, stopping or parking the
motorcycle.
§ 7-12.18 COMPTON § 7-12.23
AO:194
is defined by Chapter 30, or within 100 yards of any portion of the City
declared by Chapter 30 to be zoned for dwelling purposes, except between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Monday through Saturday
unless the noise produced or caused thereby or therefrom cannot be heard
at a distance of more than 50 feet from the building or lot in which or on
which such manufacturing operation, process or work incident thereto is
being carried on or done. "Lot" as used in this section shall mean the same
as it is defined in Chapter 30.
§ 7-12.24. Hours of Producing Noise Limited in the M-1 Zone.
[Added by Ord. #1577, § 4708.7]
In the M-1 and M-2 Zones established by Chapter 30, between the hours of
7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and all day on Sunday,
the following activities shall be prohibited unless the noise created thereby
is confined in a building: Any commercial or manufacturing activity,
including, but not limited to, the operation of a pneumatic or electrical
hammer, chipper or press, the striking of metal against metal, or the
operating of a riveting gun. In case of urgent necessity and in the interests
of the public health and safety, such operations may be permitted, but only
upon the issuance of a permit by the Building Department. Such permit
shall be limited to a maximum of three days but may be renewed from time
to time as long as the emergency exists. For the purposes of this section,
"building" shall be defined as a permanently located structure enclosed on
all sides by walls and having a roof.
§ 7-12.25. Deliveries to Commercial Zones. [Added by Ord. #1577,
§ 4708.8]
No person shall cause or permit any delivery to any commercial zone in the
City, as said zones are defined in this Code, between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. so as to produce or cause any noise thereby or therefrom
which can be heard at a distance of more than 50 feet from any building or
lot in the P-1 Zone or in any residential zone as defined in this Code, which
P-1 or residential zone is actually used for residences.
§ 7-12.26. Animals, Birds or Fowls. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4708.9]
No person shall keep any animal, bird or fowl which, by making or causing
frequent or long-continued noises, shall disturb the comfort, peace or
repose of any person in the vicinity of such place where such animal, bird
or fowl is kept.
§ 7-12.27. Vehicle Radios and Sound Devices. [Ord. #1743, §§ 1 — 4]
a. It shall be unlawful for any driver, passenger in or owner of a vehicle to
make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive,
unnecessary or unusually loud noise emanating from vehicle radios or
other sound devices which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers
the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits
§ 7-12.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-12.27
AO:195
§ 7-12.28. Loud Or Unruly Parties/Gathering Prohibited. [Ord.
#1916, § 1; Ord. #2263 § 1]
of the City whether the vehicle is on private or public property. The
prohibitions set forth in this subsection shall apply to vehicles and
motor vehicles.
b. That the using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated
any vehicle radio receiving set, or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, other vehicle
passengers or operations, or other persons in the public is hereby
prohibited.
c. That the standards which shall be considered in determining whether a
violation of this subsection exists shall include but shall not be limited
to the following:
1. The volume of the noise;
2. The intensity of the noise;
3. Complaints of citizens; and
4. Distance from which the noise can be heard.
The operation of any such radio or sound devices in such a manner as to
be plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet from the vehicle in which it is
located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection.
d. Exemptions. This subsection shall not prohibit or inhibit the operation
of emergency vehicles, law enforcement functions or other authorized
City functions. The City Council may upon its own motion or through an
application process, grant other exemptions.
a. Definitions. Unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires,
terms defined herein shall have the following meaning when used in
this section:
LOUD NOISE — Shall mean any sound or any recording thereof when
amplified or increased by any electrical, mechanical, or other device to
such volume, intensity or carrying power as to unreasonably interfere
with or disturb the peace and quiet of other persons of normal
sensitiveness within the area.
LOUD OR UNRULY PARTIES OR GATHERINGS — Shall mean a
gathering of two or more people on private property which is
determined by law enforcement personnel at the scene to constitute a
violation of the Compton Municipal Code or California Penal Code or
is otherwise disruptive to the public peace, health, safety or welfare
due to the loud noise, the magnitude of the crowd, the disturbances
or unruly behavior of those attending the party or gathering, illegally
§ 7-12.27 COMPTON § 7-12.28
AO:196
parked vehicles blocking other traffic or fire access or destruction of
property.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON — Shall mean the person or persons who
own, lease, reside or is in charge of the premises where the loud or
unruly gathering or party takes place; or the person or persons who
organized the loud or unruly gathering or party. If the responsible
person is a minor, then the parents or legal guardians of that minor
are also responsible persons whether or not they are present at the
gathering or party. All responsible persons, as defined herein, are
deemed to have caused or permitted the loud or unruly gathering or
party and are responsible for and may be charged with a violation
of this subsection; provided, however, a property owner who is not
present at the gathering or party may not be charged with a violation
of this subsection unless the absentee owner had knowledge that the
gathering or party was occurring, was planned to occur or reasonably
should have known the gathering or party would occur. This exception
does not apply to a parent or guardian of a responsible person who is a
minor.
WRITTEN REIMBURSEMENT NOTICE — Shall mean a written notice
issued by a law enforcement officer to the responsible person pursuant
to Subsection 7-12.29 that a violation is taking place and that the
disturbance must cease and that if law enforcement personnel are
required to respond to the property to address another violation within
a one-year period the responsible person may be liable to reimburse the
City all costs and expenses incurred for the subsequent response.
b. Loud or Unruly Parties/Gatherings Prohibited. Unless authorized by the
City or is otherwise legally permitted, it shall be unlawful for any
responsible person or persons to organize, cause or permit a loud or
unruly party or gathering.
1. The characteristics and conditions, which may be considered in
determining whether such loud party or gathering violates the
provisions of this subsection shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
(a) The volume of the noise;
(b) The intensity of the noise;
(c) The proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities;
(d) The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise
emanates;
(e) The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the
noise emanates;
(f) The time of the day or night the noise occurs;
(g) The duration of the noise;
§ 7-12.28 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-12.28
AO:197
§ 7-12.29. Loud or Unruly Parties or Gatherings; Second and
Subsequent Response Fees. [Ord. #2263 § 2]
(h) Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant;
(i) Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or
noncommercial activity.
c. Loud or Unruly Parties/Gatherings; Prima Facie Violation. The following
shall constitute evidence of prima facie violation of this subsection;
provided, however, that inclusion herein shall not be construed as
limiting the activities which may be found to violate this section. A party
or gathering where:
1. Noise emanating from or attributable to the party or gathering is
audible from a distance of at least 50 feet or more from the
property line of the property where the party or gathering is taking
place; or
2. Persons present at the party or gathering are acting in a wild,
unruly, uncontrollable manner which is disruptive to neighbors; or
3. The number of persons present violates the fire code, presenting a
fire or safety hazard; or
4. Persons present at the party or gathering have caused or are
causing destruction to property of others.
d. Loud or Unruly Parties/Gatherings; Declared a Public Nuisance. Loud
or unruly parties or gatherings as defined in this subsection are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as set forth herein
or as otherwise provided by law. Law enforcement personnel are
authorized to take all actions and give all directions and orders that
may be necessary to abate the nuisance, violation or condition,
including the giving of verbal warnings, the arrest of, or the issuance of
citations to the responsible person or persons, and any others who are
in violation of this subsection or any other state statute or local
ordinance.
a. Written Reimbursement Notice. If, after issuance of the written
reimbursement notice as required by this section, law enforcement
personnel are required to respond to the property to address another
violation of Subsection 7-12.28 within a one-year period after issuance
of said notice, then the responsible person or persons, as defined in
Subsection 7-12.28 above, shall be jointly and severally liable for all
actual costs and expenses incurred by the City during the second or
subsequent responses.
1. Law enforcement personnel responding to a loud party or
gathering complaint may issue a written reimbursement notice to
the responsible person when if within a one-year period after the
initial response law enforcement personnel are again required to
§ 7-12.28 COMPTON § 7-12.29
AO:198
§ 7-13. NUISANCES.39
respond to the property to address a violation of Subsection
7-12.28, then the responsible person shall be liable to reimburse
the City for all costs and expenses incurred by law enforcement
personnel during the second or subsequent responses for violations
of such subsection.
b. Reimbursement of Cost and Expenses. All responsible persons for
causing or permitting a loud party or gathering, which requires a
second or subsequent response, as described herein above are jointly
and severally liable for the following costs and expenses incurred by the
City:
1. The actual cost incurred by the City for the services of the law
enforcement personnel for each response after the initial response;
2. Damage to public property incurred in the course of any second or
subsequent response by law enforcement personnel; and
3. Injuries to any law enforcement or emergency service personnel
involved in a second or subsequent response.
c. Computation of Costs. The Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department,
Compton Station shall accurately compute the costs of providing such
additional services pursuant to the current Municipal Law Enforcement
Agreement with the City at the rates set forth on the Los Angeles
County Sheriff's Department SH-AD 575 Deployment of Personnel
Form, of said Agreement, and advise the City Manager, or his/her
designee, of such costs, as well as any other costs related to damage to
public property resulting from the use of such additional law
enforcement services. The responsible person shall be billed for these
costs by the City Manager, or his/her designee, upon notice of the
charges from the Compton Sheriff's Department and payment shall be
due and payable within 15 days of the billing date. If the amount due is
not paid by the responsible person within the allotted time, the City may
collect the debt, as well as any fees and costs incurred in its collection,
pursuant to any and all applicable provisions of law.
d. Written Notice to Responsible Persons. Any law enforcement agency
delegated by the City to enforce the provisions of this section is
authorized and directed to prepare appropriate advisory procedures to
be followed by its law enforcement officers in response to loud parties
or unruly gatherings, including preparation of written materials
advising the responsible person of the provisions of this subsection.
39.Editor's Note: Regulations providing for the City government to cause the summary
abatement of nuisances, see Gov. Code § 38773.
§ 7-12.29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13.1
AO:199
§ 7-13.1. Public Nuisance. [Ord. #856, § 4300]
No person shall create, cause, commit or maintain within the City, either
on public or private property, a public nuisance, as the same is hereafter
defined in the following subsections of this section.
§ 7-13.2. Actions Prohibited. [Amended by Ord. #1595, § 4300.1]
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance to do any of the following:
§ 7-14. OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PASSAGEWAYS.
§ 7-14.1. Public Places. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4709]
a. Maintain anything which is injurious to health, or is indecent or
offensive to the senses, or is an obstruction to the free use of property,
or interferes with the comfortable or safe enjoyment of life or property
by the entire community or by any considerable number of persons in
the City, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the
customary manner, of any river, bay, stream, canal or basin, or any
public park, or street; or to place, keep, store or maintain any lumber,
stone, rock, pipe, machinery, equipment or debris upon any property
within any residential district, unless the same is to be immediately
used in the erection or construction of a building, for which a building
permit has been obtained, unless such person so placing, keeping,
storing or maintaining said material and equipment first obtains a
permit from the City Manager so to do.
b. Throw, place or deposit any debris upon the property of another.
c. Maintain, own, operate, manage any place of business, establishment
or room in a place of business or establishment from which minors are
not excluded, and which said room or establishment has as one of its
purposes or its sole purpose the sale, distribution, exhibition or display
of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or
injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substances, other
than prescription drugs or devices to ingest or inject prescription
drugs, including roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed
and used for smoking the foregoing, is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Section 731
of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California. This remedy is
in addition to any other remedy provided by law, including the penalty
provisions applicable for violation of the terms and provisions of this
Code.
a. Merchandise or Signs or Public Property. No person shall place any
merchandise or article of personal property upon any property between
the building line of any building and the public sidewalk, public street,
parkways, within the business district, or without, or any other area,
without first having gotten written permission from the City Council.
Nor shall any person place any sign, or display any merchandise or
§ 7-13.1 COMPTON § 7-14.1
AO:200
§ 7-14.2. Exemptions. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4709.1]
§ 7-14.3. Loitering. [Ord. #1577, § 4709.2; Ord. #1694, § 1; Ord.
#1990, § 1]
article of personal property between the building line of any building
thereon and the public sidewalk where the owner of such property
permits or consents to the public using such property as a
thoroughfare.
b. Soliciting Business on Public Streets. No owner or employee of any
place of business where goods are sold or offered for sale, or where any
service is rendered, shall use any portion of the sidewalk in front of
such place of business or adjacent thereto or elsewhere for the purpose
of soliciting, requesting or enticing any other person to enter any such
place of business to examine, purchase or give any order for the
purchase of any goods; and no such person shall solicit, request or
entice any person to enter any such place of business to bargain for or
avail himself of the service rendered by or in any place of business.
c. Soliciting for Business; Itinerant Salesman. No person shall solicit,
offer, request, entice or seek an offer to buy goods on a public street,
parkway, alley or other public property without first having obtained a
business license as required by Chapter 9, §§ 9-1, 9-2 and 9-5.
a. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to boxes, barrels or other
receptacles containing merchandise delivered to any person whose
building or business abuts the public property referred to above. These
receptacles may be unpacked and their contents removed provided that
the contents are removed immediately and such receptacles are
immediately removed from the property.
b. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to any box or receptacle
placed upon any property for the purpose of receiving bakery or dairy
products.
a. Public Property. No person or persons, after first being warned by a law
enforcement officer, or where a sign or signs prohibiting loitering has
been posted, shall willfully and maliciously loiter, stand, sit or lie in or
upon any public street, sidewalk, walkway area or mall so as to create
or cause to create any of the following:
1. Hinder or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians thereon; or
2. Block, obstruct, or prevent the free access to the entrance to any
building open to the public; or
3. Stand in any roadway other than in a safety zone or in a crosswalk
if such action obstructs or impedes the lawful movement of traffic.
This provision shall not apply to any public officer or employee, or
employee of a public utility when necessarily upon street in line of
duty.
§ 7-14.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14.3
AO:201
§ 7-14.4. Criminal Trespass on Private Property. [Ord. #1888, § 1]
b. Private Property Open to Public. No person or persons, after first being
warned by a law enforcement officer, or where a sign or signs
prohibiting loitering has been posted, shall willfully and maliciously
loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon any portion of private property utilized
for public use, so as to create or cause to create any of the following:
1. Hinder or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians thereon; or
2. Block, obstruct, or prevent the free access to the entrance to any
building open to the public; or
3. Stand in any roadway other than in a safety zone or in a crosswalk
if such action obstructs or impedes the lawful movement of traffic.
This provision shall not apply to any public officer or employee, or
employee of a public utility when necessarily upon street in line of
duty.
c. Without Lawful Purpose.
1. Every person who shall loiter or wander without apparent reason
or business, and who refuses to identify himself and account for his
presence when requested to so do by a peace officer, if the
surrounding circumstances are such as to indicate to a reasonable
person that the public safety demands such identification, shall be
guilty of loitering. Loitering, as used in this section, is defined in
Subsection 7-2.3 of this Code.
d. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit persons from
sitting on public benches or other public facilities provided for such
purposes.
a. No person shall enter or be present upon any private property or
portion of private property not open to the general public without the
consent of the owner, the owner's agent, or the person in lawful
possession, where signs forbidding entry are displayed as provided in
Paragraph f.
b. No person shall enter upon any private property or portion of private
property, not open to the general public, who within the immediately
preceding six months was advised as follows: to leave and not return,
and that if he or she returns to the property within six months of the
advisement he or she will be subject to arrest. This advisement must be
made by the owner, the owner's agent, the person in lawful possession
or a peace officer at the request of the owner, owner's agent, or person
in lawful possession. The advisement shall be documented in writing by
the individual making it and shall include the name of the person
advised, the date, approximate time, address and type of property
involved. Such documentation shall be retained for a minimum period
of one year. This subsection is not violated if a person so advised enters
the property within the designated six month period, if he or she has
§ 7-14.3 COMPTON § 7-14.4
AO:202
been expressly authorized to do so by the owner, the owner's agent or
a person in lawful possession.
c. Entry Requiring Express Consent of Owner.
1. No person shall enter or be present upon private property not open
to the general public without the express consent of the owner or
the owner's agent when that person:
(a) Has been convicted of any violation of the law involving
narcotics, prostitution, vandalism, weapons, disturbance of the
peace, loitering, threat to commit a violent act, or a violent act
on same private property not open to the general public,
whether or not such property is posted in accordance with
Paragraph f; and
(b) Has subsequent to the conviction been told to leave and not
return to that same property, by the owner, the owner's agent
or a peace officer, the request of the owner or the owner's
agent.
2. The request to leave must be made within six months of the date of
the conviction and shall be documented in writing by the individual
making the request. The documentation of the request shall include
the name of the person being requested to leave, the date, the
approximate time, the address and the type of property involved.
3. This paragraph applies even if the person has the consent of a
person in lawful possession but does not apply to persons who have
a right of lawful possession to the subject property. An individual
who has the consent of the person in lawful possession may not be
refused entry by the owner or the owner's agent for a period
exceeding 12 months, computed from the date of the request.
d. No person shall enter or be present upon any private property or
portion of private property open to the general public who within the
immediately preceding 24 hours was advised to leave and not return,
and that if he or she returns to the property within 24 hours of the
advisement, he or she will be subject to arrest. This advisement must be
made by the owner, the owner's agent, the person in lawful possession
or a peace officer at the request of the owner, owner's agent or the
person in lawful possession. A request to leave may be made only if it is
rationally related to the services performed or the facilities provided.
e. The term "private property" shall mean any real property, including but
not limited to, buildings, structures, yards, open spaces, walkways,
courtyards, driveways, carports, parking areas and vacant lots, except
land which is used exclusively for agricultural purposes, owned by any
person or legal entity other than property owned or lawfully possessed
by any governmental entity or agency.
§ 7-14.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14.4
AO:203
§ 7-14.5. (Reserved)40
§ 7-15. PARADES AND MOTORCADES.41
f. For purposes of Paragraph a, one sign must be printed or posted in a
conspicuous manner at every walkway and driveway entering any
enclosed property or portion thereof and at a minimum of every 50 feet
along the boundary of any unenclosed lot. This requirement is met if at
least one sign is conspicuously printed or posted on the outside of every
structure on such property, so as to be readable from each walkway and
driveway entering such property. The sign shall state as follows:
THIS PROPERTY CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC
No Entry Without Permission C.M.C. § 7-14.4
The language "THIS PROPERTY CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC No Entry
Without Permission" on said sign shall be at least two inches high.
g. When a peace officer's assistance in dealing with a trespass is
requested, the owner, owner's agent, or the person in lawful possession
shall make a separate request to the peace officer on each occasion.
However, a single request for a peace officer's assistance may be made
to cover a limited period of time not to exceed 12 months when such
request is made in writing and provides the specific dates of the
authorization period.
h. This subsection shall not apply in any of the following instances: (1)
When its application results in, or is coupled with, any act prohibited by
the Unruh Civil Rights Act, or any other provision of law relating to
prohibited discrimination against any person; (2) when its application
results in, or is coupled with, an act prohibited by Section 365 of the
California Penal Code, or any other provision of law relating to the
duties of innkeepers; (3) when public officers or employees are acting
within the course and scope of their employment or in the performance
of their official duties; or (4) when persons are engaging in activities
protected by the United States Constitution or the California
Constitution or when persons are engaging in acts which are expressly
required or permitted by any provision of law.
i. Violation of any of the provisions of this subsection shall be a
misdemeanor or an infraction.
j. If any part or provision of this subsection, or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of this
section, including the application of that part or provision to other
persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby and shall
continue in full force and effect. To this end, the provisions of this
subsection are severable.
40.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 7-14.5, Street Banners, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 1577, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
2211. See § 19-10 for street banners.
§ 7-14.4 COMPTON § 7-15.1
AO:204
§ 7-15.1. Procedures and Standards for the Issuance of Permits.
[Added by Ord. #1577, § 4707.1; amended by Ord. #1852, § 1]
a. Definitions:
MOTORCADE — Shall mean an organized procession containing 25
or more vehicles, except funeral processions, upon any public street,
sidewalk or alley.
PARADE — Shall mean any march or procession consisting of people,
animals or vehicles, or combination thereof, except funeral processions,
upon any public street, sidewalk or alley, which does not comply with
normal and usual traffic regulations or controls.
b. Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade or
motorcade in or upon any public street, sidewalk, or alley in the City or
knowingly participate in any such parade or motorcade unless and until
a permit to conduct such parade or motorcade has been obtained from
the Chief of Police, or, as hereinafter provided, from the City Council.
c. Parade or Motorcade for Commercial Purpose Prohibited. No permit
shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a parade or motorcade which
the City Council finds is proposed to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods, wares, merchandise, or event, and is
designed to be held purely for private profit.
d. Interference with Parade or Motorcade. No person shall knowingly join
or participate in any parade or motorcade conducted under permit from
the City Council in violation of any of the terms of said permit, nor
knowingly join or participate in any permitted parade or motorcade
without the consent and over the objection of the permittee, nor in any
manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct.
e. Application for Permit. Any person who wants to conduct a parade or
motorcade shall apply to the City Council for a permit at least 30 days in
advance of the date of the proposed parade or motorcade. The City
Council may in its discretion consider any application for a permit to
conduct a parade or motorcade which is filed less than 30 days prior to
the date such parade or motorcade is to be conducted. The application
for such permit shall be made in writing on a form approved by the City
Council. In order that adequate arrangements may be made for the
proper policing of the parade or motorcade, the application shall
contain the following information:
1. The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, the parade
or motorcade chairman and the addresses and telephone numbers
of each.
2. The purpose of the parade or motorcade, the date when it is
proposed to be conducted, the location of the assembly area, the
41.Editor's Note: Subsections 7-15.2 through 7-15.5, added by Ordinance 1577 and previously
contained herein, have been repealed in their entirety by Ordinance 1852.
§ 7-15.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-15.1
AO:205
location of the disbanding area, route to be traveled and the
approximate time when the parade or motorcade will assemble,
start and terminate.
3. A description of the individual floats, marching units, vehicles,
bands, including a description of any sound amplification
equipment to be used.
4. Such other information as the City Council may deem reasonably
necessary.
f. Issuance or Denial of Permit.
1. Standards for issuance. The City Council shall issue a parade or
motorcade permit conditioned upon the applicant's written
agreement to comply with the terms of such permit unless the City
Council finds that:
(a) The time, route and size of the parade or motorcade will
disrupt to an unreasonable extent the movement of other
traffic.
(b) The parade or motorcade is of a size or nature that requires the
diversion of so great a number of police officers of the City to
properly police the line of movement and the area contiguous
thereto that allowing the parade or motorcade would deny
reasonable police protection to the City.
(c) Such parade or motorcade will interfere with another parade
or motorcade for which a permit has been issued.
2. Standards for denial. The City Council shall deny an application for
a parade or motorcade permit and notify the applicant of such
denial where:
(a) The City Council makes any finding contrary to the findings
required to be made for the issuance of a permit.
(b) The information contained in the application is found to be
false or non-existent in any material detail.
(c) The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all
conditions of the permit.
g. Contents of Permits. In each permit the City Council shall specify:
1. The assembly area and time therefor;
2. The starting time;
3. The minimum and maximum speeds;
4. The route of the parade or motorcade;
§ 7-15.1 COMPTON § 7-15.1
AO:206
5. What portions of streets to be traversed may be occupied by such
parade or motorcade;
6. The maximum number of platoons or units and the maximum and
minimum intervals of space to be maintained between the units of
such parade or motorcade;
7. The maximum length of such parade or motorcade in miles or
fractions thereof;
8. The disbanding area, and disbanding time;
9. The number of persons required to monitor the parade or
motorcade;
10. The number and type of vehicles, if any;
11. The material and maximum size of any sign, banner, placard or
carrying device therefor;
12. The materials used in the construction of floats used in any parade
shall be of fire-retardant materials and shall be subject to such
requirements concerning fire safety as may be determined by the
Fire Chief;
13. That Permittee advise all participants in the parade or motorcade
either orally or by written notice, of the terms and conditions of the
permit, prior to the commencement of such parade or motorcade;
14. That the amplification of sound permitted to be emitted from sound
trucks, or bull horns, be fixed and not variable;
15. That the parade or motorcade continue to move at a fixed rate of
speed and that any willful delay or willful stopping of said parade or
motorcade, except when reasonably required for the safe and
orderly conduct of the parade or motorcade, shall constitute a
violation of the permit, and;
16. Such other requirements as are found by the City Council to be
reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or property.
All conditions of the permit shall be complied with so far as
reasonably practicable.
h. Officials to be Notified. Immediately upon the granting of a permit for a
parade or motorcade, the City Council shall send a copy thereof to the
following:
1. The Mayor.
2. The City Attorney.
3. The City Manager.
4. The Police Chief.
§ 7-15.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-15.1
AO:207
§ 7-16. PLACES AND BUILDINGS USED FOR SELLING OR STORING
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES DECLARED A NUISANCE.
§ 7-16.1. Preamble. [Ord. #1693, Preamble]
It is the desire and intent of the City Council of the City of Compton
to eliminate the unlawful selling, storing, keeping, or giving away of any
controlled substance as defined under Health and Safety Code Section
11000 et seq. within any and every building or place in the City; and the
unlawful selling, serving, storing, keeping, or giving away of any controlled
substance in any building or place in the City is injurious to the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the community, and interferes with
the comfortable enjoyment of life and property. Section 11570 of the Health
and Safety Code of California states: Every building or place used for the
purpose of unlawfully selling, serving, storing, keeping, or giving away
controlled substances as defined in this division, and every building or place
wherein upon which such acts take place, is a nuisance which shall be
enjoined, abated and prevented...; and Section 3479 of the Civil Code of
California defines "Nuisance" as: Anything which is injurious to health, or
is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use
of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner,...of...any public park, square, street, or highway, is a nuisance. The
unlawful selling, serving, storing, keeping, or giving away of any controlled
substances as defined in the Health and Safety Code within any building
or place in the City has debilitated family life in Compton causing severe
damage to the minds of thousands of citizens in Compton, over 200 drug
related deaths, and over 2,000 mental distress cases. The Compton Police
Department has identified through arrest records and Court records
buildings or places in the City of Compton used for the unlawful selling,
storing, keeping or giving away of controlled substances as defined in the
Health and Safety Code.
§ 7-16.2. Places or Buildings Selling, Serving, Storing, etc. Declared
a Nuisance. [Ord. #1693, § 4301]
5. The Fire Chief.
6. The Director of General Services.
7. The Public Works Director.
i. Revocation of Permit. Any permit for a parade or motorcade issued
pursuant to this Chapter may be summarily revoked by the City
Council, City Manager or Chief of Police at any time when by reason of
disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the City Council, the
City Manager, or the Chief of Police determines that the safety of the
public or property requires such revocation. Notice of such action
revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing to the permittee by
personal service or by certified mail.
§ 7-15.1 COMPTON § 7-16.2
AO:208
§ 7-16.3. Hearing Before City Council. [Ord. #1693, § 4302]
a. The City Council as the legislative authority finds and declares that
every and any building or place used for the purpose of unlawfully
selling, serving, storing, keeping, or giving away of any controlled
substances as defined under Section 11000 et seq. of the Health and
Safety Code a nuisance, whether public or private.
b. The City Attorney pursuant to Section 11571 of the Health and Safety
Code is directed to recommend to the District Attorney to abate,
prevent and enjoin the unlawful selling, serving, storing, keeping or
giving away of any controlled substances within any building or place in
the City of Compton.
c. The City Attorney shall send a certified copy of this section and a
recommendation of abatement provided for in Subsection 7-16.3b, that
any and every person who shall own, legally or equitably, lease,
maintain, manage, conduct, or operate a building or place in the City
which is declared to be a public or private nuisance as set forth and
stated in Paragraph a of this subsection is deemed to be a person who
has knowledge of such nuisance for the purpose of this section and is,
thereafter, responsible for its maintenance, and shall be liable thereof.
a. The City Council may, upon its own motion or upon written charges filed
with Council by the Chief of Police or the City Attorney, set a public
hearing before the Council to determine if a nuisance as set forth in
Subsection 7-16.2 and any other appropriate state or local laws, exist.
At the hearing, the persons described in Subsection 7-16.2c shall be
given an opportunity to appear, either personally or by counsel, to be
heard, to defend themselves and they may call witnesses on their
behalf.
b. Upon a specific finding that a nuisance, as defined in Subsection
7-16.2a and any other appropriate state or local laws, exists in the City,
the City Council, in applying provisions of this section to such nuisance,
shall provide for the following by Resolution:
1. Declare the fact that such nuisance exists.
2. Set forth the description or legal description and street address or
location of the real property or place which constitutes a nuisance.
3. Set forth evidentiary facts considered by the City Council in
arriving at its factual determination that a nuisance exists, as
defined in Subsection 7-16.2a.
4. (Reserved)
5. Order the City Attorney to proceed as directed in Subsection
7-16.2b and do all things necessary to abate, prevent or enjoin such
nuisance, as defined in Subsection 7-16.2a through judicial
proceedings.
§ 7-16.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-16.3
AO:209
§ 7-17. POLITICAL LITERATURE.
§ 7-17.1. Definitions. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4705]
As used in this section:
POLITICAL SIGN OR POLITICAL PAMPHLET — Shall mean any sign or
pamphlet which seeks to influence the action of the voters either for the
passage or defeat of a measure appearing on the ballot at any national, state
or local election, or which seeks to influence the action of the voters either
for the election or defeat of a candidate for nomination or election to any
public office at any national, state or local election.
§ 7-17.2. Permission to Use. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4705.1;
amended by Ord. #1871, § 1]
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, political
signs, political literature and political advertising shall be permitted in the
City subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this section.
§ 7-17.3. Pamphlets. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4705.2; amended by
Ord. #1871, § 2]
No person shall write, print, publish, post, sponsor or distribute any political
circular, pamphlet, letter, poster or other matter relating to any political
proposition, or to the candidacy of any candidate for public office, or which
advocates any political matter, action, theory or system, or which contains a
discussion of any public issue unless there appear in or upon such circular,
pamphlet, letter, poster or publication the name of the person, or the name
of the chairman and secretary or the names of at least two officers of the
political or other organization issuing the same, or the name and residence,
with the street and number thereof, of a voter of the state who shall be
responsible therefor.
6. Order that a certified copy of the Resolution and a certified copy of
this section be delivered by personal service or first class mail to all
persons of record having legal or equitable interest in the building
or place where the nuisance exists and to any person who shall
lease, maintain, manage, conduct or operate the building or place
where the nuisance exists.
a. Display and Distribution. No political placard, poster, bumper sticker,
political circular, pamphlet, photograph or other political material
designed to attract attention to any political proposition or to the
candidacy of any candidate for public office or which advocates any
political matter, action, theory or system shall be displayed on any City
building or property, upon a City vehicle, or upon any fixture or
equipment owned, operated or leased by the City of Compton or the
Compton Redevelopment Agency. Nor shall any person carry, distribute
or place on tables or chairs or any other furniture or fixtures in any City
building or property any political placard, poster, bumper sticker,
§ 7-16.3 COMPTON § 7-17.3
AO:210
§ 7-17.4. Location, Time of Erection and Type. [Added by Ord.
#1577, § 4705.3]
Political signs which are displayed without prior approval of the Building
Official or of the Council, as provided for in Subsection 7-17.2 of this
section, shall be temporary, stationary and unlighted and shall not:
§ 7-17.5. Removal/Deposit. [Added by Ord. #1577, #4705.4;
amended by Ord. #2141 § 2]
Political signs must:
political circular, pamphlet, photograph or other political material
designed to attract attention to any political proposition or to the
candidacy of any candidate for public office, or which advocates any
political matter, action, theory or system.
a. Be erected earlier than 75 days before the election to which they relate;
b. Be attached to any utility pole, fence, tree or other vegetation or upon
any public right-of-way;
c. Be located any closer than 500 feet from any freeway right-of-way;
d. Be so situated that the face thereof can be viewed from any freeway
right-of-way;
e. Be erected in such a manner that they will or reasonably may be
expected to interfere with; obstruct, confuse or mislead traffic;
f. Be erected or placed at the intersection of any street, or within the
segment created by drawing an imaginary line between points 50 feet
back from where the curbline of the intersection quadrant intersect;
g. Be attached to any public structure, tree or improvement;
h. Be attached to any private structure, tree or improvement without the
written consent of the owner or leaseholder; or
i. Be permitted to remain for general election purposes on behalf of an
unsuccessful primary campaign candidate.
a. Be removed within 72 hours after the election to which they relate or if
the signs are not removed the City shall remove the signs and deduct
the actual costs of removal from the deposit set forth in § 7-17.5d; and
b. Where consent to post on private property has been given, be the
responsibility of the owners or leaseholders of the property upon which
the signs are placed when not posted in accordance with the provisions
of this section; and
c. Be deemed a public nuisance when not posted in accordance with the
provisions of this section and, upon three days' written notice, may be
removed by the Director of Public Works and stored in the City
§ 7-17.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-17.5
AO:211
§ 7-17.6. Exemptions. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4705.5]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
§ 7-17.7. Penalty. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4705.6]
A violation of any provisions of this section shall be deemed the commission
of a public nuisance and shall be abated as provided in Subsection 7-1.6a
and b.
§ 7-18. REWARD FOR INFORMATION ON CRIMES.42
§ 7-18.1. Authorization. [Ord. #2165, § 1]
The City Council may, on its own motion or at the request of another entity,
agency, department or member of the public, authorize the offer of a reward
for information leading to the determination of the identity of, and the
apprehension of and/or conviction of any person whose willful misconduct
results in injury or death to any person, or whose willful misconduct results
in damage or destruction of property. The reward offer shall specify the
person injured or killed or the property damaged or destroyed, the date
(if available) the misconduct occurred, and the maximum amount of the
reward to be offered.
Conviction of the person or persons responsible for the crime shall be
required for payment of a reward unless the City Council makes a finding of
impossibility of conviction due to the death or incapacity of such person or
persons.
Corporation Yard and, if not retrieved within 15 days from the date of
such removal, may be considered as abandoned and be disposed of by
the City without any liability therefor to any person.
d. A mandatory refundable cleaning deposit in the amount of $500 shall be
collected upon filing your nomination papers for signs being posted
within the City for related election; and
e. Subsection 7-17.5a does not apply to primary nominating candidates
involved in a general election until after said election is held.
a. Signs political in nature which are inside buildings although visible
from the exterior; and
b. Signs posted by persons or corporations duly licensed to erect and
maintain outdoor advertising signs and billboards provided they are in
a location and are of such character as is authorized or permitted under
other provisions of this Code.
42.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1593, 1913 and
2151.
§ 7-17.5 COMPTON § 7-18.1
AO:212
In the case of a juvenile, "conviction" shall be the sustaining of a petition
against the juvenile or other procedure which is the equivalent of the
conviction of an adult in a criminal court proceeding.
For the purposes of this section, a plea to a lesser offense or diversion of the
violator to a community service program or volunteer work service program
shall constitute a conviction.
§ 7-18.2. Amount of Reward; Multiple Contributors. [Ord. #2165,
§ 1]
§ 7-18.3. Period to Provide Information. [Ord. #2165, § 1]
For a claim for a reward to be considered, the information must be received
by the appropriate law enforcement agency within 180 days of the reward
offer, unless otherwise extended by motion of the City Council not to exceed
an additional 180 days.
§ 7-18.4. Period to Submit Claim for Reward. [Ord. #2165, § 1]
Claims for reward offers must be submitted in writing to the Office of
the City Clerk within 90 days after conviction of the person or persons
responsible for the crime.
§ 7-18.5. Claim Information. [Ord. #2165, § 1]
All claims for reward offers shall be in writing and provide:
§ 7-18.6. Claim Review and Verification. [Ord. #2165, § 1]
Claims for reward offers are to be reviewed by a representative from each
of the following agencies and City departments: City Manager's Office,
City Attorney's Office, Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department (Compton
Station), and when appropriate the Municipal Law Enforcement Services
Department and Fire Department. The representatives shall make
recommendations to the City Council with regard to amounts and
distribution of the reward. If necessary, other affected City departments and
a. A reward may be offered up to a maximum of $25,000. Private
donations may be added to City funds to increase the size of the reward
offer.
b. In the event of multiple contributors of information, the reward amount
shall be divided among the contributors in the manner the City deems
appropriate.
a. Name, address and telephone number of claimant(s).
b. Name of the involved law enforcement agency.
c. Location of court and date upon which conviction occurred.
§ 7-18.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-18.6
AO:213
outside agencies will be consulted to determine the merit and validity of a
claim.
§ 7-18.7. Liability of Guilty Party or Parents. [Ord. #2165, § 1]
Any person or persons whose willful misconduct has resulted in damage
or destruction of any property of the City or any property of any state or
federal agency located within the City of Compton shall be liable for the
amount of any reward paid pursuant to this section; and if the person is an
unemancipated minor, his/her parent or guardian shall also be liable for the
amount of such reward.
§ 7-18.8. Persons Excluded from Receiving Reward. [Ord. #2165,
§ 1]
No reward shall be payable to any person or persons who is/are:
§ 7-19. TRESPASSING.
§ 7-19.1. Definitions. [Ord. #856, §§ 3605.1 — 3605.3]
As used in this section:
NO TRESPASS SIGN — Shall mean a substantial fixed sign affixed not less
than three feet, nor more than six feet above the ground level at the place
of posting hereinafter specified, which sign shall consist of wood, metal, or
other substantial material, with a face of not less than one square foot in
area and upon which in letters not less than two inches in height, either
black against a white background or white against a black background,
appear the words "No Trespass."
POSTED BOUNDARY — Shall mean a line running from a "No Trespass"
sign to another "No Trespass" sign and such line need not conform to
the legal boundary or legal description of any lot, parcel or acreage of
land. Only the area within the "posted boundary" shall constitute "posted
property," except as otherwise provided in this section.
a. A law enforcement official or officer, elected official or public employee
in connection with the apprehension of and/or conviction of any person
or persons whose willful misconduct results in injury death to any
person, or in damage or destruction of property because it is the legal
or moral duty of such persons to assist in the apprehension and/or
conviction without payment of a reward.
b. Involved in the misconduct which prompted the offer of the reward by
the City.
c. Acting as an agent for the apprehended and/or convicted person or
persons or if the apprehended and/or convicted person or persons will
benefit from payment of the reward.
§ 7-18.6 COMPTON § 7-19.1
AO:214
POSTED PROPERTY — Shall mean any property of a class specified in
these subsections pertaining to trespass which shall have been posted in
the required manner.
§ 7-19.2. Classes of Property. [Ord. #856, § 3605.4]
Any property may be posted against trespass in the manner provided in this
section and thereby become "posted property" subject to the provisions of
this section applicable to posted property, if such property be used, or be
designed to be used for any one or more of the following purposes:
§ 7-19.3. Posting. [Ord. #856, § 3605.5]
Any property of a class or classes described in the preceding section may
be posted against trespass in the following manner:
a. An oil well, oil field, tank farm, refinery, compressor plant, absorption
plant, pipe line, pumping station or reservoir, used for the extraction,
treatment, handling, storage or transmission of oil, gas, gasoline,
petroleum or any product or products thereof.
b. A gas plant, gas storage station, gas meter or regulator station, gas
odorant station, gas pipe line, or appurtenances, or any other property
used in the transmission or distribution of gas.
c. A reservoir, dam, generating plant, receiving station, distributing
station, transformer, transmission line, or any appurtenances, used for
the storage of water for the generation of hydroelectric power, or for
the generation of electricity by water or steam or by any other
apparatus or method suitable for the generation of electricity, or for the
handling, transmission, reception, or distribution, of electric energy.
d. The transmission of telegraphic or telephonic messages, or radio
communication system.
e. A dam, reservoir, pumping plant, aqueduct, canal, tunnel, siphon,
conduit, or any other structure facility or conductor, for storing,
diverting, conserving, treating, or conveying, water for public use.
f. The production, storage or manufacture of munitions, potash, soda ash,
borax, cement, chemicals, minerals, dynamite, giant powder, gun
powder, or other explosive.
g. A railroad bridge, tunnel, shop, yard, or other railroad facility.
h. A hangar or mechanical shop used in connection with the training of
cadet flyers for the United States Government of any of the armed
services thereof.
i. Any use appurtenant or incidental to any of the uses above described.
a. Any such property, if it be not enclosed within a fence and if it be of an
area not exceeding one acre, and if it have no lineal dimension
§ 7-19.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-19.3
AO:215
§ 7-19.4. Posted Property. [Ord. #856, §§ 3605.6 — 3605.9]
No person shall enter upon, on, or go across any "posted property" without
the written permission of the owner, tenant, or occupant in legal possession
or control thereof.
§ 7-19.5. False Reports. [Ord. #856, § 3606]
No person shall knowingly make or give any false report to any public
official or employee of the City with the intent or for the purposes of having
said public official or employee act upon the same.
exceeding one mile, by posting "No Trespass" signs at each corner of
the area so posted and at each entrance thereto.
b. Any such property, if it be not enclosed within a fence and if it be of an
area exceeding one acre, or if it contain any lineal dimension exceeding
one mile, by posting "No Trespass" signs along or near the exterior
boundaries of the area so posted at intervals of not more than 600 feet
and also at each corner thereof, and, if such property have definite
entrance or entrances thereto, at each such entrance.
c. Any such property, it if be enclosed within a fence and if it be of an area
not exceeding one acre and if it have no lineal dimension exceeding one
mile, by posting "No Trespass" signs at each corner of such fence and at
each entrance thereto.
d. Any such property, if it be enclosed within a fence and if it be of an area
exceeding one acre or if it have any lineal dimension exceeding one
mile, by posting "No Trespass" signs on, or along the line of, such fence
at intervals of not more than 600 feet and also at each corner thereof
and at each entrance thereto.
e. Any such property, if it consists of poles or towers or appurtenant
structures for the suspension of wires or other conductors for
conveying electricity or telegraphic or telephonic messages, by affixing
upon two or more sides of such poles or towers "No Trespass" signs but
such posting shall render only the pole or tower or appurtenant
structure "posted property."
a. Removal of Sign. No person shall without authority tear down, deface
or destroy any "No Trespass" sign posted under the provisions of this
section.
b. Loitering. No person shall loiter in the immediate vicinity of any "posted
property."
c. Exceptions. This section does not apply to any entry, in the course of
duty, of any peace or police officer or other duly authorized public
officer, nor does it apply to the lawful use of an established and existing
right-of-way for public road purposes.
§ 7-19.3 COMPTON § 7-20
AO:216
§ 7-20. CAMPING, SLEEPING AND/OR STORAGE OF PERSONAL
PROPERTY ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
§ 7-20.1. Findings. [Ord. #2285]
The public streets and other public areas within the City should be readily
accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use
of these areas for camping purposes, storage of personal property, and
sleeping interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they
were intended. In addition, using such areas in a manner different than
what the area was designed for creates a risk of harm to all users.
§ 7-20.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2285; amended 7-2-2019 by Ord. No.
2313]
For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
CAMP — In light of all of the circumstances, residing in or using a public
park or other public property for living accommodation purposes such as
making preparations to sleep overnight, including the laying down bedding
for the purpose of sleeping or storing personal belongings, blankets, sheets,
other bedding material, luggage, backpacks, kitchen utensils, cookware
and similar material; erecting, maintaining or occupying any structure with
natural or artificial material, including a building or tent; making any fire
or using any tents; regular cooking of meals; living in a parked trailer,
camper shell, motor home, or any vehicle; or setting up or using any camp
paraphernalia.
CAMP FACILITIES — Includes, but is not limited to, tents, huts, temporary
shelters, parked trailers, camper shells, motor homes or any vehicle.
CAMP PARAPHERNALIA — Includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots,
beds, bed rolls, sleeping bags, hammocks, shopping carts, recyclable
material and/or non-City-designated cooking facilities and similar
equipment, or personal possessions that would facilitate one's use of a park,
public property, or any portion of the public right-of-way as a temporary
residence.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any public park, public street, alley, lane, public
right-of-way, or any public parking lot or public area whether improved or
unimproved.
SHELTER SPACE — Any temporary and available housing shelter that
offers free overnight indoor sleeping accommodations to the unsheltered
individual.
Shelter space shall be considered available if:
1. A shelter space is open and accessible;
The shelter space is within City boundaries or within 20 miles of
the City's boundary;
2.
a.
§ 7-20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-20.2
AO:217
STORE — In light of all of the circumstances, to put aside or accumulate for
use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location any
personal property on public property.
UNSHELTERED INDIVIDUAL — An individual that lacks a fixed, regular
and nighttime residence and lives in a vehicle, a RV/camper, tent, van or on
the street or in any other makeshift shelter.
VEHICLE — Includes any vehicle that is self-propelled or a device by
which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon
a highway. "Vehicle" does not include a self-propelled wheelchair, invalid
tricycle, or motorized quadricycle when operated by a person who, by
reason of physical disability, is otherwise unable to move about as a
pedestrian.
§ 7-20.3. Unlawful Camping. [Ord. #2285]
Unless otherwise permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to
camp or use camp paraphernalia and/or camp facilities in or on any public
park, street, sidewalk or other public property.
§ 7-20.4. Storage of Personal Property in/on Public Property. [Ord.
#2285]
Except as otherwise permitted, it shall be unlawful for any person to store
personal property, including camp facilities and/or camp paraphernalia, in
or on any public park, street, sidewalk, or other public property.
§ 7-20.5. Sleeping on Public Property. [Ord. #2285]
Except as otherwise permitted, it shall be unlawful for any person to sleep
in or on any public street, sidewalk, walkway, or other public ways intended
for pedestrian or vehicular use, public park, grounds of City-owned and/
or City-maintained buildings, facilities or other improved City-owned or
maintained by the City.
§ 7-20.6. Living and/or Sleeping in Vehicles on Public Property.
[Ord. #2285; amended 7-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2313]
In the case of a family unit, the shelter space is open and accessible
and the shelter requires adult men and women to sleep separately.
3.
Shelter space shall not be considered available if:
In the case of a family unit, the family would have to be separated
into two or more different shelter spaces;
1.
The individual would be disqualified from accessing a shelter space
due to any restrictions, rules or covenants beyond their use or
control; or
2.
The shelter space required mandatory participation in a program
or act as a prerequisite to access or use of the shelter space.
3.
b.
§ 7-20.2 COMPTON § 7-20.6
AO:218
§ 7-20.7. Penalties. [Added 7-2-2019 by Ord. No. 231343]
§ 7-20.8. Notice of Intent to Enforce and Clean-Up. [Ord. #2285]
a. Unless otherwise permitted by law, it is unlawful for any person to
occupy any parked trailer, camper shell, motor home, or any vehicle
located in any public park or other public place or on any public street
for the purpose of living or sleeping.
b. For purposes of this section, occupying for the purpose of "living or
sleeping" shall include, but not be limited to, acts of sleeping, living in,
occupying as a dwelling or any other sojourn or stay within the vehicle
not directly related to driving the vehicle.
a. The following enforcement procedures shall apply to persons found to
be in violation of any subsection of § 7-20:
1. Upon a first offense, an enforcement officer shall issue a verbal
warning to the person.
2. Upon a second offense, an enforcement officer shall issue a citation
to the person in violation. Persons found to be in violation of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be liable to the penalty established in Chapter 1, § 1-6.
3. Upon a third offense, an enforcement officer shall make an arrest of
the person found to be in violation. Persons found to be in violation
of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be liable to the penalty established in Chapter 1, § 1-6.
4. If applicable, upon arrest, the vehicle shall be seized and
impounded. Impoundment shall be for a period of up to 30 days.
b. Section 7-20.7 is not applicable when an unsheltered person is sleeping
on public property or in a vehicle and there is no available shelter space
as defined in § 7-20.2.
a. The following notice procedures shall apply to camps and/or camp
facilities located in or on public property which are inhabited by 10 or
more individuals who have been in place for more than 30 days:
1. Approximately 10 days prior to undertaking a clean-up, the City
shall make reasonable efforts to provide informal notice to any
present occupants of the camp and/or camp facilities through faceto-
face communications and/or distribution of informational flyers,
as deemed appropriate.
2. At least 72 hours prior to undertaking a clean-up, the City shall
seek to provide written notice of the intended clean-up by posting
and/or distributing written notice in a manner which is reasonably
43.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections 7-20.7 through 7-20.9
as Subsections 7-20.8 through 7-20.10.
§ 7-20.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-20.8
AO:219
calculated to provide notice to any occupants of the camp and/or
camp facilities. The written notice of intended clean-up shall be in
substantially the form specified in Subsection 7-20.8c, below.
b. The following notice procedures shall apply to camps and/or camp
facilities which are either inhabited by fewer than 10 individuals or
have been in place for fewer than 30 days:
1. At least 72 hours prior to undertaking a clean-up, the City shall
seek to provide written notice of the intended clean-up by posting
and/or distributing written notice in a manner which is reasonably
calculated to provide notice to any occupants of the camp and/or
camp facilities. The written notice of intended clean-up shall be in
substantially the form specified in Subsection 7-20.8c, below.
c. The written notice of intention to enforce and clean-up a camp and/or
camp facility shall be in substantially the following form:
NOTICE OF CODE ENFORCEMENT AND CLEAN-UP
The City of Compton shall be enforcing provisions of the Compton
Municipal Code which prohibit the placement or storage of temporary
shelters, personal property, or trash and refuse in public areas of the
City.
The clean-up shall take place in the vicinity of:
Address or Description of Location
at any time following expiration of 72 hours after the date of this
Notice. Any individuals storing personal property within this area are
in violation of § 7-20 of the Compton Municipal Code. At the time the
clean-up takes place, the City of Compton shall remove any and all
temporary shelters, personal property, and trash and refuse from this
area.
Personal property will be stored without charge for a period of
90 days. Individuals wishing to reclaim personal property collected
by the City as part of this clean-up may do so by contacting:
City Staff Name and Title
at
Phone Number
during the period of 90 days following the date of the clean-up. Any
items of personal property not claimed within that time may be
disposed of by the City.
Continued violations may result in citation and/or arrest
pursuant to the following laws:
§ 7-20.8 COMPTON § 7-20.8
AO:220
§ 7-20.9. Removal of Trash, Debris and Hazardous Substances and
Documentation of Site Conditions. [Ord. #2285]
§ 7-20.10. Collection, Storage and Disposition of Personal Property.
[Ord. #2285]
[ ] Compton Municipal Code 7-20 (prohibited activities in City public
areas) and,
[ ] California Penal Code § 647(e) (lodging in a public or private place
without permission of the owner).
Location of Notice:
Date of Notice:
a. The City shall collect and dispose of any solid waste, trash, debris, junk,
garbage, or refuse which does not reasonably appear to belong to any
individual or if the apparent owner has expressly authorized disposal.
b. The City shall photograph the area where clean-up is to occur to
document site conditions before and after the clean-up.
a. Personal property will be stored at no charge to the owner for a period
of at least 90 days, during which time the property will be available to
be reclaimed by the owner. After the expiration of 90 days, any
unclaimed property may be disposed of by the City as deemed
appropriate.
b. After the removal of personal property, the City shall post a written
notice of property retrieval in substantially the following form:
CITY OF COMPTON NOTICE OF PROPERTY RETRIEVAL
On _________ (date), 20 _____, at _______ (time) a.m./p.m., the City of
Compton conducted a clean-up at the following location:
Address or Description of Location
and removed personal property that was left in the area. Individuals
wishing to reclaim personal property that may have been collected by
the City as part of the clean-up may do so by contacting
City Staff Name and Title
at
Phone Number
for a period of 90 days following the date of the clean-up. If the
property is not claimed by _________ (date), it will be disposed of by
the City.
§ 7-20.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-21
AO:221
§ 7-21. OTHER ACTS AGAINST THE PUBLIC NOT OTHERWISE
COVERED BY THIS CHAPTER.
§ 7-21.1. Destruction of Trees. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4710.1]
No person, without first obtaining permission from the Chief Building
Inspector, shall cut down or remove any tree or shrub within any street,
parkway or public alley. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to
maliciously damage, deface or destroy any such tree or shrub.
§ 7-21.2. Parkway Planting. [Added by Ord. #1577, § 4710.2]
No person, without first obtaining permission from the Chief Building
Inspector, shall plant any tree within the public right-of-way, nor shall any
person plant any species of tree or shrub not approved by the Chief Building
Inspector.
§ 7-21.3. Evading Payment of Admission Fee. [Added by Ord. #1577,
§ 4710.3]
No person, with intent gratuitously to avail himself of the entertainment
of recreation furnished or the privileges conferred therein, shall enter any
theater, stadium, athletic club, ball park, tennis court, bathing plunge or
other place of amusement, entertainment or recreation, for admission to
which an admission fee or membership fee is charged, without first paying
such admission fee or membership fee; provided, however, that any person
who is a bona fide guest of a member of any club may enter such club in
accordance with the rules thereof, and provided further that any person
may enter any place which is within the purview of this subsection with the
consent of the owner or manager thereof; and provided further that this
section shall not be deemed to apply to the entry into any such place by a
law enforcement officer acting within the scope and course of his official
duties.
§ 7-21.4. Solicitation of Tort Claims. [Added by Ord. #1577,
§ 4710.4]
No person shall solicit employment for himself or for any other person,
either directly or through some other person acting on his behalf, to
prosecute, collect, settle, compromise or negotiate for the settlement,
compromise or collection of any tort claim, on behalf of any tort claimant,
in which he himself has no pecuniary interest arising from such tort. The
provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to prevent joint tort
claimants from negotiating with each other for the purpose of combining
respective claims or actions against the tortfeasor.
§ 7-21.5. Formation Flying of Helicopters Prohibited. [Added by
Ord. #1830]
That helicopters be prohibited from flying in formation at an altitude of 700
feet or less within the boundaries of the City of Compton between 1/2 hour
§ 7-21 COMPTON § 7-21.5
AO:222
after sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise without prior permission of the City
Council.
§ 7-21.6. Effective Date and Enforcement. [Added by Ord. #1830]
The number of formation flights has proliferated in recent months and such
flying is reasonably anticipated to occur in the near future for an indefinite
period of time. The above section is urgently needed for the immediate
protection of the public peace, health and safety for the reasons stated
herein and shall become effective immediately upon its publication with the
exception of law enforcement helicopters.
§ 7-22. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — WARNING SIGNS; DANGERS
OF CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY.
[Ord. #1755, § 1]
a. Duty to Post. Any person or entity who owns, operates, manages, leases
or rents a premises offering for sale or dispensing for consideration to
the public alcohol beverages, including beer and wine, shall cause a
sign or notice to be posted or displayed on the premises as provided in
this section. The sign or notice shall comply with the readability
requirements specified herein and shall read substantially as follows:
"WARNING: DRINKING WINE, BEER AND OTHER ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS." In
no event shall a sign as required herein be smaller than eight inches
wide and eight inches long, nor shall any lettering therein be less than
one inch in height.
b. Placement. A sign or notice required by Paragraph a above shall be
placed as follows:
1. Where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, including beer
and wine, to the public is primarily intended for consumption off
the premises, at least one sign shall be so placed as to assure that it
is readable from all locations at which said sale or dispensing
occur.
2. Where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, including beer
and wine, to the public is primarily provided through over-thecounter
service, at least one sign shall be placed to assure that it is
readable from all counter locations available to the public.
3. Where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, including beer
and wine, to the public is primarily provided for consumption on
the premises by the public at tables served by food or beverage
persons, at least one sign shall be placed to assure it is readable by
the public entering the premises; provided however that notices
may be placed or displayed at each of the tables in a manner which
will assure that the notices are as readily visible and readable as
materials provided to the public which list food and beverage
prices.
§ 7-21.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-22
AO:223
§ 7-23. CIGARETTE AND ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
ADVERTISEMENTS. [Ord. #1983, § 1]
c. In the event that a substantial number of the public patronizing a
premises offering for sale or dispensing for consideration alcoholic
beverages, including beer and wine, uses a language other than English
as a primary language, any sign or notice required by Paragraph a shall
be worded in English and the primary language or languages involved.
a. No person may place any sign, poster, placard or graphic display that
advertises cigarettes or alcoholic beverages in a publicly visible
location. In this section, "publicly visible location" includes outdoor
billboards, sides of buildings and freestanding signboards. This section
shall not apply in the following cases:
1. (a) With respect to cigarettes, the placements of signs, including
advertisements, inside any premises used by a holder of a
license required by Subsection 9-2.1a25, § 9-2.25 of this Code;
or
(b) With respect to alcoholic beverages, the placement of signs,
including advertisements, inside any premises used by a holder
of a license required by Subsection 9-12.42 of this Code; or
(c) On commercial vehicles used for transporting cigarettes or
alcoholic beverages;
2. Any sign that contains a generic description of cigarettes or
alcoholic beverages;
3. (a) With respect to cigarettes, any neon or electrically charged
sign on premises used by a holder of a license required by
Subsection 9-2.1a,25 of this Code that is provided as part of a
promotion of a particular brand of cigarettes; or
(b) With respect to alcoholic beverages, any neon or electrically
charged sign on premises used by a holder of a license
required by Subsection 9-12.42 of this Code that is provided as
part of a promotion of a particular brand of alcoholic beverage;
4. Any sign on an MTA (Metropolitan Transit Authority) vehicle;
5. Any sign on facilities for whose use applicants have been given
special permits pursuant to § 18-8 (issued by the Department of
Recreation Services) of this Code.
6. Any sign on property adjacent to an interstate highway; or
b. Any cigarette and alcoholic beverage advertisements which now exist
and are prohibited by the provisions of this section must be removed
within two years of the effective date of this section.
§ 7-22 COMPTON § 7-23
AO:224
§ 7-23A. TOBACCO RETAILER'S PERMIT. [Ord. #2159, § 1 [7-23-1]]
§ 7-23A.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2159, § 2 [7-23-1.1]
BUSINESS AND LICENSE DIVISION — Shall mean the Compton Municipal
Law Enforcement Services, Business and License Division or its designee.
CITY — Shall mean the City of Compton, California.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall mean any employee or agent of the
City who is designated to enforce any provision of this Code.
PERSON — Shall mean any natural person, partnership, cooperative
association, domestic or foreign corporation, personal representative,
authorized agent, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.
PROPRIETOR — Shall mean a person with an ownership or managerial
interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when
a person has a 10% or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of
a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial
interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share
ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business.
TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA — Shall mean cigarette papers or wrappers,
pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines,
and any other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or
consumption of tobacco products.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Shall mean: (1) any substance containing tobacco
leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah
tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other
preparation of tobacco; and (2) any product or formulation of matter
containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured,
sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that
the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does
not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food
and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco product
dependence.
c. This section shall not be construed to permit any display that is
otherwise restricted or prohibited by law.
d. Violation of these provisions shall be a misdemeanor. The penalty for
violation of this section is set forth in Subsection 1-6.1 of this Code.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage responsible
tobacco retailing and to discourage violations of tobacco-related laws
that prohibit the sale or distribution of tobacco products to minors and
prohibit the display of tobacco products from being within reach of the
public. This permit process is not intended to expand or reduce the
degree to which tobacco-related activities are regulated by federal or
state law, including criminal prosecution for violations of such laws, or
to alter the penalty provided therefor.
§ 7-23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-23A.1
AO:225
TOBACCO RETAILER — Shall mean any person who sells, offers for sale, or
does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco paraphernalia, or who distributes free or low cost
samples of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. "Tobacco retailing"
shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard
to quantity of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia sold,
offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange.
§ 7-23A.2. Requirements for and Limitations on Tobacco Retailer's
Permit. [Ord. #2159, § 3 [7-23-1.2]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer without
first obtaining and maintaining a valid Tobacco Retailer's Permit
pursuant to Subsection 7-23A.3 for each location at which that activity
is to occur.
b. A tobacco retailer or proprietor without a valid Tobacco Retailer's
Permit, including, for example, a person whose permit has been
revoked:
1. Shall keep all tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia out of
public view. The public display of tobacco products or tobacco
paraphernalia in violation of this provision shall constitute tobacco
retailing without a permit under this section.
2. Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco products or
tobacco paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of
such products from the tobacco retailer's location or that could
lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be
obtained at that location.
c. Nothing in this section shall be construed to grant any person obtaining
and maintaining a Tobacco Retailer's Permit any status or right other
than the right to act as a tobacco retailer at the location or locations in
the City identified in the permit application and/or on the face of the
permit.
d. No permit will be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at any place
other than a fixed location or locations; peripatetic tobacco retailing
and tobacco retailing from vehicles are prohibited.
e. No permit may issue to authorize tobacco retailing at a location that is
licensed under state law to serve alcoholic beverages for consumption
on the premises (e.g., an "on sale" license issued by the California
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control) and no license may issue to
authorize tobacco retailing at any location offering food for sale for
consumption by guests on the premises.
f. Tobacco retailing without a valid Tobacco Retailer's Permit is a public
nuisance. Each day that a person offers tobacco, tobacco products or
tobacco paraphernalia for sale or exchange within the City without a
§ 7-23A.1 COMPTON § 7-23A.2
AO:226
§ 7-23A.3. Application Procedure. [Ord. #2159, § 4 [7-23-1.3]
valid Tobacco Retailer Permit shall constitute a separate violation of
this section.
a. A complete application for a Tobacco Retailer's Permit shall be
submitted to the Business and License Division. Payment of all
necessary fees, as set forth by resolution, shall be submitted to the City
Treasurer's office.
b. The application shall be sought in the name of the person proposing to
conduct retail tobacco sales and shall be signed by such person or, in
the case of a business, by an authorized agent thereof. A valid City
business license is also required before a Tobacco Retailer's Permit may
be issued. Each person applying for a Tobacco Retailer's Permit shall be
responsible for reviewing the conditions of conducting retail tobacco
sales within the City and shall agree to abide by these conditions by
signing the application under penalty of perjury. All applications shall
be submitted on the form supplied by the Business and License Division
and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
1. The legal name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
2. The business name, address and telephone number of the fixed
location or locations for which a Tobacco Retailer's Permit is
sought.
3. A single name, mailing address, and/or facsimile number
authorized by each proprietor to receive all communications and
notices required by, authorized by, or convenient to the
enforcement of this section. If an authorized address and/or
facsimile number is not supplied, each proprietor shall be
understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business
address specified in Paragraph 2 above.
4. Proof that the location or locations for which a Tobacco Retailer's
Permit is sought has been issued a valid State Tobacco Retailer's
License by the California Board of Equalization.
5. A statement whether or not the applicant has ever applied for and
was denied or has been issued a Tobacco Retailer's Permit from the
City or any other jurisdiction which was revoked or suspended and
the dates and circumstances surrounding the suspension and/or
revocation.
6. A statement of whether the applicant, its agents or employees have
been convicted of a felony involving or related to the sale of
tobacco, tobacco paraphernalia or tobacco products within the past
five years.
§ 7-23A.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-23A.3
AO:227
§ 7-23A.4. Issuance and Renewal of Permit. [Ord. #2159, § 5
[7-23-1.4]
7. Such additional information as the Business and License Division
deems necessary for the administration and/or enforcement of this
section.
c. All information required to be submitted in order to apply for a Tobacco
Retailer's Permit shall be updated with the Business and License
Division whenever the information changes. A tobacco retailer shall
provide the Business and License Division with any updates within 10
business days of a change.
d. The information specified in Subsections 7-23A.3b2 and 7-23A.3b3
above, shall be available to the public for all currently licensed tobacco
retailers. Upon request, the Business and License Division shall provide
a compilation of this information to any person within a reasonable time
and subject to a fee, as set forth by resolution, approximating the actual
cost of compiling and presenting the information.
a. Upon the receipt of a complete application for a Tobacco Retailer's
Permit and the payment of the applicable permit fee, the Business and
License Division shall issue a permit unless substantial evidence
demonstrates that one or more of the following bases for denial exists:
1. The information presented in the application is incomplete,
inaccurate, or false. Intentionally supplying inaccurate or false
information shall be a violation of this section.
2. The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at an
address that appears on a permit that is suspended, has been
revoked, or is subject to suspension or revocation proceedings for
violation of any of the provisions of Subsection 7-23A.3, provided,
however, this paragraph shall not constitute a basis for denial of a
permit if either or both of the following apply:
(a) The applicant provides the Business and License Division with
documentation demonstrating, by clear and convincing
evidence that the applicant has acquired or is acquiring the
location or business in an arm's length transaction. For the
purposes of this paragraph, an "arm's length transaction" is
defined as a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration
that reflects the fair market value in the open market between
two informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any
compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between
relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for which a
significant purpose is avoiding the effect of the violations of
this section is not an "arm's length transaction."
(b) It has been more than three years since the most recent permit
for that location was revoked.
§ 7-23A.3 COMPTON § 7-23A.4
AO:228
§ 7-23A.5. Permits Not Transferable. [Ord. #2159, § 6 [7-23-1.5]
A Tobacco Retailer's Permit may not be transferred from one person to
another or from one location to another. Should a new person acquire a
business that is engaged in tobacco retailing or the location changes, a new
permit must be obtained prior to the commencement of any retail activity
by the new person or at the new location.
§ 7-23A.6. Display of Permit. [Ord. #2159, § 7 [7-23-1.6]
Each Tobacco Retailer's Permit shall be prominently displayed in a publicly
visible location where tobacco retailing occurs. The permit or duplicate
permits are to be displayed at each location identified in the application
submitted pursuant to Subsection 7-23A.3.
3. The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing by a
person who has a currently suspended Tobacco Retailer's Permit or
who has had a permit revoked, pursuant to Subsection 7-23A.9,
within the last three years.
4. The application seeks authorization from tobacco retailing in a
manner which would violate this Code or any other local, state or
federal law.
5. The applicant, its agents or employees, have been convicted of a
felony involving or related to the sale of tobacco, tobacco
paraphernalia or tobacco products within the past five years.
6. The issuance of a Tobacco Retailer's Permit would be in conflict
with any other City ordinance.
b. A Tobacco Retailer's Permit is invalid unless the appropriate fee has
been paid in full and the term of the license has not expired. The term of
a Tobacco Retailer Permit is one year. Each tobacco retailer shall apply
for the renewal of his or her Tobacco Retailer's Permit and submit the
permit fee no later than 30 days prior to the expiration of the term.
c. A Tobacco Retailer's Permit that is not timely renewed shall expire at
the end of its term. To reinstate a license that has expired, or to renew a
license not timely renewed pursuant to Paragraph b, the proprietor
must:
1. Submit the permit fee plus a reinstatement fee, which will be set by
resolution; and
2. Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor: (i) has not
sold and will not sell any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia
after the permit expiration date and before the permit is renewed;
or (ii) has waited the appropriate ineligibility period established for
tobacco retailing without a permit, as set forth in Subsection
7-23A.10a of this section, before seeking renewal of the permit.
§ 7-23A.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-23A.7
AO:229
§ 7-23A.7. Permit Fee. [Ord. #2159, § 8 [7-23-1.7]
The fee to issue or to renew a Tobacco Retailer's Permit shall be established
by resolution of the City Council. The fee shall be calculated so as to recover
the total cost of both permit administration and permit enforcement,
including, for example, issuing the permit, administering the permit
program, retailer education, retailer inspection and compliance checks,
documentation of violations, and prosecution of violators, but shall not
exceed the costs of the regulatory program authorized by this section. All
fees shall be used exclusively to fund the program. Fees are nonrefundable
except as may be required by law.
§ 7-23A.8. Permit Violation — Compliance Monitoring. [Ord. #2159,
§ 9 [7-23-1.8]
§ 7-23A.9. Suspension or Revocation of Permit. [Ord. #2159, § 10
[7-23-1.9]
a. In the course of tobacco retailing or in the operation of the business or
maintenance of the location or locations for which a permit issued, it
shall be a violation of this section for any permittee, or his or her agents
or employee, to violate any local, state or federal tobacco-related law.
b. Compliance with this section shall be monitored by Municipal Law
Enforcement Services. Notwithstanding the forgoing, any City peace
officer or Law Enforcement Officer is authorized to enforce the
provisions of this section. The Municipal Law Enforcement Services
shall check compliance of each tobacco retailer at least once per
twelve-month period. Compliance checks shall determine, at a
minimum, if the tobacco retailer is conducting business in a manner
that complies with tobacco laws regulating youth access to tobacco.
When appropriate, the compliance checks shall determine compliance
with other laws, applicable to tobacco retailing. Nothing in this
paragraph shall create a right of action in any permit or other person
against the City or its agents.
c. Municipal Law Enforcement Services may use youth decoys and shall
comply with protocols for the compliance checks developed in
consultation with Los Angeles County Department of Health Services.
The City shall not enforce any law establishing a minimum age for
tobacco purchases or possession against a person who otherwise might
be in violation of such law because of such person's age (herein "youth
decoy") if the potential violation occurs when the youth decoy is
participating in a compliance check supervised by a peace officer, a law
enforcement officer or an agent of another governmental agency.
a. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a Tobacco Retailer's
Permit may be suspended or revoked if the City finds, or any court of
competent jurisdiction determines, after notice to the tobacco retailer
permittee and an opportunity for the permittee to be heard, that the
permittee, or his or her agents or employees, has violated any of the
§ 7-23A.7 COMPTON § 7-23A.9
AO:230
provisions of this section or any other local, state or federal law relating
to tobacco, or in a different legal proceeding, has pleaded guilty, "no
contest" or its equivalent, or admitted to a violation of any law
designated in this section. Furthermore, a Tobacco Retailer's Permit
shall be revoked if the Municipal Law Enforcement Services finds, after
the permittee is afforded reasonable notice and an opportunity to be
heard, that one or more of the bases for denial of a permit under
Subsection 7-23A.3 existed at the time application was made or at any
time before the license issued.
1. Upon a finding by the City of a first violation of any provision of this
article, within any three-year period, the Municipal Law
Enforcement Services, Business and License Division may:
(a) Issue a written warning to the permittee.
(b) Advise the permittee of the penalties for further violations of
the section.
(c) Require the permittee to provide documentation to the City
that all employees engaged in the retail sales of tobacco have
received training in a City approved program within 60 days
after the warning, or such other time as shall be set by the
Business and License Division.
(d) Suspend said Tobacco Retailer's Permit for 30 to 90 days.
2. Upon a finding by the City of a second permit violation of any
provision of this section, within any three-year period, the Tobacco
Retailer's Permit may be suspended up to one year.
3. Upon finding by the City of a third permit violation of any provision
of this section, within any three-year period, the Tobacco Retailer's
Permit may be permanently revoked.
b. A Tobacco Retailer's Permit shall be revoked if the City finds, after
notice to the permittee and an opportunity for the permittee to be
heard, that any one of the conditions listed below existed at the time of
the violation. The revocation of a Tobacco Retailer's Permit shall
prohibit the permittee from tobacco retailing within the City for a
period of three years. The revocation shall be without prejudice to the
filing of a new application for a Tobacco Retailer's Permit by a new
applicant at the address where a permit has been revoked. Any new
application for a Tobacco Retailer's Permit by a new applicant at an
address where a permit has been revoked shall be approved by
resolution of the City Council.
1. One or more of the bases for denial of the Tobacco Retailer's Permit
listed in Subsection 7-23A.4 existed at the time the Tobacco
Retailer's Permit application was made or at anytime before the
permit was issued.
§ 7-23A.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-23A.9
AO:231
§ 7-23A.10. Tobacco Retailing Without A Permit. [Ord. #2159, § 11
[7-23-1.10]
2. The application is incomplete for failure to provide the information
required by Subsection 7-23A.3.
3. The information contained in the application, including any
supplemental information, is found to be false in any material
respect.
4. The application seeks authorization for a type of tobacco retailing
that is unlawful pursuant to this Code or any other local, state or
federal law.
c. In the event the City denies, suspends or revokes a Tobacco Retailer's
Permit, written notice of the denial, suspension or revocation shall be
served upon the applicant or permittee, as the case may be, within five
business days of the decision to deny, suspend or revoke the permit to
the mailing address specified in the application.
d. During a period of suspension of a Tobacco Retailer's Permit, the
permittee must remove from public view all tobacco products and
tobacco paraphernalia at the address that appears on the suspended or
revoked Tobacco Retailer's Permit.
a. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if the Business and
License Division finds, or any court of competent jurisdiction
determines, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, that any
person has engaged in tobacco.
b. Retailing at any location without a valid Tobacco Retailer's Permit,
either directly or through the person's agent or employees, the person
shall be ineligible to apply for or be issued a Tobacco Retailer's Permit
for that location as follows:
1. After the first violation of this section at a location within any
eighteen-month period, no new permit may issue for the person at
the location until 30 days have passed from the date of the
violation.
2. After the second violation of this section at a location within any
eighteen-month period, no new permit may issue for the person at
the location until six months have passed from the date of the
violation.
3. After the third violation of this section at a location within any
eighteen-month period, no new permit may issue for the person at
the location until one year has passed from the date of the violation.
c. Tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia offered for sale or
exchange in violation of this section are subject to seizure by the
Municipal Law Enforcement Services or any peace officer and shall be
§ 7-23A.9 COMPTON § 7-23A.10
AO:232
§ 7-23A.11. Notification and Appeals. [Ord. #2159, § 12 [7-23-1.11]
forfeited after the permittee and any other owner of the tobacco
products or tobacco paraphernalia seized is given reasonable notice
and an opportunity to demonstrate that the tobacco products or
tobacco paraphernalia were not offered for sale or exchange in violation
of this section. The decision by Municipal Law Enforcement Services
may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Subsection
7-23A.11. Forfeited tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia shall
be destroyed.
d. For the purposes of the civil remedies provided in this section,
whichever is greater, shall constitute a separate violation of this
section:
1. Each day on which a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia is
offered for sale in violation of this section; or
2. Each individual retail tobacco product and each individual retail
item of tobacco paraphernalia that is distributed, sold, or offered
for sale in violation of this section.
a. Any notice of denial, suspension or revocation of a Tobacco Retailer's
Permit shall state the reasons for such action and the appropriate
remedy or cure, if applicable.
b. Any notification to be given pursuant to Subsection 7-23A.3, shall be
deemed given once the notice is sent by facsimile to the facsimile
number listed on the application, or if no number is listed, when notice
is placed, postage prepaid in the United States mail, addressed to the
applicant at the address shown on the permit application.
c. Any applicant or permittee aggrieved by a decision or action of the
Municipal Law Enforcement Services under this section shall have the
right to appeal such decision to the City Council.
d. Any appeal that is filed pursuant to this Subsection 7-23A.11 shall be
filed, and all appropriate fees, as set forth by resolution, shall be paid,
with the City Clerk within 14 calendar days after notice of denial,
approval or revocation is given by the City. The City Council shall act
upon any such appeal within 28 business days of the filing of the appeal.
e. Upon receipt of an appeal that is filed pursuant to this Subsection
7-23A.11, the City Clerk shall set a date for a hearing of the matter and
give notice of the late, time and place of the hearing to the applicant/
appellant. Prior to such hearing, the Municipal Law Enforcement
Services shall transmit to the City Clerk a report of its findings. At the
hearing by the City Council, the Municipal Law Enforcement Services
shall present all documents on file with respect to the matter being
appealed.
§ 7-23A.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-23A.11
AO:233
§ 7-23A.12. Settlement in Lieu of Hearing. [Ord. #2159, § 13
[7-23-1.12]
§ 7-23A.13. Enforcement. [Ord. #2159, § 14 [7-23-1.13]
f. The City Council shall consider the record and such additional evidence
as may be offered and may affirm, reverse or modify, in whole or in part,
the action hat was appealed. The City Council may also make or
substitute additional decisions or determinations as it finds warranted
under the provisions of this section and may waive any requirement of
Subsection 7-23A.3, where it is found to be in the public interest. The
City Clerk shall transmit a written copy of the City Council's decision to
the applicant/appellant within five business days of the hearing.
a. For the first or second alleged violation of this section within any
eighteen-month period, the City Attorney may engage in settlement
negotiations and may enter into a settlement agreement with a tobacco
retailer alleged to have violated this section without approval from the
City Council.
b. Notice of any settlement shall be provided to the Municipal Law
Enforcement Services, Business and License Division and no hearing
shall be held.
c. Settlements shall not be confidential and shall contain the following
minimum terms:
1. After a first alleged violation of this section at a location within any
eighteen-month period:
(a) An agreement to stop acting as a tobacco retailer for at least
one day;
(b) A settlement payment to the City of an amount up to $1,000;
and
(c) An admission that the violation occurred and a stipulation that
the violation will be counted when considering what penalty
will be assessed for any future violations.
2. After a second alleged violation of this section at a location within
any eighteen-month period:
(a) An agreement to stop acting as a tobacco retailer for at least
10 days;
(b) A settlement payment to the City of an amount up to $5,000;
and
(c) An admission that the violation occurred and a stipulation that
the violation will be counted when considering what penalty
will be assessed for any future violations.
§ 7-23A.11 COMPTON § 7-23A.13
AO:234
§ 7-23A.14. Severability. [Ord. #2159, § 15 [7-23-1.14]
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this section, or the application to any person or circumstances,
is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable, such invalidity or
unenforceability shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the
remaining sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses or phrases of this section, or its application to any other person or
circumstance. The City Council of the City of Compton hereby declares that
it would have adopted each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one
or more other sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses or phrases hereof be declared invalid or unenforceable.
§ 7-24. OPERATION OF BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLERSKATES
ON SIDEWALKS.
§ 7-24.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2038, § 1]
The following words are defined as set forth in this section:
a. The remedies provided by this section are cumulative and in addition to
any other remedies available at law or in equity.
b. Whenever evidence of a violation of this section is obtained in any part
through the participation of a person under the age of 18 years old,
such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any
civil or administrative process brought to enforce this section and the
alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and
persuasiveness of the evidence presented.
c. Violations of this section may, in the discretion of the City Attorney be
prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors.
d. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any
provision of this section shall also constitute a violation of this section.
e. Violations of this section are hereby declared to be public nuisances.
f. In addition to other remedies provided by this section or by other law,
any violation of this section may be remedied by a civil action brought
by the City Attorney, including, for example, administrative or judicial
nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement
proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief.
a. BICYCLES – Shall mean a vehicle or a device in a tandem arrangement,
which is propelled solely by human power and upon which one or more
persons may ride.
b. ROADWAY – Shall mean that portion of the highway or street improved
or designed especially for vehicular use or travel.
§ 7-23A.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-24.1
AO:235
§ 7-24.2. Use or Operation of Bicycles and Skateboards Prohibited.
[Ord. #2038, § 1]
§ 7-24.3. Designation of Additional Prohibited Areas. [Ord. #2038,
§ 1]
The City Council of the City may from time to time review the business and
commercial areas within the City boundaries and may declare after such
review, areas that may be specifically designated for the nonuse of bicycles,
skateboards and roller-skates. Such declaration may be accomplished by
adoption or amendment of existing ordinances or by declaration and
passage and adoption of a resolution.
§ 7-24.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2038, § 1]
A violation of this Chapter of the Municipal Code shall be an infraction. The
penalty for violation of this section is set forth in Subsection 1-6.3 of this
Code.
§ 7-25. (RESERVED)44 [Ord. #2192; repealed by Ord. #2296]
c. ROLLER-SKATES – Shall mean any device or conveyance with any
number of wheels, tracks or gliding surface, whether off-set or in-line,
worn on each foot, and which are designed to be or can be propelled by
human power, and include "rollerblades."
d. SIDEWALK – Shall mean that portion of a road, street or highway
designed or ordinarily used for pedestrian travel and includes any
pedestrian walkways in any parks within the commercial or business
districts of the City.
e. SKATEBOARD – Shall mean any single plat-form mounted on wheels,
which is propelled solely by human power and which has no mechanism
or other device with which to steer or control the movement or
direction of the platform.
a. It is unlawful for any person(s) to use or operate any bicycles,
skateboards, or roller-skates upon or in any public parking lot, any Cityowned
permit parking lot, any City-owned parking structure(s) or
facilities designed and utilized for parking use.
b. It is unlawful for any person(s) to use or operate any bicycles,
skateboards, or roller-skates upon or in any sidewalk, street, or other
City-owned property designations in the following locations:
1. Compton Civic Center Plaza;
2. Compton Boulevard from its intersection point with Willowbrook
Avenue to its intersection point with Acacia Avenue.
44.Editor's Note: Sex Offender Residency Restrictions repealed by Ord. #2296.
§ 7-24.1 COMPTON § 7-26
AO:236
§ 7-26. SOLICITATION OF EMPLOYMENT, BUSINESS OR
CONTRIBUTIONS OF MONEY OR OTHER PROPERTY.
§ 7-26.1. Legislative Purpose. [Ord. #2196, § 1]
It is the intent of the Council of the City of Compton to protect the health
and welfare of the general public and promote safer and more efficient
traffic flow in industrial and commercial zones by reasonably regulating the
time, place and manner of the solicitation of employment and/or business
from pedestrians and occupants of vehicles on the public rights-of-way
and in public and private parking areas. These regulations are content
neutral and are not intended and do not restrict the right of free speech or
alternative channels of communication.
§ 7-26.2. Findings. [Ord. #2196, § 1]
The Council of the City finds, determines and declares that the approaching
and solicitation by pedestrians directed to the occupants of vehicles which
are located in the public rights-of-way and roadways has caused a
significant public safety risk by causing vehicles to stop, impede and block
the flow of traffic in travel lanes within or adjacent to industrial or
commercial zones and that it will be in the interest of the public health,
safety and welfare to restrict the solicitation acts that occur in, within or
directly affect traffic conditions upon any public street, roadway, alley or on
private parking areas within the City.
§ 7-26.3. Definitions. [Ord. #2196, § 1]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following meanings shall apply:
a. ALLEY – Shall mean any highway or street not exceeding 25 feet in
width which is primarily used for access to the rear or side entrances of
abutting property.
b. BUSINESS – Shall mean and includes any type of product, goods,
services, performance or activity which is provided or performed or
offered to be provided or performed in exchange for money, labor,
goods or any other form of consideration.
c. CODE – Shall mean the Compton Municipal Code.
d. EMPLOYMENT – Shall mean the services, industry or labor performed
by a person for wages or other compensation or under any contract of
hire, written or oral, expressed or implied.
e. OCCUPANT – Shall mean a person who occupies a vehicle.
f. PARKWAY – Shall mean that portion of a street or highway other than
the roadway or the sidewalk. In general terms, the space between the
street and the sidewalk.
§ 7-26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-26.3
AO:237
§ 7-26.4. Prohibition of Solicitation in Public Rights-of-Way. [Ord.
#2196, § 1]
g. PEDESTRIAN – Shall mean any individual who is utilizing a public
street, sidewalk, roadway, alleyway, parkway or public or private
parking area while traveling without the benefit of any vehicle as
defined herein.
h. PERSON – Shall mean any individual, company, corporation,
association, business, or other legal entity.
i. PRIVATE PARKING AREA – Shall mean privately owned property which
is designated or used primarily for the parking of vehicles and which
adjoins one or more commercial establishments or adjoins any property
in a nonresidential zone, including, but not limited to, driveways,
setbacks and portions of that area that are landscaped.
j. ROADWAY – Shall mean that portion of the public right-of-way that is
designated and used primarily for vehicular travel.
k. SOLICIT OR SOLICITATION – Shall mean the act of making a request,
offer or announcement by use of the spoken word, bodily act or gesture.
A solicitation as defined in this section shall be deemed completed when
made, whether or not an employment relationship is created. It shall
not constitute solicitation for a pedestrian to make a request or
announcement using signs or delivering flyers or leaflets.
l. STREET – Shall mean a way or place of whatever nature, publicly
maintained and open to the use of the public for purpose of vehicular
travel. For the purposes of this section, street includes highway and any
parking area or lot owned or operated by the City or the Community
Redevelopment Agency of the City of Compton.
m. VEHICLE – Shall mean a vehicle as defined in California Vehicle Code §
670 as the same now reads or may hereafter be amended.
a. No person shall stand in or on any portion of a public right-of-way,
including any street, roadway, alley, highway or driveway that is within,
or immediately adjacent to, any industrial or commercial zone within
the City and solicit employment, business or contributions of money or
other property from the occupant of any vehicle that is traveling upon a
public right-of-way, including a street, roadway, alley, highway or
driveway or is stopped in or blocking a lane of traffic. This section does
not prohibit any solicitation that is directed at the occupant of a vehicle
that is legally stopped at the side of the roadway and out of the lanes of
traffic.
b. No person, while the occupant of any vehicle that is traveling upon a
public right-of-way, including a street, roadway, alley, highway or
driveway or is stopped in or blocking a lane of traffic, shall solicit
employment, business or contributions of money or other property from
a person who is on or within the public right-of-way, including any
§ 7-26.3 COMPTON § 7-26.4
AO:238
§ 7-26.5. Prohibition of Solicitation in Unauthorized Locations
Within Private Parking Areas. [Ord. #2196, § 1]
§ 7-26.6. Violation — Penalty. [Ord. #2196, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this section. Any person violating any
provision of this section or failing to comply with any of its requirements
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each
and every person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of any of
the provisions of this section is committed, continued or permitted by such
person, and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this section.
§ 7-26.7. Civil Remedies. [Ord. #2196, § 1]
street, roadway, highway or driveway that is within, or immediately
adjacent to, any industrial or commercial zone within the City.
c. This section shall not apply to peddlers or other vendors who have a
permit and/or license pursuant to Chapter 9 of this Code.
a. No person shall solicit or attempt to solicit employment, business or
contributions of money or other property from a location within a
private parking area as defined in this section. This section shall not
apply to a solicitation to perform employment or business for the owner
or lawful tenants of the subject premises.
b. This section shall only apply to private parking areas when the
following occurs:
1. The owner or person in lawful possession of the private parking
area establishes a written policy which provides area(s) for the
lawful solicitation of employment and/or business, in locations
which are accessible to the public and do not interfere with normal
business operations of the commercial premises. Nothing herein
shall require a private property owner to permit solicitations at
their premises.
2. The owner or person in lawful possession of the private parking
area has caused a notice to be posted in a conspicuous place at
each entrance to such private parking area not less than 18 inches
by 14 inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height,
but not to exceed in total area six square feet. Said notice shall be
in substantially the following form: "It is a misdemeanor to engage
in the solicitation of employment and/or business in areas of this
private parking lot which are not approved for such activity by the
property owner."
§ 7-26.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-26.7
AO:239
§ 7-27. SPECTATOR PROHIBITION AT ILLEGAL SPEED CONTESTS
OR EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED.
§ 7-27.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2205, § 1]
The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens and business owners of the City of Compton by prohibiting
spectators at illegal speed contests (street races) with the aim of
significantly curbing this criminal activity. This section targets a very clear,
limited population and gives proper notice to citizens as to what activities
are lawful and what activities are unlawful. In discouraging spectators,
the act of organizing and participating in illegal street races will be
discouraged.
§ 7-27.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2205, § 1]
For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply:
a. The violation of any of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
nuisance and may be abated by the City, or, on private property, by the
owner or lawful tenant of that private property, through civil process by
means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in
any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.
b. In addition to the civil process described in Paragraph a above, at the
request of the property owner or lawful tenant of the real property upon
which the violation occurs, this chapter may be enforced by any law
enforcement officer by citation of any person who violates this section,
or by any law enforcement officer or private security by removal from
the private property of any person who violates this section.
a. ILLEGAL MOTOR VEHICLE SPEED CONTEST OR ILLEGAL
EXHIBITION OF SPEED – Shall mean any speed contest or exhibition of
speed referred to in California Vehicle Code §§ 23109(a) and 23109(c).
b. EVENT – Shall mean any speed contest or exhibition of speed referred
to in California Vehicle Code §§ 23109(a) and 23109(c).
c. PREPARATIONS FOR THE ILLEGAL MOTOR VEHICLE SPEED
CONTEST OR ILLEGAL EXHIBITION OF SPEED – Shall mean
situations which include but are not limited to: (1) a group of motor
vehicles or individuals has arrived at a location for the purpose of
participating in or being spectators at the event; (2) a group of
individuals has lined one or both sides of a public street or highway for
the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (3) a
group of individuals has gathered on private property open to the
general public without the consent of the owner, operator or agent
thereof for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the
event; (4) one or more individuals has impeded the free public use of a
public street or highway by actions, words, or physical barriers for the
purpose of conducting the event; (5) two or more vehicles have lined up
§ 7-26.7 COMPTON § 7-27.2
AO:240
§ 7-27.3. Spectator at Illegal Contest or Exhibition of Speed;
Violation. [Ord. #2205, § 1]
§ 7-27.4. Relevant Factors to Prove a Spectator Ban Violation. [Ord.
#2205, § 1]
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, to prove a violation of
Subsection 7-27.3, admissible evidence may include, but is not limited to,
any of the following:
with motors running for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or
exhibition of speed; (6) one or more drivers is revving his engine or
spinning his tires in preparation for the event; or (7) an individual
is stationed at or near one or more motor vehicles serving as a race
starter.
d. SPECTATOR – Shall mean any individual who is within 200 feet of an
illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed, or at a
location where preparations are being made for such activities, for the
purpose of viewing, observing, watching, or witnessing the event as it
progresses. Spectator includes any individual within 200 feet of the
event without regard to whether the individual arrived at the event by
driving a vehicle, riding as a passenger in a vehicle, walking, or arrived
by some other means.
a. Any individual who is knowingly present as a spectator, either on a
public street or highway, or on private property open to the general
public without the consent of the owner, operator or agent thereof, at
an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed is guilty of
a misdemeanor subject to a maximum of six months in jail and a fine of
$1,000.
b. Any individual who is knowingly present as a spectator, either on a
public street or highway, or on private property open to the general
public without the consent of the owner, operator or agent thereof,
where preparations are being made for an illegal motor vehicle speed
contest or exhibition of speed is guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a
maximum of six months in jail and a fine of $1,000.
c. An individual is present at the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or
exhibition of speed if that individual is within 200 feet of the location of
the event, or within 200 feet of the location where preparations are
being made for the event.
d. Exemption: Nothing in this section prohibits law enforcement officers
or their agents from being spectators at illegal motor vehicle speed
contests or exhibitions of speed in the course of their official duties.
a. Time of day;
b. The nature and description of the scene;
§ 7-27.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-27.4
AO:241
§ 7-27.5. Admissibility of Prior Acts. [Ord. #2205, § 1]
The list of circumstances set forth in Subsection 7-27.4 is not exclusive.
Evidence of prior acts may be admissible to show the propensity of the
defendant to be present at, or attend an illegal motor vehicle speed contest
or exhibition of speed, if the prior act or acts occurred within three years of
the presently charged offense. These prior acts may always be admissible
to show knowledge on the part of the defendant that a speed contest or
exhibition of speed was taking place at the time of the presently charged
offense. Prior acts are not limited to those that occurred within the City of
Compton.
§ 7-28. SMOKING PROHIBITED BY LAW IN CERTAIN AREAS.
§ 7-28.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. #2225, § 2]
The City Council finds that smoking, or the use of any other tobacco
product, is a serious danger to the health, discomfort and welfare to
nonsmokers who are present in unenclosed areas where there is exposure
to secondhand smoke. The U.S. Surgeon General and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency have concluded that secondhand smoke
causes lung cancer and heart disease in healthy non-smokers. In order
to protect the public and promote public health, safety and welfare, the
declared purposes of this section are to prohibit smoking, or other use of
tobacco products, in certain places where nonsmokers, are subject to the
exposure of secondhand smoke.
c. The number of people at the scene;
d. The location of the individual charged in relation to any individual or
group present at the scene;
e. The number and description of the motor vehicles at the scene;
f. That the individual charged drove or was transported to the scene;
g. That the individual charged has previously participated in an illegal
motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed;
h. That the individual charged has previously aided and abetted an illegal
motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed;
i. That the individual charged has previously attended an illegal motor
vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed;
j. That the individual charged previously was present at a location where
preparations were being made for an illegal speed contest or exhibition
of speed or where an exhibition of speed or illegal motor vehicle speed
contest was in progress.
§ 7-27.4 COMPTON § 7-28.2
AO:242
§ 7-28.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2225, § 2]
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this section, shall be
defined as follows:
a. COMMON AREA – Shall mean every enclosed or unenclosed area of a
multi-unit residence that residents of more than three units of that
multi-unit residence are entitled to enter or use including, but not
limited to, hallways, paths, lobbies, courtyards, elevators, stairs,
community rooms, playgrounds, gym facilities, swimming pools,
parking garages or lots, laundry rooms, restrooms, cooking areas and
eating areas.
b. DINING AREA – Shall mean any area, including streets and sidewalks,
which is available to, or customarily used by, the general public or an
employee and which is designed, established, or regularly used for
consuming food or drink.
c. ENCLOSED AREA – Shall mean an area in which outside air cannot
circulate freely to all parts of the area, and includes an area that has
any type of overhead cover and at least three walls or other vertical
boundaries of any height. For purposes of this definition, it is not a
requirement for such overhead cover or walls (or other vertical
boundaries) to include vents or other openings.
d. MULTI-UNIT RESIDENCE – Shall mean property containing three or
more adjoining units, as defined in this section, used for dwelling
purposes.
e. PERSON – Shall mean any natural person, business, association,
nonprofit entity, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or
any other legal entity including government agencies.
f. PLAYGROUND – Shall mean any park or recreational area specifically
designed to be used by children that has play equipment installed, or
any similar facility located on the public or private school grounds, or
on City, county, or state park grounds.
g. PUBLIC PARK – Shall mean a park, playground, swimming pool, playing
field, and any other area or facility devoted to green-space or
recreational use that is owned, leased, or operated by the City of
Compton, or for which the City has the right to possession.
h. PUBLIC PLACE – Shall mean any place, publicly or privately owned,
which is open to the general public regardless of any fee or age
requirement.
i. RECREATIONAL AREA – Shall mean any area, including streets and
sidewalks, that is publicly or privately owned and open to the general
public for recreational purposes, regardless of any fee or age
requirement. Recreational area includes, but is not limited to, parks,
picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses, walking paths,
§ 7-28.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-28.2
AO:243
§ 7-28.3. Prohibition of Smoking and Tobacco Product Use in
Certain Areas. [Ord. #2225, § 2]
Smoking and the use of tobacco products are prohibited in the unenclosed
areas of the following places within the City of Compton, except places
where smoking or the use of tobacco products are already prohibited by
state or federal law, in which case those laws apply.
gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, riding trails, swimming pools, roller
and ice skating rinks, skateboard parks, and amusement parks.
j. RESTAURANT – Shall mean any coffee shop, cafeteria, luncheonette,
soda fountain, fast food service, or other establishment where cooked
or otherwise prepared food is sold to the public. It shall not include the
on-site cafeteria or lunchroom that is part of a business.
k. SERVICE AREA – Shall mean any publicly or privately owned area,
including streets and sidewalks that is designed to be used or is
regularly used by one or more persons to receive a service, wait to
receive a service or to make a transaction, whether or not such service
or transaction includes the exchange of money. The term "service area"
includes, but is not limited to, areas including or adjacent to
information kiosks, automatic teller machines (ATMs), ticket lines, bus
stops, bus shelters, mobile vendor lines or cab stands.
l. SMOKE – Shall mean the gases, particles, or vapors released into the
air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization and the
apparent purpose of such release is for human inhalation of the byproducts.
"Smoke," for purposes of this definition, does not include
combustion of material that contains no tobacco or nicotine where the
purpose of inhalation is solely for smell, such as smoke from incense.
The term "smoke" includes, but is not limited to, tobacco smoke,
electronic cigarette vapors, and marijuana smoke.
m. SMOKING – Shall mean the carrying of a lighted pipe, lighted cigar, an
operating electronic cigarette or a lighted cigarette of any kind, or the
lighting of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, including, but not
limited to, tobacco, or any other weed or plant.
n. TOBACCO PRODUCT – Shall mean any manufactured substance made
from the tobacco plant, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars,
pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco and smokeless tobacco, or
products prepared from tobacco and designed for smoking or ingestion.
o. UNENCLOSED AREA – Shall mean any area that is not an enclosed
area, as defined in this section.
p. UNIT – Shall mean a personal dwelling space and includes any
associated exclusive-use enclosed area enclosed or unenclosed area
such as a private balcony, porch, deck, or patio.
a. Dining areas.
§ 7-28.2 COMPTON § 7-28.3
AO:244
§ 7-28.4. Prohibition of Smoking and Tobacco Product Use in Public
Parks and Recreational Areas. [Ord. #2225, § 2]
Smoking or use of tobacco-related products is prohibited in any public park
or recreational area within the City of Compton.
§ 7-28.5. Prohibition of Smoking and Tobacco Product Use in Multi-
Unit Residences. [Ord. #2225, § 2]
b. Service areas.
c. Common areas of multi-unit residences.
d. Other public places, including streets and sidewalks, when being used
for a public event, including but not limited to a farmer's market,
concert, parade, fair, festival, or any other event open to the general
public.
a. New Multi-Unit Residences. In every new multi-unit residence that
receives a certificate of occupancy after the effective date of this
section, 100% of the units (including private outdoor spaces associated
with such units, such as balconies, patios and decks), shall be
nonsmoking units by law.
1. Required Lease Terms. Every lease or other agreement for the
occupancy of a unit in a new multi-unit residence shall include:
(a) A clause stating that smoking is prohibited in the unit;
(b) A clause stating that it is a material breach of the lease or
agreement to (i) violate any law regulating smoking while on
the premises; (ii) smoke in the unit; or (iii) smoke in any multiunit
residence common area in which smoking is prohibited;
and
(c) A clause stating that all occupants of the multi-unit residence
are express thirty-party beneficiaries of the above required
clauses.
2. The California Apartment Association Form 34.0, revised 1/07,
meets the requirements for lease terms as outlined and is an option
for use to comply with this section.
b. Existing Multi-Unit Residences. In every multi-use residence existing on
the effective date of this section, not subject to Paragraph a above,
100% of the units (including private outdoor spaces associated with
such units, such as balconies, patios, and decks), shall by law be
nonsmoking units by January 1, 2013. A person with legal control over a
multi-unit residence, such as, for example, a landlord or homeowners'
association, may make units nonsmoking prior to January 1, 2013.
§ 7-28.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-28.5
AO:245
§ 7-28.6. Reasonable Smoking Distance Required. [Ord. #2225, § 2]
1. Required Lease Terms. By January 1, 2013, every lease or other
agreement for the occupancy of a unit in an existing multi-unit
residence shall include:
(a) A clause stating that smoking is prohibited in the unit;
(b) A clause stating that it is a material breach of the lease or
agreement to (i) violate any law regulating smoking while on
the premises; (ii) smoke in the unit; or (iii) smoke in any multiunit
residence common area in which smoking is prohibited;
and
(c) A clause stating that all occupants of the multi-unit residence
are express third-party beneficiaries of the above required
clauses.
2. The California Apartment Association's Form 34.0, revised 1/07,
meets the requirements for lease terms as outlined and is an option
for use to comply with this section.
c. The lease or agreement terms required by Subsection (a) and (b) are
hereby incorporated by the law into any lease or other agreement for
the occupancy of a unit in a multi-unit residence made on or after the
effective date of this section and which does not fully comply with
Paragraph a or b.
d. A tenant who breaches the smoking regulations of a lease or knowingly
allows another person to do so shall be liable to: (i) the landlord; and (ii)
any occupant of the multi-unit residence who is exposed to secondhand
smoke as a result of that breach. A landlord shall not be liable to any
person for the tenant's breach of smoking regulations if the landlord
has fully complied with the requirements of this section.
e. Failure to enforce any smoking regulation of a lease or agreement on
one or more occasions shall not constitute a waiver of the lease or
agreement provisions required by this section and shall not prevent
future enforcement of any such smoking regulation on another
occasion.
a. Smoking in all unenclosed areas, where smoking is not otherwise
prohibited, shall be prohibited within 25 feet from any doorway,
window, opening, or vent into an enclosed area in which smoking is
prohibited, except while the person smoking is actively passing on the
way to another destination and provided smoke does not enter any
enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited.
b. Smoking in unenclosed areas, where smoking is not otherwise
prohibited, shall be prohibited within 25 feet from any unenclosed
areas in which smoking is prohibited under this section, except while
the person smoking is actively passing on the way to another
§ 7-28.5 COMPTON § 7-28.6
AO:246
§ 7-28.7. Enforcement. [Ord. #2225, § 2]
destination and provided smoke does not enter any unenclosed area in
which smoking is prohibited.
c. The prohibitions in Paragraphs a and b shall not apply to unenclosed
areas of private residential properties that are not multi-unit
residences.
a. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the City
Manager or his or her designee. In addition, any peace officer or code
enforcement official also may enforce this section.
b. The remedies provided by this section are cumulative and in addition to
any other remedies available at law or equity.
c. Each incident of smoking or tobacco use in violation of this section is an
infraction subject to a $100 fine. In the discretion of the City Attorney,
violations may be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors when the
interests of justice so require.
d. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any
provision of this section shall also constitute a violation of this section.
e. No person shall intimidate, harass, or otherwise retaliate against any
person who seeks compliance with this section. Moreover, no person
shall intentionally or recklessly expose another person to smoke in
response to that person's effort to achieve compliance with this section.
Violation of this subsection shall constitute a misdemeanor.
f. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
g. In addition to other remedies provided by this section or by other law,
any violation of this section may be remedied by a civil action brought
by the City Attorney, including, but not limited to, administrative or
judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code
enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief.
h. Any person acting for the interests of itself, its members, or the general
public may bring a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction,
including small claims court, to enforce this section against any person
who has violated this section two or more times. Upon proof of the
violations, a court shall grant all appropriate relief, including: (1)
awarding damages; and (2) issuing an injunction or a conditional
judgment. If there is insufficient or no proof of actual damages for a
specific violation, the court shall award $150 for each violation as
statutory damages.
i. Except as otherwise provided, enforcement of this section is at the sole
discretion of the City of Compton. Nothing in this subsection shall
create a right of action in any person against the City of Compton or its
§ 7-28.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-28.7
AO:247
§ 7-28.8. Sign Posting Requirement. [Ord. #2225, § 2]
A person, employer, or nonprofit entity that has legal or de facto control of
an unenclosed area in which smoking is prohibited by this section shall post
a clear, conspicuous and unambiguous "No Smoking" or "Smoke-free" sign
at each point of ingress to the area, and in at least one other conspicuous
point within the area. The signs shall have letters of no less than one inch in
height and shall include the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting
of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle
with a red bar across it). Signs posted on the exterior of buildings to comply
with this section shall include the reasonable smoking distance requirement
set forth in this section. Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or
absence of signs shall not be a defense to a charge of smoking in violation
of any other provision of this section.
§ 7-29. (RESERVED)45
Chapter 8
PUBLIC SAFETY
§ 8-1. CITY-PROVIDED EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.
§ 8-1.1. Definition. [Added by Ord. #1654, § 3-1100]
CITY-PROVIDED EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES — Are defined as
those advanced or basic life support services provided by Fire Department
personnel who have been certified as a Paramedic or Emergency Medical
Technician 1 by the County Health Officer or County-designated physician
after having completed an approved training program and examination for
competence.
§ 8-1.2. Schedule of Fees. [Added by Ord. #1654, § 3-1101; Ord.
#1779, § 1; Ord. #1955, § 1; Ord. #1981, § 1; Ord. #2295 § 2]
The City Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, from time to time
determine and fix the amount to be assessed as fees for City-Provided
Emergency Medical Services.
§ 8-1.3. Fee for Voluntary Emergency Medical Services Subscription
Program. [Added by Ord. #1882, § 1; Ord. #1904, § 1]
agents to compel public enforcement of this section against private
parties.
45.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2249, adopted April 22, 2014 and establishing a moratorium
on the use of hydraulic fracturing, acidizing or other well stimulation treatment in
conjunction with production or extraction of oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances was
rescinded in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2254, adopted October 7, 2014.
§ 7-28.7 COMPTON § 8-1.3
AO:248
§ 8-2. (RESERVED)46
§ 8-3. (RESERVED)47
§ 8-4. POLICE RESERVE.
§ 8-4.1. Establishment of Police Reserve Corps. [Added by Ord.
#977, § 3701; amended by Ord. #1373]
A Police Reserve Corps, hereinafter called "Corps," is hereby established
as a voluntary organization to serve whenever deemed necessary by the
Chief of Police, hereinafter called the "Chief," and shall be composed of
persons appointed by the Chief. Each member so appointed shall be paid
$1 per calendar year, or fraction thereof, at the time of his appointment.
Thereafter, the Corps member shall be paid at the rate of $1 per calendar
year, payable on the second regular pay period of January.
§ 8-4.2. Chief to Have Control. [Added by Ord. #977, § 3702]
Subject to the provisions of this section, the Chief shall have complete
authority and control over the Corps. He may appoint as members thereof
any persons whom he deems to be qualified, and he may reject any
application for membership. He may provide for the training of candidates
for membership and for the further training of members. Membership in
this Corps shall be open to both men and women. Whenever the male sex
is referred to in this section, it shall be construed to include the male and
female sexes.
§ 8-4.3. Methods of Appointment. [Added by Ord. #977, § 3703]
No person shall become a member of the Corps until he has taken the
training and is able to meet all other requirements prescribed by the Chief.
When so qualified and selected, he shall then be sworn in by the Chief, or
by the Chief's representative, as a member of the Corps.
a. The following voluntary Emergency Medical Services Subscription
Program annual fees are adopted: $50 per household for residents, $50
per every 10 employees or fraction thereof for businesses.
b. Program enrollees would be entitled to emergency medical services
provided by the Compton Fire Department exclusive of transportation,
administration of medication and treatment.
46.Editor's Note: Former Section 8-2, Municipal Law Enforcement Services Department
established, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 2173
and 2186, was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2244.
47.Editor's Note: Former Section 8-3, Parking Control Officer Corps, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1408, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2173.
§ 8-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-4.4
AO:249
§ 8-4.4. Duties. [Added by Ord. #977, § 3704]
The duties of the Corps, subject at all times to the direction, supervision,
and control of the Chief, shall be to assist the regular members of the
Police Department in the enforcement of laws and maintenance of peace
and order whenever and wherever its services are required. The Chief may,
by order, establish rules and regulations to govern the Corps, including the
fixing of specific duties of its members and providing for the maintenance
of discipline. He may change such orders from time to time.
§ 8-4.5. Identification. [Added by Ord. #977, § 3705]
An identification card, badge, cap piece, and such other insignia or evidence
of identification as the Chief may prescribe shall be issued to each member
who shall carry the card at all times. Each member shall surrender all City
property issued to him upon the termination of his membership.
§ 8-4.6. Removal from Membership; Resignations. [Added by Ord.
#977, § 3706]
The membership of any person in the Corps may be terminated by the Chief
at any time, and such member may resign from the Corps at any time upon
notifying the Chief in writing of his resignation. The Chief may delay the
acceptance of any resignation for 10 days during a period of a civil or war
emergency or disaster, so declared by the Chief or other competent body or
agency.
§ 8-4.7. Carrying Firearms. [Added by Ord. #977, § 3707]
No member of the Corps shall carry any firearm until he has qualified for,
and received, a gun permit signed by the Chief. All members of the Corps
shall carry the regulation police baton.
§ 8-4.8. Powers of Arrest: Authority to Direct Traffic. [Added by Ord.
#977, § 3708]
A member of the Corps, when on duty as assigned by the Chief, shall have
the authority given to officers of the Police Department to direct traffic and
shall have the same powers of arrest granted a regular member of the Police
Department, subject to any limitations which the Chief may impose.
§ 8-4.9. Diminishing the Force. [Added by Ord. #977, § 3709]
Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the Chief may, by order, diminish
or expand the membership of the Corps as any existing or contemplated
condition or emergency may require.
§ 8-4.10. False Personation. [Added by Ord. #977, § 3710]
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person not a member of the Corps to:
§ 8-4.4 COMPTON § 8-4.10
AO:250
§ 8-4.11. Uniform. [Added by Ord. #977, § 3711]
The uniform for members of the Corps shall be similar to the uniform worn
by members of the regular Police Department, with an identifying insignia
to be prescribed by the Chief. Side arms shall be carried in the regulation
police Sam Brown belt and holster.
§ 8-4.12. Use of Uniforms, Badges, Etc. [Added by Ord. #977,
§ 3712]
The uniform, badge, and cap piece may be worn, and the gun and baton
carried, only while on duty as assigned by the Chief.
§ 8-5. ABANDONED VEHICLE ABATEMENT.48
§ 8-5.1. Findings. [Ord. #2191, § 1]
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the State under Section 22660 of the California Vehicle
Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles,
or parts thereof, as public nuisances, the City Council hereby makes the
following findings and declarations:
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property,
including highways, is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce
the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite
plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance,
creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage
for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general
welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private or public property, including
highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby declared to
constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 8-5.2. Definitions as Used in This Section. [Ord. #2191, § 1]
a. Wear, carry, or display a Corps identification card, badge, cap piece, or
insignia; or
b. In any manner represent himself to be connected with the Corps.
a. CITY MANAGER – Shall mean the City Manager of the City of Compton
or his/her authorized designee.
b. HEARING OFFICER – Shall mean the person designated by the City
Manager to hear and act on requests for hearing on public nuisances as
herein defined.
48.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 1432 and 1924.
§ 8-4.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-5.2
AO:251
§ 8-5.3. Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled or Inoperative Vehicles;
Prohibited. [Ord. #2191, § 1]
§ 8-5.4. Exclusions. [Ord. #2191, § 1]
c. HIGHWAY – Shall mean a way or place of whatever nature, publicly
maintained and open to use of the public for purposes of vehicular
travel. Highway includes street.
e. OWNER OF THE LAND – Shall mean the owner of the land on which the
vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized
assessment roll.
f. OWNER OF THE VEHICLE – Shall mean the last registered owner and
legal owner of record.
g. PUBLIC PROPERTY – Does not include "highway."
h. VEHICLE – Shall mean a device by which any person or property may
be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
a. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon,
park, store, leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or
leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle, or parts thereof, which is
in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon
any private or public property, including highways, within the City for a
period of 72 hours or more, unless such vehicle, or parts thereof, is
completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not
plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or
unless such vehicle is otherwise stored or parked in a lawful manner in
connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, a licensed vehicle
dealer or a junkyard.
b. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse
to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle,
or parts thereof, or to refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do
so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this section or State
law, where such State law is applicable.
a. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
1. A vehicle, or parts thereof, that is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or
public or private property; or
2. A vehicle, or parts thereof, that is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a
licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junk dealer.
b. Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or
private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter
§ 8-5.2 COMPTON § 8-5.4
AO:252
§ 8-5.5. Regulations Nonexclusive. [Ord. #2191, § 1]
This section is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the City. It shall supplement
and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances
heretofore and hereafter enacted by the City, State or any other legal entity
or agency having jurisdiction.
§ 8-5.6. Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. #2191, § 1]
§ 8-5.7. Notices of Intent to Abate. [Ord. #2191, § 1]
A notice, of not less than 10 days, of intention to abate and remove the
vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered
or certified mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle,
unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are
not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in
substantially the following forms:
10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the California
Vehicle Code and this section.
a. Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this section may
be administered and enforced by the City Manager or other official(s)
designated by the City Manager, who are regularly salaried, full-time
employees of the City, except that the removal of vehicles, or parts
thereof, from property may be by any other duly authorized person. In
the enforcement of this section, such official(s) and his/her deputies
may enter upon private or public property, including a highway, to
examine a vehicle, or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the
identity of a vehicle, or parts thereof, and to remove or cause the
removal of a vehicle, or parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance
pursuant to this section.
b. When the City has contracted with or granted a franchise for vehicle
towing services, such person or persons shall be authorized under
direction of the designated official(s) to enter upon private or public
property, including a highway, and remove or cause the removal of a
vehicle, or parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this
section.
c. The City Council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to
be assessed as administrative costs under this section by resolution.
Said amount is intended to compensate the City for proceedings under
this section when voluntary compliance is not obtained. The actual cost
of removal of any vehicle, or parts thereof, shall not be included in the
administrative costs.
a. Notice to Land Owner.
§ 8-5.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-5.7
AO:253
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN
ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE
VEHICLE, OR PARTS THEREOF, AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
(Name and address of owner of land)
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land
located at __________________ (address), you are hereby notified that
the undersigned, pursuant to Section 8-5 of the Compton Municipal
Code, has determined that there exists upon said land an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof,
registered to __________________, license number _________________,
which constitutes a public nuisance.
You are hereby notified to abate such nuisance by the removal of such
vehicle, or parts thereof, within 10 days from the date of mailing of this
notice of intention. If you fail to do so, the vehicle may be removed by
the City of Compton with costs thereof, together with administrative
costs, becoming an assessment upon your property.
As owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located,
you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days of the date
of mailing this notice of intention, request a public hearing. If such
request is not received by the designated official within such ten-day
period, the designated official shall have the authority to abate and
remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance without a
public hearing. You may appear in person at any hearing requested
by you or the owner of the vehicle, or, in lieu of appearing, may
present a sworn written statement, provided it is received in time for
consideration at the hearing, denying responsibility for the presence of
said vehicle, or parts thereof, on said land along with the reasons for
your denial.
Notice
mailed:
(Date)
/s/
Designated Enforcement Official
b. Notice to Vehicle Owner(s).
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN
ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE
VEHICLE, OR PARTS THEREOF, AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of
record - Notice should be given to both, if different)
§ 8-5.7 COMPTON § 8-5.7
AO:254
§ 8-5.8. Vehicles Valued Less Than $200. [Ord. #2191, § 1]
No notice of intention or hearing shall be required for removal of a vehicle,
or parts thereof, which is inoperable due to the absence of a motor,
transmission or wheels and incapable of being towed, and is valued at less
than $200 by the designated official(s), and is determined to be a public
nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety, provided
that the following conditions are met:
As the last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of
_______________________ (description of vehicle - make, model, license,
etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to
Section 8-5 of the Compton Municipal Code, has determined that said
vehicle, or parts thereof, exists as an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicle at __________ (describe location on
public or private property), and constitutes a public nuisance.
You are hereby notified to abate such nuisance by the removal of such
vehicle, or parts thereof, within 10 days from the date of mailing of
this notice of intention.
As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of this vehicle, or parts
thereof, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days of the
date of mailing this notice of intention, request a public hearing. If
such request is not received by the designated official within such
ten-day period, the designated official shall have the authority to
abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance
without a public hearing at your expense for towing, storage and
administrative costs.
Notice
mailed:
(Date)
Designated Enforcement Official
a. The owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located
has signed a release authorizing the removal of the vehicle, or parts
thereof, and waiving further interest in the same;
b. Said inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, is located on a parcel of land
that is zoned for agricultural use or not improved with residential
structures containing one or more dwelling units; and
c. Prior to final disposition of such a low value vehicle, or parts thereof, for
which evidence of registration has been recovered, the abatement
officers shall provide notice to the registered and legal owner(s) of
intent to dispose of the vehicle, or parts thereof, and that if the vehicle,
or parts thereof, is not claimed and removed within 12 days after the
notice is mailed, from the location specified in the notice, final
disposition may proceed.
§ 8-5.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-5.9
AO:255
§ 8-5.9. Public Hearing; Notification Requirements. [Ord. #2191,
§ 1]
§ 8-5.10. Public Hearing; Procedure. [Ord. #2191, § 1]
a. Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received
by the designated enforcement official within 10 days after the date of
the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public
hearing shall be scheduled on the questions of:
1. Abatement and removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, as an
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle; and
2. The assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal
of the vehicle, or parts thereof, against the property on which it is
located. If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement
denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her
land within such ten-day period, said statement shall be construed
as a request for a hearing which does not require his/her presence.
b. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed, by
registered or certified mail, at least 10 days before the hearing to the
owner of the land and, if the ownership of the vehicle can be
determined, to the owner of the vehicle.
c. If a request for hearing is not received within the 10 days after mailing
of the notices of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the
authority, without holding a public hearing, to abate and remove the
vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance and assess the costs of
removal and administrative costs against the property on which the
vehicle, or parts thereof, is located.
a. All hearings under this section shall be held before the Hearing Officer,
who shall hear all facts and testimony deemed pertinent. Said facts and
testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle, or
parts thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on the said
private or public property. The Hearing Officer shall not be limited by
the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the
vehicle is located and/or the owner of the vehicle may appear in person
at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for
consideration at the hearing denying responsibility for the presence of
the vehicle on the land, including the reasons therefor.
b. The Hearing Officer may impose such conditions and take such other
action as he/she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry
out the purpose of this section. The Hearing Officer may delay the time
for removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, if, in his/her opinion, the
circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the
Hearing Officer may find that a vehicle, or parts thereof, has been
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative on private or public
property, and order the same removed from the property as a public
§ 8-5.9 COMPTON § 8-5.10
AO:256
§ 8-5.11. Removal. [Ord. #2191, § 1]
nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine
whether the administrative costs and the cost of removal should be
charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal
shall include a description of the vehicle, or parts thereof, and the
correct identification number and license of the vehicle, if available at
the site.
c. If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land
without the consent of the owner of the land and that the land owner
has not subsequently acquiesced to its presence, the administrative
costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle shall not be assessed
against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise
collected from the landowner, but shall be collected from the registered
owner of the vehicle, if possible, or shall be borne by the City. The
decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final.
d. If the owner of the land or the vehicle does not appear at the hearing, or
if an interested party makes a sworn written statement or other written
presentation, but does not appear at the hearing, he/she shall be
notified in writing of the decision.
a. Unless additional time for removal is granted pursuant to the provisions
of this section, five days after a adoption of the order declaring the
vehicle, or parts thereof, to be a public nuisance, or five days from the
date of mailing the notice of the decision, if notice is required by the
provisions of this section, the vehicle, or parts thereof, may be disposed
of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler's yard.
b. Where a vehicle, or parts thereof, is removed by a City employee, other
than a peace officer or employee of a Sheriff's Department, the City
employee designated to remove the vehicle may do so only after he/she
has mailed or personally delivered a written report identifying the
vehicle and its location to the office of the Department of the California
Highway Patrol located nearest to the vehicle.
c. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not be reconstructed or made
operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless
carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to
Section 5004 of the California Vehicle Code, in which case the vehicle
may be reconstructed or made operable.
d. Motor vehicles which are parked, resting or otherwise immobilized on
any highway or public right-of-way and which lack an engine,
transmission, wheels, tires, doors, windshield or any other part or
equipment necessary to operate safely on the highways of this State,
are hereby declared a hazard to public health, safety and welfare and
may be removed immediately upon discovery by a designated
enforcement official of the City.
§ 8-5.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-5.12
AO:257
§ 8-5.12. Removal; Notice to State. [Ord. #2191, § 1]
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof,
notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the
vehicle, or parts thereof, removed. At the same time there shall be
transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of
registration available, including, but not limited to registration cards,
certificates of ownership and license plates.
§ 8-5.13. Assessment of Costs. [Ord. #2191, § 1]
If the administrative costs and costs of removal which are charged against
the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of this section are
not paid within 30 days from the date of the order, or the final disposition of
an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land
pursuant to the provisions of Section 38773.5 of the California Government
Code and shall be transmitted to the Tax Collector for collection. Such
assessment shall have the same priority as other City taxes.
§ 8-6. BICYCLES.
§ 8-6.1. Licenses Required. [Ord. #856, § 3500; Ord. #957]
a. No person shall operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by
muscular power upon any street or public highway of the City, unless
there shall have been first obtained by or on behalf of the owner of such
bicycle a license so to do, which license shall be procured from the
License Collector, and for which the applicant shall have paid a license
fee. Each such license shall be subject to renewal whenever the
ownership of the bicycle changes. Each such license when so issued
shall entitle the licensee to operate such bicycle for which such license
shall have been issued upon any of the public streets or public highways
of the City, exclusive of sidewalks in any business district of the City.
b. No registration with the City shall be required where the user of a
bicycle is a resident of another jurisdiction of the State having
provisions for registration comparable to those of the City and who has
actually complied with such registration provisions, has a valid
evidence of registration, and is not using such bicycle in the City for a
period in excess of seven days in any one month. In any proceedings,
civil or criminal, brought pursuant to the provisions of this section, the
burden of proof pertaining to this exception, and any element thereof,
shall be with the operator and/or user, and a prima facie case under this
section will be made upon proof of the violation of the provisions of
paragraph a of this section, and thereafter the burden shall shift to the
defendant or user to prove the applicability of this exception by
competent evidence.
§ 8-5.12 COMPTON § 8-6.2
AO:258
§ 8-6.2. Duration of Licenses.49 [Ord. #856, § 3501; Ord. #957; Ord.
#1446; Ord. #1464; Ord. #1477]
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to issue, upon written
applications, bicycle licenses, each of which shall be effective until the
expiration of the period in which such license is issued. The license duration
periods may be established by resolution of the Council to conform to the
State bicycle license periods established by the Director of the Department
of Motor Vehicles of the State or to conform with such other State law as
may become applicable in the future.
§ 8-6.3. License Plates. [Ord. #856, § 3502; Ord. #957]
The License Collector shall provide for each one-year period license plates
and registration cards as provided in Division 16.7, Sections 39000 et
seq., of the Motor Vehicle Code of the State. Such license plates shall be
suitable for attachment upon the frames of bicycles. It shall be the duty of
the License Collector, upon the payment of the license fee provided for in
subsection 8-6.10 to deliver one such plate to the owner of the bicycle and
to issue a corresponding registration card to the owner of the bicycle. Such
license plate shall remain attached during the valid period of such license.
The License Collector shall keep a record of the date of issuance of each
license, the person to whom issued, and the number thereof. Such records
shall be given periodically to the Chief of Police who shall maintain such
records.
§ 8-6.4. Dealers and Junk Dealers: Reports of Purchases. [Ord.
#856, § 3503; Ord. #957]
All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles or
bicycle frames, and any junk dealer who purchases or otherwise acquires
any bicycle or bicycle frame as junk or otherwise, are hereby required to
make a report to the Chief of Police, in writing, within 24 hours thereafter,
specifying:
a. The name and address of the person from whom each bicycle or bicycle
frame was purchased or otherwise acquired;
b. The description of each bicycle or bicycle frame purchased or otherwise
acquired;
c. The frame number thereof; and
d. The number of the license plate found attached thereto, if any, or any
identifying insignia.
49.Editor's Note: For violations of the subsection, see Section 12-6, Bail Rates.
§ 8-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-6.5
AO:259
§ 8-6.5. Dealers and Junk Dealers: Reports of Sales. [Ord. #856,
§ 3504; Ord. #957]
In addition to any other reports required by the provisions of this Code, all
persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand bicycles or
bicycle frames are hereby required to make a daily report to the Chief of
Police, and any junk dealer who sells or otherwise disposes of any bicycle
or bicycle frame as junk or otherwise shall report to the Chief of Police in
writing, within 24 hours thereafter, specifying:
§ 8-6.6. Transfers of Ownership: Reports Required. [Ord. #856,
§ 3505; Ord. #957; Ord. #1464]
§ 8-6.7. Period of Time to Elapse Before Sale. [Ord. #856, § 3506;
Ord. #957]
No pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer shall sell or otherwise
dispose of any bicycle frame within 14 days after such article has been
purchased or received by such pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk
dealer.
§ 8-6.8. Removal of Numbers. [Added by Ord. #957, § 3507]
No person shall wilfully remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter the number of
any bicycle or bicycle frame, either licensed or unlicensed.
§ 8-6.9. Destruction of Plates. [Added by Ord. #957, § 3508]
No person shall wilfully remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter any license plate
or registration card during the time such plate or card is operative. In the
event a license plate is lost, stolen, or mutilated, the person owning any
such bicycle shall make an application to reregister such bicycle, and a new
license plate shall be procured from the License Collector for which the
a. The name and address of the person to whom each bicycle or bicycle
frame was sold or otherwise disposed of;
b. The description of each bicycle or bicycle frame sold or otherwise
disposed of;
c. The frame number thereof; and
d. The number of the license plate found attached thereto, if any.
a. It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of
any bicycle or bicycle frame to report such sale or transfer by returning
to the License Collector the registration card issued to such person as
licensee thereof.
b. Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this section
changes his address, he shall, within 10 days, notify the License
Collector of the new and old address.
§ 8-6.5 COMPTON § 8-6.9
AO:260
applicant shall pay a license fee of $0.50. The Chief of Police shall cancel
the registration of such bicycle in the register, and such bicycle shall be
reregistered and, if necessary, be given a new serial number and identifying
letter. Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to prohibit the
Chief of Police from stamping any number or insignia on any such bicycle
for identification purposes.
§ 8-6.10. Fees. [Added by Ord. #957, § 3509; amended by Ord.
#1446; Ord. #1464]
The Council may set by resolution fees for bicycle licenses and for services
performed by City agencies under this section, such that such fees will
cover all City costs incurred directly or indirectly therefrom. In the event
bicycle license fees have not been set by resolution, the fee therefor shall
be $2 per year or any part thereof.
§ 8-6.11. Schedule of Fees. [Ord. #1766, § 1; Ord. #2295 § 3]
The City Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, from time to time
determine and fix the amount to be assessed as fees applicable to process
the sealing of police records pursuant to Section 851.8 of the California
Penal Code.
§ 8-6.12. Administrative Fee for the Release of Abandoned and
Impounded Vehicles. [Ord. #1765, §§ 1 — 5; Ord. #1945, § 1; Ord.
#2295 § 4]
a. The City Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, from time to time
determine and fix the amount to be assessed as fees applicable to the
release of stored or impounded vehicles.
b. An administrative fee will be assessed on vehicles stored or impounded
for reasons including, but not limited to:
1. Vehicles that have been abandoned;
2. Vehicles that are found on the street and have not been registered
for more than one year;
3. Vehicles that create parking hazards;
4. Vehicles that block driveways and no other remedies are available;
5. Vehicles with more than four outstanding parking tickets;
6. Vehicles that are operated by unlicensed drivers; and
7. The operators and/or owners are taken into custody and it is not
practical to legally park and lock the vehicles.
c. The City Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, from time to time
determine and fix the amount to be assessed as fees applicable to the
cost to the City for reimbursement for impounding, processing the
§ 8-6.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-6.12
AO:261
§ 8-7. DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTERING AGENCY FOR
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL RELEASE RESPONSE PLAN AND
INVENTORY PROGRAM. [Ord. #1892, § 1]
Pursuant to the provisions of the California Health and Safety Code, Section
25500 through 25521, or as they may be amended, the Fire Chief of the City
of Compton, or his designee, is designated as the administering agency for
the implementation of the Hazardous Material Release Response Plan and
Inventory Program within the City of Compton.
§ 8-7.1. Responsibilities of Administering Agency. [Ord. #1892, § 1]
In order to effect such implementation, the Fire Chief shall:
§ 8-7.2. Violations. [Ord. #1892, § 1]
Any person who violates Section 25507 of the Health and Safety Code of
the State of California shall be subject to the penalties specified in Section
25515 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California. This section
is supplemental to and in addition to any other civil or criminal liability or
penalty provided by law.
§ 8-7.3. Schedule of Fees. [Ord. #1892, § 1; Ord. #2295 § 5]
The City Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, from time to time
determine and fix the amount to be assessed as fees applicable to hazardous
materials violations.
§ 8-8. PRIVATE PATROL OPERATORS.
vehicle report, and for the release of a stored or impounded vehicle.
This process includes: registration checks, paperwork completion, tow
request, owner notification, phone contacts, log entries, release of
vehicle, sending of teletypes, and any other related tasks.
d. This fee is payable prior to the owner's receipt of written authorization
from the Police Department for the release of the vehicle. The fee shall
be collected by the desk person handling the matter and a receipt for
same shall be given.
e. Recovered stolen vehicles that are impounded/stored would be exempt.
a. Enforce the provisions of the California Hazardous Material Release
Response Plan and Inventory Law; and
b. Prepare supplemental regulations from time to time to facilitate such
enforcement; and
c. Set fees for the administration and enforcement of said program, which
such fees shall be set pursuant to subsection 8-7.3 of this Code.
§ 8-6.12 COMPTON § 8-8.1
AO:262
§ 8-8.1. Regulation of Uniforms, Insignias and Vehicles Used by
Private Patrol Operators. [Ord. #1923, § 1]
§ 8-9. SHOPPING CARTS.50
§ 8-9.1. Declaration of Public Nuisance. [Ord. #2016, § 1]
The City Council makes the following findings and declarations:
The unauthorized use, accumulation and storage of shopping carts, of parts
thereof, off the premises or parking areas of retail establishments, where
such carts are made available for use by customers, is found to create
conditions that could impede emergency services, interfere with pedestrian
and vehicular traffic, reduce property values, to promote blight and
deterioration, constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the
health and safety of minors, be aesthetically detrimental to the community,
and be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the
unauthorized use and the presence of shopping carts, or parts thereof, off
the premises or parking areas of retail establishments, is declared to be a
violation of this Code and to constitute a public nuisance, which may be
abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 8-9.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2016, § 1]
The following definitions shall apply to this section:
CART OWNER — Shall mean every person, corporation, partnership,
association, or other entity who, in connection with the conduct of a
business, owns, rightfully possesses, or makes any shopping cart available
to patrons and/or the public. This shall include the owner's agent or
authorized representative.
a. No person, other than a sworn police officer or other personnel
designated by the Chief of Police, shall wear any shoulder emblem or
any uniform of a pattern or design or in the semblance of the uniform
adopted or hereafter adopted by the Chief of Police for the use of the
regular members of the Police Department or other personnel
designated by the Chief of Police or wear upon any uniform any star,
badge or insignia of a pattern or design that may be mistaken for or
confused with the official police officer's badge or other personnel so
designated by the Chief of Police.
b. No person other than a sworn police officer or other personnel
designated by the Chief of Police shall operate a vehicle in the
semblance by insignia of a pattern or design that may be mistaken for
or confused with the official Police Department vehicles.
c. Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
50.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1933 and 1938.
§ 8-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-9.2
AO:263
PARKING AREA — Shall mean a parking lot or other property provided by
a retailer for use by a customer for parking an automobile or other vehicle.
Parking area of a retail establishment located in a multi-store complex or
shopping center shall include the entire parking area used by the complex
or center.
PARKWAY — Shall mean that area between the sidewalks and the curb of
any street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge
of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also
include any area within a roadway that is not open to vehicular travel.
PLACARDED CART — Shall mean a shopping cart that has a sign affixed to
it, containing the information required by subsection 8-9.4.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Shall mean and include, but is not limited to, all
areas dedicated to public use for public street purposes, roadways,
parkways, alleys, sidewalks, flood control channels and any public right-ofway.
SHOPPING CART — Shall mean a basket, which is mounted on wheels or
a similar device generally, used in a retail establishment by a customer for
the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. Shopping cart shall include
a basket which is mounted on wheels and used in a coin-operated laundry
or dry cleaning retail establishment by a customer or an attendant for
the purposes of transporting fabrics and the supplies necessary to process
them.
§ 8-9.3. Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. #2016, § 1]
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this section shall
be administered and enforced by representatives of the City. In the
enforcement of this section, the City may enter upon public or private
property in a manner consistent with the United States and California
Constitution to examine a shopping cart, or parts thereof, or to obtain
information as to the identity of the owner of the shopping cart, and to
remove, or cause the removal of, a shopping cart, or parts thereof, declared
to be a nuisance pursuant to this section.
§ 8-9.4. Identification of Shopping Carts. [Ord. #2016, § 1]
The owner of every premises or retail establishment where shopping carts
are made available for use by customers shall permanently affix to each cart
a placard or sign which includes the following:
a. Identification of the owner of the shopping cart or the retailer, or both;
b. Notification of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of
the cart from the premises or retail establishment;
c. Notification that the unauthorized removal of the shopping cart from
the premises or parking area of the retail establishment, or the
unauthorized possession of the shopping cart, is a violation of law; and
§ 8-9.2 COMPTON § 8-9.4
AO:264
§ 8-9.5. Removal Prohibited. [Ord. #2016, § 1]
§ 8-9.6. Abandoned Shopping Cart. [Ord. #2016, § 1]
Any shopping cart left on any public or private property shall be deemed
to be abandoned and therefore a public nuisance pursuant to this section.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to shopping carts left on the
owner's private property, including the common areas of shopping centers
adjacent thereto.
§ 8-9.7. Abandonment Prohibited. [Ord. #2016, § 1]
It is unlawful for any person to abandon or leave any shopping cart, which
has been removed from the premises or parking area of a retail
establishment, upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other
d. A telephone number or address for returning the shopping cart
removed from the premises to the owner or retailer.
a. It is unlawful for any person to remove a shopping cart from the
premises or parking area of any retail establishment or be in possession
of any shopping cart that has been removed from the premises or
parking area of a retail establishment, if such shopping cart has
permanently affixed to it a placard or sign as required by subsection
8-9.4.
b. This subsection prohibiting removal of a shopping cart from the
premises or parking area of a retail establishment shall not apply to the
owner of the shopping cart, to his or her agents or employees, or to a
customer of a retail establishment who has written consent from the
owner of a shopping cart or a retailer, to be in possession of the
shopping cart, or to remove the shopping cart from the premises or
parking area of the retail establishment.
c. If the owner of the shopping cart or the retailer authorizes removal of
any cart from the premises or parking area of the retail establishment,
the owner or retailer shall establish a written policy, including a
verifiable and reliable system, to ensure that the cart will be returned
or retrieved within 24 hours. Said written policy shall be disclosed to
the City upon request.
d. On an annual basis, (in conjunction with the renewal of their business
license), the owner of placarded carts or the retailer, shall provide the
City with the name, address and telephone number of his or her
authorized cart retrieval service, if any, that provides cart retrieval
services within the City. Should the cart retrieval service change during
the year, the owner of the placarded carts shall provide the name,
address and telephone number of his or her new authorized cart
retrieval service. The owner shall provide a copy of the written
authorization for the retrieval company to be in possession of his or her
carts to the City upon request.
§ 8-9.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-9.7
AO:265
public place, or upon private property other than the premises or parking
area of the retail establishment which owns the shopping cart.
§ 8-9.8. Abandoned Shopping Cart — Abatement. [Ord. #2016, § 1]
a. The City may impound any abandoned, unplacarded shopping cart from
any public or private property at any time.
b. The City may impound any abandoned, placarded shopping cart from
any public or private property, provided the following has occurred:
1. The shopping cart is located outside of the premises or parking
area of the retail establishment;
2. The owner of the placarded shopping cart, or his or her agent, has
received notice of the location of shopping cart from the City, and
that if not retrieved within three business days, the City will
impound the cart; and
3. The owner of the placarded shopping cart, or his or her agent, has
not retrieved the shopping cart within three business days from the
date the owner, or his or her agent, has received notice from the
City.
c. Notwithstanding paragraph b above, the City may impound any
abandoned, placarded shopping cart from any public or private
property provided the owner, or his or her agent, is given notice within
24 hours following the impound which informs the owner, or his or her
agent, of the location where the shopping cart may be claimed. Any
impounded shopping cart which is reclaimed by the owner, or his or her
agent, within three business days following the date of the twenty-fourhour
notice, shall be released and surrendered to the owner, or his or
her agent, at no charge whatsoever, including waiver of any impound
and storage fees or occurrence fines. Any shopping cart reclaimed
within the three business day period shall not be deemed an occurrence
for purposes of subsection 8-9.10e.
d. Notwithstanding paragraph b above, the City is authorized to
immediately retrieve any placarded shopping cart from any public or
private property in instances where the location of the shopping cart
will impede emergency services. Locations in which cart may impede
emergency services include, but are not limited to, the following areas:
1. The cart is located on a sidewalk or parkway so as to block access
of emergency equipment and/or personnel seeking access to public
or private facilities, structures, or buildings, in response to a
request for services.
2. The cart is located on a roadway so as to block access of emergency
equipment and/or personnel seeking access to public or private
facilities, structures, or buildings, in response to a request for
services.
§ 8-9.7 COMPTON § 8-9.8
AO:266
§ 8-9.9. Removal of Wrecked Shopping Carts. [Ord. #2016, § 1]
The City Manager, or his/her authorized designee, may determine that a
wrecked shopping cart abated according to the provisions of this section is
in such poor condition that it may be immediately disposed of. This action
will be a discretional decision of the City Manager, or his/her authorized
designee, and based upon a determination that the shopping cart is
inoperable, unsafe, or that the cost to repair exceeds the value of the
shopping cart. In such case, the shopping cart, or parts thereof, may be
destroyed without providing appeal hearing, but notice of the action shall
be given to the owner, if the same can be determined.
§ 8-9.10.. Assessment for Shopping Cart Removal — Hearings. [Ord.
#2016, § 1]
3. The cart is located on publicly or privately owned property and is
situated so as to block the access of emergency equipment and/or
personnel seeking access to public or private facilities, structures,
or buildings, in response to a request for services.
4. The cart is located within a roadway, on the day prior to or on the
day of scheduled street sweeping that is to occur on that roadway.
5. The cart is located such as to block access to vehicle or pedestrian
curb cuts.
6. The cart is located within a roadway, for which "No Parking" or "No
Stopping" signs have been placed, or within red zones painted on
curbs and curb faces.
7. The cart is located within a roadway, for which "Loading/
Unloading" signs have been placed, or within yellow zones painted
on curbs and curb faces.
8. The cart is located within an identified crosswalk or within a street
intersection.
9. The cart is located within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
10. The cart is located within a designated bus stop area.
a. Upon the abatement and removal of any shopping cart, the City shall
provide written notice to the owner (if the same can be ascertained),
advising that such shopping cart is held by the City and that the
shopping cart must be redeemed within 30 days and upon payment of
reasonable administrative fees. Such abatement notice shall state the
date the shopping cart was removed, the procedure for retrieving the
shopping cart and a statement that the owner, or his or her agent, may
request a hearing to appeal the abatement order by submitting a
written request within 10 days of the date appearing on the notice. Any
shopping cart removed and stored pursuant to these provisions shall be
released to the owner thereof, or his or her agent, if claimed within 30
§ 8-9.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-9.10.
AO:267
§ 8-9.11. Supplemental Regulation. [Ord. #2016, § 1]
This section is not construed as the exclusive regulation of shopping carts
within the City. It shall supplement and be in addition to other regulatory
codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City,
State or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
§ 8-10. (RESERVED)51
§ 8-11. WEED AND RUBBISH ABATEMENT PROGRAM.
days of the date appearing on the abatement notice and upon payment
of reasonable administrative fees. Such fees shall be waived if, after a
hearing to appeal has been requested, a determination is made at such
hearing that the fees shall be waived. If the shopping cart is not marked
in accordance with subsection 8-9.4, no such notice shall be required.
b. The administrative fees for the removal and storage of any shopping
cart shall be established or modified by resolution of the City Council
and shall include the actual cost of removal and storage of any shopping
cart, or parts thereof, plus the proportional share of administrative
costs in connection therewith.
c. Any hearing which is requested shall be conducted within five working
days of the receipt of the request, excluding Fridays, weekends and
holidays, by the City Manager, or his/her designate, who shall be
designated as the hearing officer. The failure of either the owner, or his
or her agent, to request a hearing shall waive the right to a hearing. At
the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether good cause
was shown for the abatement and removal of the shopping cart. The
decision of the hearing officer shall be deemed the final administrative
determination. If good cause is shown for the abatement and removal of
the shopping cart, the owner, or his or her agent, shall have 30 days
from the hearing date to retrieve the shopping cart upon payment of the
administrative fee. If good cause is not shown for the abatement and
removal of the shopping cart, the administrative fee shall be waived and
the owner, or his or her agent, shall have 30 days from the hearing date
to retrieve the shopping cart.
d. Any shopping cart not retrieved by its owner, or his or her agent, within
30 days of the date appearing on the abatement notice, when such
owner or agent has not requested a hearing in accordance with this
section, or within 30 days after the hearing date, when the owner, or his
or her agent, has requested a hearing, shall be deemed to be
permanently abandoned and may be sold or otherwise disposed of by
the City.
e. A fine of not more than $50 for each occurrence in excess of three
during any six-month period shall be charged the owner of a shopping
cart for failure to retrieve shopping carts. An occurrence includes all
shopping carts impounded by the City in a one-day period.
§ 8-9.10. COMPTON § 8-11.1
AO:268
§ 8-11.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
§ 8-11.2. Application. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
The provisions of this section shall apply generally to all property
throughout the City of Compton, wherein any of the conditions, hereinafter
specified, are found to exist.
§ 8-11.3. Definitions. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directive.
a. It is the intent of the Council of the City of Compton to provide a
comprehensive method for the identification and abatement of property
within the City of Compton on which there is an accumulation of grass,
weeds and rubbish.
b. Provisions of this section are to be supplementary and complementary
to all of the provisions of the Compton Municipal Code, State law, and
any law cognizable at common law or in equity, and nothing herein shall
be read, interpreted or construed in any manner so as to limit any
existing right or power of the City of Compton to abate any and all
nuisances.
a. GRASS IN EXCESS OF SIX INCHES – Shall mean any indigenous or
ornamental grass including, but not limited to blue grasses, fescues and
St. Augustine.
b. HEARING OFFICER – Shall mean the person designated by the City
Manager or his/her designee to conduct a public hearing to determine
the validity of the charges of the violation in question.
c. LESSEE – Shall mean any person to whom a lease is made and holds an
estate by virtue of the lease.
d. NOXIOUS WEEDS – Shall mean any species of plant that is, or is liable
to be troublesome, aggressive, intrusive, detrimental, or destructive to
agriculture, silviculture (the study, cultivation, and management of
forest trees), or important native species and is difficult to control, or
eradicate.
e. OCCUPANT – Shall mean any person having possessory rights of the
property and has the actual use, possession or control of same.
51.Editor's Note: Former Section 8-10, Seizure and Forfeiture of Nuisance Vehicles,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2098 was repealed in
its entirety by Ordinance No. 2216. See Section 7-9 for nuisance vehicle regulations.
§ 8-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-11.3
AO:269
§ 8-11.4. Enforcement Authority. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
The Municipal Law Enforcement Director, Building Official, Street
Superintendent, Fire Chief or their respective designees or any other
Director authorized by the City Manager, are authorized to administer and
enforce the provisions of this section.
f. OWNER – Shall mean any person, partnership, association, corporation,
fiduciary or other legal entity having a legal or equitable right to the
real property upon which the violation occurred.
g. PARKWAY – Shall mean the area between the sidewalk and the curb of
any street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge
of the roadway and property line adjacent thereto. Parkway also
includes any area within the roadway which is not open to vehicular
travel.
h. PERSON – Shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation,
company, association, business, firm, governmental entity or other legal
entity.
i. RUBBISH – Shall mean all trash or garbage found upon the parkways,
alleys, sidewalks or private property in the City of Compton, which
rubbish creates an immediate danger to the health, welfare, or safety of
the community, and shall include the following: accumulations of dirt;
accumulations of the combustible trash including garden refuse,
cuttings, industrial and commercial refuse and household refuse;
accumulations of trash which may be breeding places for rats, roaches
or other vermin; accumulations of trash which may be immediate fire
hazards; and safety hazards, including broken appliances or abandoned
machinery.
j. SIDEWALK – Shall mean that part of a public right-of-way that is
designated and used primarily for pedestrian travel.
k. STREET – Includes but is not limited to public street, alley, lane, court
or other place.
l. WEEDS IN EXCESS OF SIX INCHES – Shall mean all weeds growing
upon private property, parkways, easements, alleys, or sidewalks, or
any of the following:
1. Weeds which bear or may bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature;
2. Weeds and indigenous grasses which may attain such large growth
as to become, when dry; a fire menace to adjacent improved
property;
3. Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous; and
4. Poison oak, poison ivy and/or castor beans when the condition or
growths are such as to constitute a menace to the public health.
§ 8-11.3 COMPTON § 8-11.5
AO:270
§ 8-11.5. Enforcement Remedies. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
§ 8-11.6. Recovery of Attorneys' Fees. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
§ 8-11.7. Public Nuisance. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
It is declared unlawful and a public nuisance for any owner of real property
in this City to maintain such premises or to permit such premises to be
maintained in such a manner that any one or more of the conditions or
activities described in the following paragraphs are found to exist:
a. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment in the County jail for six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
b. In accordance with California Penal Code Section 373a, a crime can be
charged for each day the violation continues following service of a
notice of the violation.
c. In addition to all other remedies and penalties available for any
violation of this section, the City Attorney is authorized, to bring a civil
action in any court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief and to
recover any other civil penalties which may be sought in accordance
with the applicable provisions of the Civil and Penal codes of the State
of California.
d. As an alternative to a criminal citation, the City may issue an
administrative citation pursuant to Compton Municipal Code Section
1-7.
a. In accordance with Government Code Section 38773.5(b), the
prevailing party in any proceeding conducted pursuant to this weed
abatement Section 8-11 and associated with the abatement of a public
nuisance shall be entitled to recovery of attorneys' fees incurred in any
such proceeding.
b. The recovery of attorneys' fees by the prevailing party is limited to
those individual actions or proceedings in which the City elects, at the
initiation of that action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own
attorneys' fees.
c. An award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party in an action or
proceeding shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the City in the action or proceeding.
a. The keeping, storage, depositing, or accumulation on the premises of
rubbish which poses a risk of harm to the public or constitutes visual
blight or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or is
offensive to the senses or is detrimental to the use and enjoyment of
nearby properties or reduces nearby property values.
§ 8-11.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-11.7
AO:271
§ 8-11.8. Owner to Maintain Property Free of Weeds and Rubbish;
Private Property. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
§ 8-11.9. Owner to Maintain Sidewalk and Parkway Free of Weeds
and Rubbish — Public Property. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
Every owner of real property or person having charge or control of same
is required to maintain the property free of rubbish, weeds or grass over
six inches from his property extending to the center of the street which
includes the parkways, sidewalks, alleys, easements, etc.
§ 8-11.10. Abatement Notice — Contents. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
Upon determining that certain properties located in the City of Compton
are in violation of this section, the Municipal Law Enforcement Director
or designee, shall issue a notice directed to the record owner and to any
occupants, as appropriate, of the property. The notice shall contain:
b. Property on which weeds and grass exist in excess of six inches outside
of a managed landscape or garden area where such plants are
purposefully cultivated, propagated, and controlled; or where noxious
weeds or other vegetation pose a risk of harm to the public, or
constitute visual blight, or reduce the aesthetic appearance of the
neighborhood, or are offensive to the senses, or are detrimental to the
use and enjoyment of nearby properties, or which reduce nearby
property values.
a. Every owner of real property or person having charge or control of
same is required to maintain such property in a manner so as not to
violate the provisions of this section. The owner shall maintain the
property free of rubbish, weeds or grass in excess of six inches.
b. Every owner of real property or person having charge or control or
occupancy of same is presumed to know that the weeds or grass
thereon, or on a part thereof exceed six inches in height, if the height of
a substantial portion of the weeds or grass remains in excess of six
inches in height for one calendar week.
c. Such owner remains liable for violations on his property regardless of
any contract or agreement with any third party regarding such
property.
d. Every occupant, lessee or holder of any interest in property, other than,
as owner, is required to maintain such property in the same manner as
is required of the owner. The duty imposed by this section on the owner
thereof shall in no instance relieve those persons herein referred to
from the similar duty.
a. The street address and such other description as is required to identify
the premises.
§ 8-11.7 COMPTON § 8-11.10
AO:272
§ 8-11.11. Abatement Notice — Service. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
b. A statement which specifies the conditions which constitute the
nuisance and which also may specify the measures necessary to abate
the nuisance.
c. An order that the nuisance be abated within 15 days from the date of
service of the abatement notice.
d. A statement that, if the conditions which constitute the nuisance are not
abated by the owner within the time specified, the City shall have the
right to abate such conditions with the cost thereof to be assessed
against the owner of the property.
e. A statement that the owner and/or any occupant to whom the notice has
been directed, has the right to request a hearing before a Hearing
Officer, and that such request must be made in writing and must be
made within the time period within which the owner has been ordered
to abate the nuisance.
a. Service 15 Days Before Abatement Deadline. The written notice shall be
served upon any owner and occupant of the property upon which the
nuisance exists, at least 15 calendar days before the abatement
deadline date specified in said notice.
b. Owner. The written notice shall be served either by personal delivery
upon the record owner or by mailing a copy to the record owner by
United States Mail, postage prepaid, as certified, first class mail, return
receipt requested to the owner's last known address as it appears on
the latest equalized assessment roll of Los Angeles County or to the
address known by the City Clerk.
c. Occupant. The written notice shall be served on any occupant to whom
the notice has been directed by personal delivery to said occupant or by
mailing a copy to the occupant by first class mail at the address of the
subject property or to another address known to be the occupant's
home, business or mailing address.
d. Failure to Receive Notice. The failure of the owner or occupant to
receive such notice shall not affect the power of the City or its officers
or employees to proceed as provided in this section.
e. Proof of Service. Proof of service of the notice shall be certified by
written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person
effecting service. It shall declare the time, date and manner in which
service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt returned
in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be made part of the
department's permanent record.
§ 8-11.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-11.12
AO:273
§ 8-11.12. Abatement Notice — Posting.
If the owner's address is unavailable pursuant to subsection 8-11.11b,
(Abatement Notice — Service; Owner) such service may be made by posting
the notice in a conspicuous place either upon or in front of the property of
which the nuisance exists, as follows:
§ 8-11.13. Duty to Abate — Time Frame. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
The owner and occupant shall abate the public nuisance within 15 calendar
days from the date of service of the abatement notice.
§ 8-11.14. Duty to Abate — Request for Hearing. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
§ 8-11.15. Appeal Hearing Notice — Service. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
a. One notice shall be posted on or in front of each separately owned
parcel.
b. Not more than two notices to any such parcel of 50 to 100 feet frontage
are required.
c. Notices shall be placed at intervals of not more than 100 feet if the
frontage of a parcel is greater than 100 feet, with one notice for each
100 feet of frontage.
a. After the written notice has been served, it shall be the duty of the
owner and any occupant to whom the notice has been directed, to abate
such nuisance within the time specified by the notice. However, within
this time, the owner or occupant may request a hearing before a
Hearing Officer.
b. The request must be made in writing, and must set forth the reasons
why the abatement is not necessary. The request must be made within
15 calendar days from the date of service of the abatement notice. It
must be filed by delivering the request to the Municipal Law
Enforcement Services Director or his designee.
c. The appeal hearing shall be set not less than 15 calendar days and not
more than 30 calendar days from the date the owner or occupant filed a
request for a hearing with the Municipal Law Enforcement Services
Director or his designee.
a. Upon receipt of a timely, written request for a hearing, the Municipal
Law Services Director or his designee or any other Director authorized
by the City Manager shall serve upon the owner or occupant who has
appealed a copy of the notice of hearing. The appeal hearing notice
shall be served at least 10 calendar days before the hearing. Service
shall be completed in the same manner as set forth in subsection
8-11.11 (Abatement Notice — Service).
§ 8-11.12 COMPTON § 8-11.15
AO:274
§ 8-11.16. Appeal Hearing — Procedure. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
§ 8-11.17. Abatement Order. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
Once the Hearing Officer determines that a public nuisance exists he shall
issue an abatement order upon those who have submitted written requests
for a hearing. The order shall state that unless the nuisance is removed
and abated within 10 calendar days from the date of mailing, the Street
Superintendent or his designee shall abate the nuisance.
§ 8-11.18. Abatement Order — Service. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
The abatement order shall be served in the same manner as set forth in
subsection 8-11.11 (Abatement Notice — Service).
§ 8-11.19. Abatement by City. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
In the event the nuisance is not abated by the time specified in either the
abatement notice or the abatement order, the Street Superintendent or
b. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the
validity of any proceedings under this section.
a. At the time stated in the notice, the Hearing Officer shall hear and
consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests, and shall receive
testimony from owners, witnesses, including City personnel, and
interested persons relative to the alleged public nuisance and to the
proposed abatement of the premises. The hearing may be continued
from time to time without further notice.
b. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall determine
whether the premises, or any part thereof, as maintained, constitutes a
public nuisance as defined in subsection 8-11.7 (Public Nuisance). If the
Hearing Officer finds that a public nuisance does exist, it shall
determine how the nuisance is to be abated and shall establish a time,
not to exceed 10 calendar days, within which abatement shall take
place. In the event the owner fails to correct the nuisance within the
time prescribed, the City shall cause the nuisance to be abated. The
cost incurred by the City, including incidental enforcement costs, plus
any prescribed penalties, shall become a lien upon the property.
c. A copy of the Hearing Officer's determination, noted as the Abatement
Order, shall be served as set forth in subsection 8-11.11 (Abatement
Notice — Service), upon the owner of the affected property and any
occupant who may have requested a hearing.
d. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final.
e. Failure to attend the appeal hearing by the person appealing shall
constitute a waiver of his or her rights to an appeal hearing and
adjudication of the abatement notice or any portion of the notice.
§ 8-11.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-11.19
AO:275
designee may enter onto any private property and abate any nuisance found
on or in front of the property.
§ 8-11.20. Establishment of Costs and Fees by Resolution. [Ord.
#2188, § 2]
The City Council may, from time to time, establish a schedule of
administrative and abatement costs and fees by resolution.
§ 8-11.21. Recovery of Costs. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
Any legal owner of real property who causes, maintains or permits a public
nuisance to continue on his property after such person is given written
notice to abate the nuisance, and such continuation goes beyond the time
set for such abatement in the written notice, then such owner shall be liable
to the City for attorneys' fees as set forth in subsection 8-11.6 (Recovery
of Attorneys' Fees) and the expenses incurred in detecting, investigating,
abating the violation and the costs of monitoring compliance. If the owner
fails to reimburse the City within 30 calendar days from the date of billing,
the City may recover such costs by either; instituting a civil action, imposing
a nuisance abatement lien, a special assessment lien or any combination
thereof. The City may also pursue any other remedy available under the law.
§ 8-11.22. Costs of Abatement as Lien Against Private Property.
[Ord. #2188, § 2]
The Street Superintendent shall, after the removal of weeds and/or rubbish
from any lot, compute all expenses, so incurred by the City in connection
therewith including the applicable processing fees and all incidental
enforcement costs plus any prescribed penalties. All expenses may be
charged as a lien against the property on which the nuisance existed.
§ 8-11.23. Abatement Cost Report. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
The Street Superintendent, upon completion of abatement under the
direction of the City, shall prepare an Abatement Cost Report which
provides an accounting of the costs, including incidental expenses, incurred
as a result of abating the public nuisance. The Abatement Cost Report shall
itemize all costs associated with the abatement as well as:
a. A description of the real property where the abatement activity took
place.
b. The names and addresses of the persons entitled to receive notice.
c. A description of the work completed.
d. A determination that the amount of the costs set forth in the Abatement
Cost Report are accurate and reasonable.
e. Notice of the opportunity to appeal the amount and the reasonableness
of the abatement costs.
§ 8-11.19 COMPTON § 8-11.23
AO:276
§ 8-11.24. Filing of Abatement Cost Report with City Clerk. [Ord.
#2188, § 2]
On a periodic basis, as determined by the Street Superintendent, the
original Abatement Cost Report shall be filed with the City Clerk on those
properties for which the owner has not fully reimbursed the City within 30
calendar days from the date of billing.
§ 8-11.25. Posting of Notice of Abatement Cost Report and
Assessment List. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
§ 8-11.26. Mailing of Notice of Hearing on Abatement Cost Report
and Assessment. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
f. Notice of the manner in which the City intends to collect the final and
approved abatement costs including, but not limited to, by special
assessment against the property.
a. The City Clerk shall maintain a copy of the Abatement Cost Report,
assessment list, notice of the filing of the report and the time and place
where said documents will be submitted to the City Council for
confirmation and hearing for public inspection.
b. Said documents shall be posted on the bulletin board adjacent to the
entrance to City Hall notifying the public of the time and location of the
hearing at which they may be heard.
c. The posting and first publication of said notice shall be made and
completed at least 10 calendar days before the time such report shall be
submitted to the City Council. Such notice, as so posted and published,
shall be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE OF HEARING ON ABATEMENT COST REPORT AND
ASSESSMENT FOR WEED OR RUBBISH ABATEMENT
Notice Is Hereby Given that on _________, 20_________, the Street
Superintendent of the City of Compton filed with the City Clerk of
said City a report and assessment on the abatement of weeds or
rubbish within said City, a copy of which is posted on the bulletin board
adjacent to the entrance to Compton City Hall.
Notice Is Further Given that on _________, 20 __________, at the hour
of _________ p.m. in the Council Chamber of said City Hall, said report
and assessment list will be presented to the City Council of said City
for consideration and confirmation. Any and all persons interested or
having any objections to said report and assessment list, or to any
matter or thing contained therein, may appear at said time and place
and be heard. Date Posted _____________, 20 __________
d. A similar notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general
circulation which is published and circulated within the City.
§ 8-11.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-11.26
AO:277
§ 8-11.27. Hearing on Report and Confirming Cost Assessment for
Weed Abatement. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
§ 8-11.28. Nuisance Abatement Lien. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
If the Council orders that the abatement costs be deemed a nuisance
abatement lien, same may be recorded and enforced against the property
pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Section 38773.1.
A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the
City for a money judgment. As part of the foreclosure action, the City may
recover reasonable attorneys' fees and costs including, but not limited to
costs incurred for processing and recording the lien and providing notice to
the property owner.
§ 8-11.29. Special Assessment. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
a. The City Clerk shall also mail a notice to each property owner identified
in the report. Said notice shall provide a description of the real property
at which the work was performed, the nature of the work performed,
and the expenses incurred by the City in performing the work and shall
notify the owner that said costs shall be assessed against the owner of
the property unless objection is made by the owner in writing and
submitted to the City Clerk at least two days before the hearing.
b. The notice shall also specify the time and location where the proposed
assessment will be presented to the City Council for hearing and
confirmation. The notice shall be mailed at least 10 calendar days prior
to the date of the hearing.
c. Any owner who objects to the proposed assessment and who desires to
challenge the proposed assessment shall submit written objections to
the City Clerk at least two business days before the hearing.
a. At the time and place fixed for hearing and confirming the proposed
assessments, the City Council shall hear the same. The Street
Superintendent shall attend the hearing with a record of all the
abatement costs.
b. At the hearing, the City Council may correct, modify or eliminate any
proposed assessment which it may deem excessive or otherwise
incorrect. Thereafter, by resolution, the Council shall confirm each
assessment and the amount, as proposed or as corrected and modified.
c. The Council may order that the costs of abatement be made a personal
obligation of the property owner and either a nuisance abatement lien
or a special assessment against the property.
a. As an alternative to a nuisance abatement lien, in accordance with
California Government Code Section 39577, the costs of abatement
may be made a special assessment against the property. Once the
special assessment is recorded in the Office of the County Recorder, it
§ 8-11.26 COMPTON § 8-11.29
AO:278
§ 8-11.30. Notice of Special Assessment. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
Notice shall be given to the property owner at the time of imposing the
assessment and shall specify that the property may be sold after three years
by the Tax Collector for unpaid delinquent taxes. The Tax Collector's power
of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive
notice.
§ 8-11.31. Collection on Tax Roll. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
In accordance with California Government Code Sections 39578, 39579
and 39581, after confirmation of the report, the City Clerk shall submit a
certified copy of the report to the County Auditor Controller. The County
Auditor Controller shall enter each assessment on the County Tax Roll
opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected
at the same time and in the same manner as general municipal taxes.
The assessment shall be subject to the same interest and penalties and
same procedure and sale in case of delinquency. All laws and ordinances
applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of City taxes are hereby
made applicable to such special assessments.
§ 8-11.32. Abatement Cost Constitutes a Civil Debt. [Ord. #2188,
§ 2]
Final abatement costs shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the City and
may be deemed a personal obligation of the legal owner by the City Council.
An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of
competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any delinquent
or unpaid abatement costs. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be
cumulative, and the use of an action to collect such an amount as a debt
by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by the
Municipal Code or by law.
§ 8-11.33. Abatement Penalty. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
In addition to recovering the costs of abatement, the Municipal Law
Enforcement Services Director or his designee may also assess an
abatement penalty against the property owner for creating or maintaining
a public nuisance in accordance with California Government Code Sections
53069.4(a) and 36901. The penalty shall be assessed pursuant to the
administrative procedures set forth in Compton Municipal Code Section 1-7
(Administrative Citation).
shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the special
assessment and a lien will attach against the property until the
assessment, and all interest and penalties due and payable have been
paid.
b. The special assessment and lien shall be subject to the same penalties
as are provided for other delinquent taxes or assessments of the City.
§ 8-11.29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-11.34
AO:279
§ 8-11.34. Treble Damages for Repeat Violations. [Ord. #2188, § 2]
In accordance with California Government Code Section 38773.7, upon
entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a twoyear
period where an owner of property is responsible for a condition that
may be abated, except any conditions abated pursuant to California Health
and Safety Code 17980, the City may seek to recover treble the costs of
abatement from the owner.
§ 8-11.35. Emergency Weed Abatement. [Ord. #2188, § 2)G27]
Chapter 9
GENERAL LICENSING
a. If, in the opinion of the Chief Building Official, Fire Chief, Municipal
Law Enforcement Services Director or Los Angeles County Health
Department representative, there exists a condition on any property
which is of such a nature as to be immediately dangerous to the public
health, safety or welfare, which, if not abated, would, during the
pendency of the abatement procedures set forth in this chapter, subject
the public to imminent harm of a serious nature, the same may be
abated by the City forthwith without compliance with the provisions of
this section.
b. The cost of emergency abatement including all administrative costs of
any action taken hereunder may be assessed against the subject
premises as a lien or made a personal obligation of the owner as
provided in this section.
c. The property owner or person with charge or control or occupancy may
request a hearing as to the necessity and reasonable cost of the work
performed by order of the Building Official within 10 days after the
abatement has been completed or within 10 days after receiving a
notice of such work.52
52.Editor's Note: Weed and Rubbish Abatement was previously codified in Section 7-20 and
contained Ord. Nos. 1223, 1389, 1574, 1721, 1924, 2005 and 2006, and was repealed in
entirety by Ordinance No. 2188.
§ 8-11.34 COMPTON § 8-11.35
AO:280
ARTICLE I
Licenses and Permits
§ 9-1. LICENSE PROCEDURE.
§ 9-1.1. Definitions. [Added by Ord. #1342; Ord. #856, §§ 6100 —
6100.42; Ord. #933; Ord. #990; Ord. #1018; Ord. #1086; Ord.
#1361; Ord. #1391; Ord. #1732, § 4; Ord. #2243, § 1]
As used in this Chapter:
ADVERTISING — Shall mean and include:
ADVERTISING BY BILLBOARDS — Shall mean and include every person
erecting, installing, maintaining billboards, or operating any other
advertising sign, sign device, design or statuary erected to attract the
attention of the public and visible from any street or other public place.
ADVERTISING BY DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS — Shall mean and include
every person operating the business of distributing handbills, samples,
dodgers, circulars, booklets, or other notices of advertisements. No
additional fee shall be required for employees or agents of such licensee
engaged in the performance of their duties as employees or agents of such
licensee; provided, the employees or agents carry upon their persons at all
times while engaged in such business an identification card furnished by the
licensee, endorsed by the License Collector.
ADVERTISING BY POSTING — Shall mean and include every person
operating the business of advertising by posting, sticking, tacking, affixing
or painting bills or signs to or upon posts, fences, buildings or other
structures, except billboards or advertising sign boards; provided, that
nothing in this section contained shall be construed to affect or apply to
any person who shall be liable for and who shall pay a license under any
provisions of this Chapter and who shall post, stick, tack, affix upon or
erect any such signs on the premises or buildings occupied and used in the
business of that person and which sign advertises the goods of the business
of the person only.
Operating any shop for the purpose of manufacturing or painting of
show cards of any kind whatsoever.
a.
Affixing or displaying bills, cards, signs or other advertising matter in
or upon trucks, wagons, trailers, or other vehicles, using the public
street. Provided, nothing in this section shall be construed as applying
to any sign or advertisement advertising the person owning the trucks,
wagons, trailers, or other vehicles, provided the trucks, wagons,
trailers or other vehicles are used primarily in the conduct of the
business of said person.
b.
Installing or maintaining flags, banners or other decorative advertising
displays over or upon any street or other public place.
c.
§ 9-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.1
AO:281
ADVERTISING BY SEARCHLIGHT — Shall mean and include carrying on
the business of advertising by means of a searchlight, stereoscope,
biograph, moving picture or any similar device; provided that nothing in
this section contained shall be construed to affect or apply to any person
who shall be liable for and shall pay the license under any provision of
this Chapter, and who shall use a stereoscope, biograph or moving picture
or any similar device for the purpose of advertising goods, wares, or
merchandise of the business of that person only.
ADVERTISING BY SOUND TRUCKS — Shall mean and include every person
operating the business of advertising by means of any vehicle containing
amplifiers, phonograph, loud speaker, microphone, broadcasting radio, or a
device for public address, or carrying advertising signs, and which is used
for announcing or advertising upon the public streets or public grounds in
the City.
AUCTION ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean a fixed place of business where
any goods, wares or merchandise are sold or offered for sale or trade by
public outcry or public auction, five or more days each year.
AUTO WRECKER — Shall mean and include any person who buys any motor
vehicle as the term "motor vehicle" is defined in the California State Vehicle
Code, for the purpose of dismantling or disassembling, or who dismantles
or disassembles any such motor vehicle whether for the purpose of dealing
in the parts thereof or using the same for the purpose of reconditioning
any other vehicle, or for the purpose of selling or otherwise dealing in the
materials of such vehicle or vehicles.
BANKRUPT STOCKS — Business includes every person engaged in the
business of selling any goods, advertised or designated as sheriff's,
assignee's creditor's, bankrupt's, consignee's, trustee's, receiver's, or
special sale of damaged goods, damaged by fire, water or otherwise.
Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to sale of goods which
are actually in good faith in the possession of the sheriff or trustee in
bankruptcy or in possession of any court of the state or of the United States;
or the goods belonging to an established business, paying a license, which
have been damaged within the City and which are being disposed of in good
faith by the person engaged in said business to close out the same.
Except that such sales provided in this section shall be certified to by
the City License Collector that such sale is a bona fide sale held by an
established licensee to conduct such business in the City and provided
further that an inventory of merchandise to be sold at such sale shall be
furnished the City License Collector and the Chief of Police and provided
further that permission to hold such sale shall not include the right to
increase the stock of merchandise or inventory after the sale has been
publicly advertised.
BEAUTICIAN — Shall mean and include every person engaged in the
business of giving beauty treatments, massage, manicuring, shampooing, or
hairdressing, or removing or eradicating surplus hair, moles, warts, or other
facial blemishes, by going from house to house or place to place, and if such
person be connected with or be operating from an established shop or place
§ 9-1.1 COMPTON § 9-1.1
AO:282
of business in the City the license fee specified shall be in addition to any
and all fees required of the owner or operator of such shop.
BEAUTY PARLOR — Shall mean and include operating a manicuring,
shampooing, hairdressing, facial massage, or beauty parlor, or any
establishment where surplus hair, moles or other facial blemishes are
removed or eradicated.
BUSINESS — Shall mean and include "professions," "trades," and
"occupations," and all and every kind of calling carried on for profit or
livelihood.
BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONS GENERALLY — Shall mean and include,
but shall not be limited to commission merchants, brokers, hotels
containing eight or more guest rooms and intended for occupancy by eight
or more guests whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise;
and motels including but not limited to any structure which is occupied or
intended for occupancy by persons for limited periods of time.
BUSINESS, PROFESSION OR OCCUPATION — Shall not apply to any
person engaged in any of the professions or occupations hereinabove
enumerated, solely as an employee of any other person conducting,
managing or carrying on any such business in the City.
CARNIVAL — Shall mean any fair, festival, or like activity of a temporary
nature having a collection of games, rides, booths, or concessions.
CIRCUS — Shall mean and include any tent or canvas enclosure wherein
are exhibited any feats of horsemanship, trained animals, clowns, acrobats,
trapeze performances, or such other forms of skill or amusement as are
commonly given in rings and combinations of entertainments.
CONCESSION — Shall mean and include every person, regularly licensed
under this Chapter for the conduct of any business, who rents or leases
floor space or a concession to one or more persons in his regular place of
business on a cash rental or commission basis, or otherwise.
CONTRACTOR — Shall mean a person who, for a fixed sum, price, fee,
percentage, or other compensation other than wages, undertakes with
another for the construction, alteration, repair, addition to, or improvement
of any building or other structure, project, development, or improvement.
"Contractor" shall include "subcontractor" but shall not include anyone who
merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating the same, or
consuming the same, in the performance of the work of the contractor.
EMPLOYEE — Shall mean all persons engaged in the operation or conduct
of any business, whether as owner, any member of the owner's family,
partner, agent, manager, or solicitor, and any and all other persons
employed or working in such business.
FORTUNE-TELLING — Shall mean and include operating the business
or art of astrology, palmistry, phrenology, life reading, fortune-telling,
cartomancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, hypnotism,
mesmerism, mediumship, prophecy, augury, divination, magic necromancy,
or any occult science and who demands or receives a fee for the practice
§ 9-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.1
AO:283
or exhibition of his business or art, or who practices or gives an exhibition
of his business free, or who practices or gives an exhibition of his business
as a bonus, prize, or free with the sale of any book or other article, or who
gives an exhibition thereof at any place where any admission is charged or
received.
FORTUNE-TELLING ADVERTISING — Shall mean and include every person
advertising by oral word, sign, circular, handbill, newspaper, periodical,
magazine, or other publication, or by any other means whatsoever, fortunetelling
or furnishing any information not otherwise obtainable by the
ordinary processes of knowledge, for or without pay, by means of any occult
or psychic power, faculty or force, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy,
psychology, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, mediumship, seership,
prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind reading, telepath,
or other crafty art, science, cards, talismans, charms, substances, gypsy
cunning or foresight, crystal gazing, oriental mysteries, or magic of any kind
or nature.
GASOLINE DELIVERY — Shall mean and include the selling or delivering
of kerosene, gasoline, benzene, energine, distillate, stove distillate, furnace
distillate, or any other petroleum product by means of a tank wagon, tank
truck, or other vehicle.
GROCERY BUS BUSINESS — Shall mean and include every person who
sells upon the public streets, from any vehicle commonly known as a
traveling grocery store or bus, a general line of groceries or other articles
usually carried for sale in grocery stores but shall not include any person
peddling fruits, vegetables, poultry, butter, eggs, or other farm produce
grown, raised, or produced by himself or by any person whose fees for
peddling are otherwise specifically provided for in this Chapter.
GROSS RECEIPTS — Shall mean the gross receipts of the calendar year
and is defined as the total amount of the sales price of all sales or the
total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service,
or employment of whatever nature it may be, whether such service, act, or
employment is done as a part of, or in connection with, the sale of goods
or not, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, including all receipts,
cash credits and property of any kind or nature, any amount for which credit
is allowed by the seller to the purchaser without any deduction therefrom
on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used,
labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses or other expenses
whatsoever; provided, that cash discounts allowed or taken on sales shall
not be included, and this Chapter shall not be construed to impose any tax
upon any business or transaction which the City is not authorized to license
or tax under any law of the state or of the United States. Any tax required
by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from
the consumer or purchaser, and such part of the sales price of any property
previously sold returned by the purchaser to the seller which is refunded
by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances given or taken as part
payment on any property so accepted for resale, shall be deducted for the
purpose of determining the gross receipts hereunder.
§ 9-1.1 COMPTON § 9-1.1
AO:284
INVALID COACH — Shall mean a vehicle used to transport the sick and
infirm from place to place, but which vehicle is not an emergency vehicle.
ITINERANT VENDOR — Shall mean any person who engages in a
temporary business for the sale of goods and who for such purpose hires or
occupies any building or structure or portion thereof within the City.
JUNK DEALER — Shall mean and include any person engaged in the
business of selling, either wholesale or retail or storing on premises any
rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metals, or any articles of junk.
LAUNDRY — Shall mean a place where clothes, wearing apparel, household
linen, or other similar articles are washed or ironed, or both washed and
ironed, for a fee or compensation.
LINEN SUPPLY — Shall mean a plant operated for the purpose of leasing,
renting, or otherwise furnishing clean or laundered table linens, towels,
aprons, jackets, overalls, wiping rags, and articles of like nature for a fee.
MONEY LENDER — Shall mean and include every person carrying on the
business of loaning money upon personal security, upon evidence of debt,
assignments of salary, salary warrants, salary demands, or any personal
property, or purchasing for himself or for any other person, commercial
paper, evidence of debts, assignment of salary, salary warrants, salary
demands, time checks or other evidence of salaries due, or to become due.
Nothing in this section contained shall be deemed or construed to apply to
the holder of a bond broker's license, or to any person conducting a banking
business under the laws of the state.
PATROL SYSTEM — Shall mean and include any private service or private
system which purports to furnish or does furnish to members or
subscribers, any watchman or guard, either uniformed or otherwise, to
patrol any part of the City or to guard or watch any property, including
guarding against theft, fire, or both, or to perform any service usually and
customarily performed by the Chief of Police in his capacity as a peace
officer.
It does not include the guarding of property of a single owner while such
property is not open to public by one or more individuals whose entire
salary or wage is paid by such owner, irrespective of whether such salary
or wage be paid direct to the individuals performing such guard duty or to
another, or service of any nature performed by an employee whose main or
principal duty is not that of guarding or protecting property.
PATROLMAN — Shall mean an individual engaged in the act of guarding
property as the owner, member, or employee of a period system.
PEDDLER OF NOTIONS — Shall mean and include every person traveling
from place to place operating the business of a peddler of food or
beverages, flags, banners, balloons, canes, horns, trumpets, musical or
noisemaking instruments of any kind, toys, badges, buttons, or souvenirs
of any kind. The license referred to in this section shall not entitle the
licensee to operate in the Central Business District of the City. Operation
shall be limited to licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and
other similar licensed public entertainment events.
§ 9-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.1
AO:285
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION — Shall mean the transportation of persons by
motor bus or other motor vehicle over a specified route upon the public
streets, irrespective of whether such route lies wholly within the City or has
its point of origin and destination wholly within or without the City.
PUSHCART — Shall mean, unless otherwise specified, any wagon, cart, or
similar wheeled container, which is not a "vehicle" as defined in the Vehicle
Code of the State of California, from which food, beverage or non-food
products are offered for sale to the public.
REAL ESTATE BROKER — Shall mean a person who, for compensation,
sells or offers for sale, buys or offers to buy, lists or solicits for prospective
purchasers, or negotiates the purchase or sale of real estate, or solicits
prospective purchasers of real estate, or negotiates loans on real estate, or
leases, or negotiates the sale, purchase, or exchange of leases, or offers to
lease, rent, or place for rent any real estate or improvement thereon.
REAL ESTATE SALESMAN — Shall mean a natural person who, for
compensation, is employed by a licensed real estate broker to sell, or offer
for sale, or to list, or to buy, or to offer to buy, or to negotiate the purchase
or sale or exchange of real estate, or to solicit prospective purchasers of
real estate, or to negotiate a loan on real estate, or to lease or negotiate the
sale, purchase, or exchange of leases, or offer to lease, rent, or place for
rent any real estate, or improvement thereon.
SOLICITING — Shall mean and include any person who engages in the
business of going from house to house and place to place, or at or along
the streets, selling or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders
for, goods or other things of value for future delivery or for services to be
performed in the future.
SWAP MEET — Shall mean the act or practice of carrying on, on a single
location or premises, the exchange, barter, trade, sale, or purchase of
personal property among or between 25 or more persons, not otherwise
licensed to do business in the City, less frequently than six times per week.
SWAP MEET OPERATOR — Shall mean that person or group of persons who
organizes or administers any swap meet.
SWAP MEET PARTICIPANT — Shall mean that person or group of persons
who sets up a table or booth or establishes any location within swap meet
premises to exchange, sell, or purchase goods.
THEATER — Shall mean and include a moving picture theater or drive-in
theater where moving or motion pictures or legitimate theater or vaudeville
shows are exhibited and a fee is charged, collected, or received.
For the purpose of licensing drive-in theaters, seating capacity shall be
calculated on the basis of 2 1/2 seats per automobile space provided in such
theaters.
VEHICLE — Shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except
devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.
§ 9-1.1 COMPTON § 9-1.1
AO:286
VEND OR VENDING — Shall mean, unless otherwise specified, selling,
or offering to sell, any food, beverage or non-food products of any kind
from any vehicle, motor vehicle, transporting mechanism (motorized or
nonmotorized), stationary mechanism (e.g., stand or booth), portable box,
bag or similar container.
VENDING MACHINES; AMUSEMENT — Shall mean and include each
board, set of numbers, alley, wheel, or any individual device whereby a
player manipulates the game, device, machine, or other instrument, and
each thereof shall be deemed a separate device, machine, or instrument
requiring an additional license fee.
VENDING VEHICLE — Shall mean, unless otherwise specified, any vehicle,
as that term is defined in the California Vehicle Code, which is equipped or
primarily used for the selling or offering to sell of any type of food, beverage
or non-food products directly to any consumer. Vending vehicle includes,
but is not limited to, catering trucks, ice cream trucks, and mobile vendors
of stationary dining establishments, but shall not include a vehicle that
only delivers food, beverage or non-food products ordered by home delivery
customers.
VENDOR — Shall mean, unless otherwise specified, any person who vends
or engages in the act of vending.
§ 9-1.2. Licenses Required. [Ord. #856, § 6101]
No person shall commence or carry on any business in the City without
first having procured a license from the City so to do or without complying
with any and all regulations of such business contained in this Chapter;
and the carrying on of any business without first having procured a license
from the City so to do, or without complying with any and all regulations of
such business contained in this Chapter, shall constitute a separate violation
of this Chapter for each and every day such trade, calling, profession, or
occupation is so carried on.
§ 9-1.3. Unlawful Businesses. [Ord. #856, § 6102]
No license issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be construed
as authorizing the conduct of, or continuance of, any illegal or unlawful
business.
§ 9-1.4. Suits for Recovery of Unpaid Sums. [Ord. #856, § 6103]
Any sum required to be paid under this Chapter shall be deemed a debt
to the City, and any person who engages in any business required to be
licensed without obtaining a license so to do shall be liable to an action by
and in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the
recovery of any such amount.
§ 9-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.5
AO:287
§ 9-1.5. Contents of License. [Ord. #856, § 6104; Ord. #1242]
Each license issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall state
upon the face thereof the following:
§ 9-1.6. Delinquency Penalty. [Ord. #856, § 6105; Ord. #1018; Ord.
#1824, #1, A]
To every license mentioned or provided for in this Chapter remaining
unpaid 30 days following its date of expiration, whether it be a monthly,
quarterly, semi-annual or annual license, a penalty of 25% of the amount
of such license shall be added and an additional 10% shall be added each
30 days thereafter until paid, and the penalty shall be collected and the
payment thereof shall be enforced in the same manner as other licenses are
collected and the payment thereof enforced.
No greater or less amount of money shall be charged or received from any
license than is provided in this Chapter, and no license shall be sold or
issued for any period of time other than is provided in this Chapter.
Daily license remaining unpaid at the close of 24 hours after the same
becomes due, shall have a penalty of 10% of the amount of such license
added and the penalty shall be collected and the payment thereof shall
be enforced in the same manner as other licenses are collected and the
payment thereof enforced.
Weekly license remaining unpaid at the close of 48 hours after the same
becomes due, shall have a penalty of 10% of the amount of such license
added and the penalty shall be collected and the payment thereof shall
be enforced in the same manner as other licenses are collected and the
payment thereof enforced.
§ 9-1.7. No License Issued Where Applicant Indebted to City for Any
Unpaid License Fee. [Ord. #856, § 6106]
No license for any succeeding current or unexpired license period shall
knowingly be issued to any person who at the time of making application
for any license is indebted to the City for any unpaid license fee; provided
that the License Collector, or his duly authorized deputy, may enter into
an agreement with any person indebted to the City for the non-payment
a. The person to whom the license is issued;
b. The kind of business licensed thereby;
c. The location of such business; and
d. The date of expiration of such license.
In no case shall any mistake of the License Collector in stating the amount
of a license prevent or prejudice the collection by the City of what should be
actually due from any person carrying on a business subject to a license under
the provisions of this Chapter.
§ 9-1.5 COMPTON § 9-1.7
AO:288
of license fees for any past license period, agreeing with such person that
such person may pay delinquent license fees for any past license period in
equal installments extending over a period not to exceed one year. In such
agreement such debtor shall acknowledge its debt to the City and agree
in case default be made in the payment of any installment agreed to be
paid thereunder that the whole amount agreed to be paid shall become
immediately due and payable and that in case suit be brought to enforce
collection of the amount agreed to be paid under such agreement that the
debtor will pay all costs of suit incurred by the City. In case such agreement
is executed, licenses for any current or ensuing license period may be
issued to any such person paying the fee prescribed for the current or
ensuing license period, together with penalties, if any.
§ 9-1.8. License Not Transferable. [Ord. #856, § 6107]
No license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be transferable; provided
that where a license is issued authorizing a person to conduct business at a
particular location, such licensee may upon application therefor and paying
a fee of $1 have the license previously issued amended so as to authorize
the conduct of such business from such other location.
§ 9-1.9. Duplicate License Fees. [Ord. #856, § 6108]
Duplicate license may be issued by the License Collector to replace any
license previously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon applicant
therefor filing an affidavit attesting to such fact, and at the time of filing
such affidavit paying to the License Collector a fee of $1 therefor.
§ 9-1.10. Posting and Keeping License. [Ord. #856, §§ 6109 —
6109.1]
Except as otherwise specifically provided by the provisions of this Chapter,
all licenses shall be kept and posted in the following manner:
a. Subject to other provisions of this Chapter, any licensee engaged in
business at a fixed place of business shall keep the license issued
posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business
is conducted.
b. Any person engaged in business in the City, but not operating from a
fixed place of business, shall keep the license issued to him upon his
person at all times while engaged in such business.
c. License Holders Required for Vehicles. Each person driving, operating
or having control of any wagon, cart or other vehicle or using or
controlling any tray, basket or other receptacle for which a license is
required under the provisions of this Chapter, shall procure a device,
herein designated as a license holder, which shall be of such size that
the ordinary license issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be
inserted and held therein under a transparent face. Such license holder
shall be firmly attached to and the license or tag carried therein on the
§ 9-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.10
AO:289
§ 9-1.11. Enforcement. [Ord. #856, § 6110; Ord. #1732, § 4]
It shall be the duty of the License Collector, and he is hereby directed,
to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter and of any other
Chapter of this Code requiring the payment of any license fee, and the Chief
of Police shall render such assistance in the enforcement of this Chapter as
may be required by the License Collector and the Council.
The License Collector in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him, and
acting through his deputies or duly authorized employees, shall examine all
places of business in the City to ascertain whether or not the provisions of
this Chapter have been complied with.
The License Collector and his deputies and duly authorized employees
shall have the power to examine all necessary books and records of all
persons doing business in the City required to be licensed by the terms
of this Chapter, for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of license fee
required to be paid by the provisions hereof. The officer and each and
all of his deputies and duly authorized employees shall have the power
and authority to enter, free of charge, and at any reasonable time, any
place of business required to be licensed by the provisions of this Chapter,
demand an exhibition of such license. Any person having any such license
theretofore issued in his possession or under his control, who fails to exhibit
the same on demand, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. It shall be the
duty of the License Collector and each of his deputies to cause a complaint
to be filed against any and all persons found to be a violator of any of the
provisions of this Chapter.
outside rear end of the wagon or vehicle in such manner that the license
inserted therein shall be plainly visible whether the vehicle is in motion
or not and whether the receptacle is being carried or is stationary.
When a license holder is required by the provisions of this Chapter to be
attached to any wagon, cart, tray, basket or other vehicle or receptacle,
the current license for such wagon, cart, tray, basket or other vehicle,
or receptacle, shall be inserted and kept in such license holder at all
times during the term of the license as specified therein and while the
person to whom the same is issued shall continue to carry on such
business.
d. Expiration of License. No person shall place or keep any license in such
license holder longer than 30 days after the expiration of the term for
which such license is issued and no person, except the licensee, or his
authorized agent, shall take or remove from any such license holder any
license therein contained.
e. License Affixed to Machine. Whenever in this Chapter a license tag is
required and issued to the licensee, the same shall be affixed to the
machine, object or article for which the license was issued.
§ 9-1.10 COMPTON § 9-1.11
AO:290
§ 9-1.12. License Inspector. [Ord. #856, § 6111; Ord. #1206; Ord.
#1322; Ord. #1481]
All license inspectors are hereby vested with the powers of the License
Collector.
§ 9-1.13. Deputy License Collectors; Public Safety Members of the
Police Department, Building Inspectors, and Electrical Inspectors.
[Ord. #856, § 6112; Ord. #990; Ord. #1206]
All public safety members of the Police Department, Building Inspectors,
and Electrical Inspectors are hereby appointed Deputy License Collectors
and, in addition to their several duties to which they are regularly assigned,
are hereby required to examine all places of business and persons in their
respective territories liable to pay a license and to see that such licenses
are taken out; provided, however, the Chief of Police shall, in addition to
the above inspections provided for, cause a license survey to be made of
the entire City when instructed to do so by the City Manager. Such Deputy
License Collectors shall have and exercise the power:
a. Accountant May Be Deputized. For the purpose of the enforcement of
this Chapter, the License Collector may with the prior consent of the
Council deputize a qualified accountant to examine the necessary books
and records of any person doing business in the City. Any failure on the
part of any person licensed under this Chapter to exhibit to and allow
examination by an accountant so deputized shall constitute a violation
of this Code.
The conviction and imprisonment of any person for engaging in any
business without first obtaining a license to conduct such business shall
not relieve such person from paying the license fee to conduct such
business, nor shall the payment of any license fee prevent a criminal
prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter.
All remedies prescribed by the provisions of this Chapter shall be
cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the City shall
not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the
prosecution of violations of this Chapter.
b. Illegally Sold Merchandise Confiscated. When a peddler is selling
illegally in the City he will be cited and his merchandise confiscated by
the License Inspector. Perishable items will be disposed of.
Nonperishable items will be inventoried and stored pending outcome of
Court appearance. If the Court does not stipulate returning
merchandise to peddler, the merchandise will be included in the auction
conducted by the Police Department.
a. To make arrests for the violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter; and
b. To enter free of charge, at any time, any place of business for which a
license is required by this Chapter and to demand the exhibition of such
§ 9-1.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.13
AO:291
§ 9-1.14. Fees Payable in Advance. [Ord. #856, § 6113; Ord. #896]
All license fees shall be paid in advance to the License Collector in lawful
money of the United States.
Whenever the amount of any business license to be paid under this Chapter
is to be determined in accordance with the provisions of Subsection
9-2.1a17, and there has been no previous business experience of the same
kind or character by the person obligated to pay the license fee on which to
base the amount of the tax, the License Collector, if in his opinion the gross
receipts of such business will exceed $10,000, may require a deposit of an
amount which in his opinion will cover the amount of the business license to
become due under Subsection 9-2.1. Such deposit shall be applied upon any
tax ultimately due under the provisions of this Chapter if the deposit is less
than the amount of the tax due. If the deposit is greater than the amount of
the tax due, the excess of the deposit over the tax due shall be refunded by
the License Collector to the person making the deposit.
§ 9-1.15. Branch Establishments. [Ord. #856, § 6114]
Separate licenses shall be obtained for each branch establishment or
location of the business engaged in, and each license shall authorize the
licensee to engage only in the business licensed thereby at the location or
in the manner designated in such license; provided, however, warehouses
and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business
licensed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to be
separate places of business or branch establishments.
§ 9-1.16. Payment Dates. [Ord. #856, § 6115; Ord. #937]
Except as herein otherwise provided, licenses required hereunder shall be
due and payable at the following times:
license for the current term by any person engaged or employed in
the transaction of such business. If such person shall then and there
fail to exhibit such license, such person shall be liable to the penalties
provided for violations of the provisions of this Chapter.
It is hereby made the duty of each Deputy License Collector to cause
complaints to be filed against all persons violating any of the provisions of this
Chapter.
a. Annual licenses on the first day of July of each year, except licenses for
those persons or businesses who or which also are licensed by the
Contractor's State License Board, pursuant to Chapter 9, Division 3, of
the Business and Professions Code of the State of California, which
licenses shall be due and payable on the day following the date of their
expiration.
b. Semi-annual licenses on the first day of January and the first day of July
of each year.
§ 9-1.13 COMPTON § 9-1.16
AO:292
§ 9-1.17. Full Payment of License Fee Required. [Ord. #856, § 6116]
No person charged with the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
Chapter shall knowingly accept or receive any sums for any license which is
less than or greater than the amount actually required to be paid under the
provisions of this Chapter.
§ 9-1.18. Written Statements of Tickets Sold Required at Time of
Application. [Ord. #856, § 6117; Ord. #937]
In all cases where the license fee is based upon the number of tickets sold,
the applicant at the time of applying for license, and monthly thereafter,
shall file with the License Collector a verified written statement, sworn to
before an officer authorized to administer oaths, showing the number of
tickets sold during the preceding month.
When the license fee is based upon the number of persons employed, the
applicant at the time of applying for a license shall file a written statement
showing the average number of persons employed during the preceding six
months. Such written statement shall be made on a form provided by the
License Collector.
Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter the license period for licenses
hereunder shall be the fiscal year of the City, beginning July 1 and ending
June 30. Subject to the provisions of this Chapter the license fees required
to be paid hereunder shall be due and payable on July 1 of each year and
shall be delinquent 30 days after same become due. In the event a portion
of the license period has lapsed prior to the application for a license, the
amount of the fee payable shall be apportioned on a quarterly basis and
applicant shall pay 3/4, 2/4, or 1/4, as the case may be, of the total annual
license fee.
The license period for all licenses issued to persons or businesses who or
which also are licensed by the Contractors State License Board pursuant
to Chapter 9, Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code of the State
of California, shall be for a calendar year from the date of issuance and
the license fee required to be paid hereunder shall be due and payable
on the day such license is issued and thereafter on the date following the
expiration date of such annual license.
c. Quarterly licenses on the first day of January, April, July and October of
each year.
d. Monthly licenses on the first day of each and every month.
e. The weekly licenses in this Article provided shall be due and payable to
the City on Monday of each week in advance.
f. Daily licenses in advance on each day.
§ 9-1.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.19
AO:293
§ 9-1.19. License Fee Based on Number of Persons Employed. [Ord.
#856, § 6117.1]
Where the license fee is based upon the number of persons employed
and applicant has not previously been engaged in business required to
be licensed hereunder in the City, or has been engaged therein for a
period of less than six months immediately preceding his application, he
shall file a written statement setting forth the estimated total number of
persons he intends or expects to employ for the ensuing six months. Such
written statement shall be made on forms provided by the License Collector
and shall be sworn to before an officer authorized by law to administer
oaths. Such persons shall pay annually a license fee of $12, plus a sum
of money equal to $1 per annum per employee for the estimated number
of employees. At the end of said six months the licensee shall file with
the License Collector a statement sworn to before an officer authorized by
law to administer oaths, showing the average number of persons employed
by him for the preceding six months. If the average number of persons
employed exceeds the number estimated at the time the license was issued,
the licensee shall be required to pay an additional sum equal to $1 for
each employee in excess of the number estimated. If the average number of
persons employed is less than the number estimated at the time the license
was issued, the licensee shall be entitled to receive from the City a refund
of a sum of money equal to $1 for each estimated employee in excess of the
average number employed.
§ 9-1.20. Penalty. [Ord. #856, § 6117.2]
Any person who fails to file any required statement, or fails to pay the
amount required hereunder within the time fixed by this Chapter shall be
assessed the same penalty provided in this section for failure to pay a
license fee before it shall become delinquent, which sum shall become a
part of the license fee required to be paid hereunder. No such statement
shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing
of such statement preclude the City from collecting by appropriate action
such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and
each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and
verification by the License Collector, who is hereby authorized to examine,
audit, and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for
a license as may be necessary in this judgment to ascertain the correct
amount of license due. All licensees, applicants for licenses, and persons
engaged in business are hereby required to permit the examination of such
books or records for such purposes. The information or data obtained from
such examination or audit or from any statements required hereunder shall
be used for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section and for
no other purpose.
§ 9-1.19 COMPTON § 9-1.21
AO:294
§ 9-1.21. Penalty; Commencement of Business Without a License.
[Added by Ord. #1468, § 6117.3]
Any person who carries on any business without first obtaining a license
therefor shall pay a penalty of 10% of the prescribed license fee. An
additional 1% of the license fee due shall be added to the license fee for
every three days or fraction thereof that the license fee is delinquent;
provided, however, the total amount of such penalty to be added shall in no
event exceed 50% of the amount due. Such penalty shall be collected and
the Code enforced in the same manner as other business license fees are
collected and payment enforced.
§ 9-1.22. Additional Powers of the License Collector. [Ord. #856,
§ 6118]
The License Collector shall have, in addition to all other powers conferred
upon him, for good cause shown, the power to extend the time for filing
any such statement for a period not to exceed 30 days and, in such case,
to waive any penalty that would have otherwise accrued, and, with the
approval of the Council and the written approval of the City Attorney, to
compromise any claim for a license fee subject to the provisions of this
Chapter.
All moneys collected by the License Collector under this Chapter for
licenses shall be remitted to the City Treasurer daily.
§ 9-1.23. Failure to File Statements. [Ord. #856, § 6119]
If any person fails to file any statement required by this Chapter within
the time prescribed hereby or, after demand therefor made by the License
Collector, fails to file a corrected statement, the License Collector, with
the consent of the Council first obtained, may determine the amount of
the license fee due from such person from such information as he may be
able to obtain and if necessary may estimate the fee required to be paid
hereunder upon the basis of external indices on hand, capital invested,
dividends paid, sales or other taxes paid, number of people employed, or by
considering other facts. In case such a determination is made, the License
Collector shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving the notice
personally or by depositing the notice in the United States Post Office in the
City, with postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the person so assessed at
his last known address. Such person may, within 10 days after the mailing
or serving of such notice, make an application in writing to the License
Collector for a hearing on the amount of the tax. If such application is not so
made within the time prescribed, the assessment shall become final. After
such an application is filed, the License Collector shall cause the matter to
be set for hearing, within 15 days, before the Council. The Council shall
consider all evidence produced and shall make written findings thereon,
and a copy of such findings shall be served upon the applicant in the manner
prescribed in this section for the service of the notice of assessment. Such
findings shall become final at the expiration of five days after the date of
§ 9-1.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.23
AO:295
service, within which time exceptions may be filed by the applicant with
the City Clerk. If filed, the Council shall consider such exceptions and make
such modifications as may be deemed necessary, and thereupon the final
assessment shall be made.
§ 9-1.24. Basis for Estimating the Amount of License Fee. [Ord.
#859, § 6119.1 and 2; Ord. #968]
a. In all cases where the amount of license to be paid by any person under
any provision of this Chapter is based upon the amount of receipts or
sales or of business transactions, or upon the number of wagons or
other vehicles used, or upon the number of chairs in any barber shop, or
upon the number of rooms in any building, such person, before
obtaining a license for his business, shall render to the License
Collector, for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of license to be
paid by such person, a written statement, under penalty of making a
false statement, showing the schedule or bracket of license fee, as set
forth in this Chapter, required to be paid on the total amount of receipts
or sales or of business transactions during the calendar year next
preceding the date of such statement in which such business falls by
virtue of the total amount of receipts or sales or of business
transactions made or done during said calendar year by such business,
or the number of wagons or other vehicles used, or the number of
chairs in such barber shop, or the number of rooms contained in such
building; provided, however, where the quarterly or semiannual license
to be paid under any section of this Chapter is based upon the gross
annual receipts of the business transacted, or the gross annual
commissions, fees, or compensation received or collected, only one
such statement need be filed during any calendar year, which statement
shall be filed at the time the first quarterly or semiannual license is
procured, and the license to be paid during the next preceding
quarterly or semiannual period of the year shall be determined by and
based upon the statement filed at the time the first quarterly or
semiannual license is procured.
b. No such statement shall be conclusive upon the City, or upon any officer
thereof, as to the matters therein set forth, and the same shall not
prejudice the right of the City to recover any amount that may be
ascertained to be due from such persons in addition to the amount
shown by such statement to be due in case such statement shall be
found to be incorrect.
If any person hereby required to make such statement shall fail so to
do, such person shall be required to pay a license at a maximum rate
herein prescribed for the business carried on by such person and shall
be guilty of a violation of this section and be punishable therefor as
herein provided; provided, however, in any case where the first license
is to be issued for any newly established business, no statement need be
made, at the time such first license is issued, of the amount of receipts,
sales, or business transacted, and the minimum rate prescribed herein
§ 9-1.23 COMPTON § 9-1.24
AO:296
§ 9-1.25. Exemptions. [Ord. #856, §§ 6120 — 6120.2; Ord. #899;
Ord. #990; Ord. #1107; Ord. #1260]
shall be paid at the time such first license is issued for any such newly
established business, the amount of the license for which is regulated
by the amount of the receipts, sales, or business transacted, and, at
the termination of the license period during which the operation of
such business is commenced, the license shall be ascertained for such
license period and paid in the manner provided in this section for
ascertaining and payment of licenses for other license periods, after
deducting from the amounts so found to be due the amount paid at the
time such first license was issued.
All statements filed pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall
be deemed confidential in character and shall not be subject to public
inspection. It shall be the duty of the License Collector to so preserve
and keep such statements that the contents thereof may not become
known except to the person charged by law with the administration of
this section.
a. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed or construed to
require the payment of a license to conduct, manage, or carry on any
business, or require the payment of any license from any institution or
organization so conducted, managed, or carried on wholly for the
benefit of charitable purposes, or from which profit is not derived,
either directly or indirectly, by any person; nor shall any license be
required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition,
or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious, or moral subjects
whenever the receipts of such entertainment, concert, exhibition, or
lecture are to be appropriated to any church or school, or to any
religious or benevolent purpose within the City; nor shall any license be
required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert,
exhibition, or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal,
educational, military, state, county, or municipal organization or
association whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, dance,
concert, exhibition, or lecture are to be appropriated for the purposes
and objects for which such association or organization was formed, and
from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any
person; provided, however, nothing in this section contained shall be
deemed to exempt any such association or organization from complying
with the provisions of this Code requiring such institution or
organization to obtain a permit from the Council or proper officer to
conduct, manage, or carry on any business; provided, further, that no
business referred to or included within the provisions of this section
shall be exempt from the requirement of obtaining a license and the
payment of the fee therefor, as provided in this Chapter, if such
business is to be conducted from premises situated within an area
bounded on the east by Alameda Street, the south by Almond Street,
the west by Willowbrook Avenue, and the north by Elm Street, and on
more than a casual basis. "Casual basis," as herein used, is defined to
§ 9-1.24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.25
AO:297
§ 9-1.26. Exempt Licenses to Be Endorsed. [Ord. #856, § 6121]
Whenever the License Collector shall issue any license granting any
exemption provided for in this section, the person to whom such license
is issued shall endorse thereon his signature in ink in the presence of an
employee of the License Collector, and no such license shall be transferable.
mean the conduct of such business for periods of time not in excess
of seven days in any one calendar year at any one or more premises
situated within the area above described.
b. Nothing in this section contained shall be deemed or construed as
applying to any person managing, or carrying on, or engaging in any
business exempt from taxation by municipal corporations by virtue of
Section 14, Article 13 of the Constitution of the State or by the
Constitution of the United States.
c. Licenses for Infirm or Poverty Stricken. The Council may, upon written
evidence received from the Associated Charities, License Inspector, or
other competent source, that any person, by reason of physical
infirmity, unavoidable misfortune, or unavoidable poverty, merits
exemption from the operation of any license required by any provision
of this Chapter, allow such person an exemption of $15 on one license
for the conduct of any one business licensed by any provisions of this
Chapter, or a free license to peddle or solicit within the City.
d. Licenses for Veterans.
1. Any veteran or widow of any veteran of the Mexican War, Civil War,
Spanish-American War, World War I or II, or the Korean Conflict
who is a bona fide resident of the City may be exempt from payment
of the first year's license fee or an amount not to exceed $15 from
the fees required by this Chapter. No such exempt license shall be
granted by the License Collector until an application has been
made and satisfactory evidence of eligibility has been filed with and
approved by the License Collector.
2. In addition to the first year's license, a renewal of such exempt
license may be granted by the License Collector provided the gross
income from such business does not exceed $5,000 per year; and it
is further provided that a statement of the gross income from such
business, duly sworn to before a notary public or one authorized by
law to take oaths, shall be filed with the License Collector before
such renewal shall be granted.
3. Any person exempted from license charges under Section 16001 of
the Business and Professions Code of the State of California is
hereby exempted from the payment of City license fees for
engaging in the type of exempted operations covered by that
section.
§ 9-1.25 COMPTON § 9-1.26
AO:298
Any such exempt license shall be issued by the License Collector only for
the minimum license period of any such business and may be renewed for
the same period under the same conditions and in the same manner as
originally obtained.
§ 9-1.27. Revocation of License Exemptions. [Ord. #856, § 6122]
At any time that it shall appear to the satisfaction of the Council that none of
the conditions specified in this section as meriting exemption from license
requirements exist as to any person to whom any such exemption has been
allowed, the Council may revoke such exemption and the exempt license
issued thereunder.
§ 9-1.28. Concessions. [Ord. #856, § 6123]
Every person who operates any business, whether upon a cost, rental, or
commission basis, as a concession or upon rented floor space in or upon
the premises of any person licensed under any provisions of this Chapter
shall be required to obtain a separate and independent license pursuant to
the appropriate provisions of this Chapter and shall be subject to all the
provisions of this Chapter, regulatory, directive, or penal.
§ 9-1.29. Interstate Commerce. [Ord. #856, § 6124]
Every person claiming to be entitled to exemption from the payment of any
license provided for in this Chapter upon the ground that such license casts
a burden upon his rights to engage in commerce with foreign nations or
among the several states, or conflicts with the regulations of the United
States Congress respecting interstate commerce, shall file a verified
statement with the License Collector, disclosing the interstate or other
character of his business entitling such exemption. Such statement shall
state the name and location of the company or firm for which the orders are
to be solicited or secured, the name of the nearest local or state manager,
if any, and his address, the kind of goods to be delivered, the place from
which the goods are to be shipped or forwarded, the method of solicitation
or taking orders, the location of any ware-house, factory, or plant within
the state, the method of delivery, the name and location of the residence
of the applicant, and any other facts necessary to establish such claim of
exemption. A copy of the order blank, contract form, or other papers used
by such person in taking orders shall be attached to the affidavit for the
information of the License Collector.
If it appears that the applicant is entitled to such exemption, the License
Collector shall forthwith issue a free license.
§ 9-1.30. Secondhand Goods. [Ord. #856, § 6125]
When any person is engaged in any business licensed under the provisions
of this chapter and, as an incident to such business, accepts secondhand
goods as part payment on any new merchandise, such person shall not be
§ 9-1.26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.30
AO:299
required to obtain a license as a secondhand dealer, for the doing of such
act shall not be considered as dealing in secondhand merchandise.
§ 9-1.31. Revocation of Licenses. [Ord. #856, § 6126; Ord. #1453]
Any license, permit, or certificate issued by the City to any person to carry
on any business under the provisions of this Code may be revoked or
suspended by the Council or suspended by the Chief of Police or the Health
Officer as follows:
§ 9-1.32. Suspension of Licenses Prior to Hearings. [Ord. #856,
§ 6127; Ord. #1453]
a. The Council may, upon its own motion, or upon written charges filed by
the Chief of Police or the Health Officer, give notice to any licensee,
permittee, or certificate holder to appear before the Council at a time
and place set for such hearing to show cause, if any there may be, why
the license, permit, or certificate issued to such licensee, permittee, or
certificate holder should not be revoked or suspended. Such notice
shall state the grounds for complaint or reasons for the revocation or
suspension in clear and concise language.
Additionally, the Chief of Police or the Health Officer may serve a notice
to such licensee, permittee, or certificate holder to appear before the
Council at a time and place set for such hearing to show cause as
described in this subsection and shall file a copy of such notice with the
City Clerk within two working days after the service of said notice. The
City Clerk, upon the request of the Chief of Police or the Health Officer,
shall set the hearing to show cause for a time in compliance with the
notice requirements set forth in Paragraph b of this subsection.
b. Hearings for persons whose licenses have been suspended shall be set
within 15 days after the date of the suspension. The licensee, permittee,
or certificate holder may be granted a continuance of the hearing if he
is served with a notice thereof less than five days prior to the hearing
date.
a. The Chief of Police, the Health Officer, or the Council, upon its own
motion, may suspend any license, permit, or certificate without
previous notice and pending a hearing when it appears to the Chief of
Police, Health Officer, or Council that the immediate suspension of any
license, permit or certificate is necessary for the public health, morals,
safety, and general welfare.
b. At the time of the suspension of any license, permit, or certificate, the
licensee, permittee, or certificate holder shall be served with a written
statement containing the reasons for such suspension.
c. Within five working days after such suspension of any license, unless
such license is sooner restored, such licensee, permittee, or certificate
§ 9-1.30 COMPTON § 9-1.32
AO:300
§ 9-1.33. Hearings. [Ord. #856, § 6128]
At any hearing provided for in this Chapter the licensee, permittee, or
certificate holder shall be given an opportunity to appear, either personally
or by counsel, and to be heard, and to defend himself and he may call
witnesses on his behalf.
The Council may continue such hearing from time to time upon good cause
being shown therefor, providing, however, that if the license has been
suspended prior to said hearing the same must be completed within two
days including the first day of hearing.
§ 9-1.34. Council May Revoke or Suspend License. [Ord. #856,
§ 6129]
After conducting such hearing as hereinabove provided for, the City Council
may revoke, suspend or reinstate any such license, permit or certificate
upon such terms and conditions as in the exercise of a reasonable and
sound discretion it shall determine. The order of the Council revoking,
suspending, or reinstating said license, permit or certificate shall be final
and conclusive.
§ 9-1.35. Delivery of Notice. [Ord. #856, § 6130]
Any notice required to be given under this Chapter may be given either
by personal delivery thereof to the licensee, permittee or certificate holder,
by personal delivery thereof to any employee of such licensee, permittee
or certificate holder at his place of business mentioned in the license,
permit or certificate providing the licensee, permittee or certificate holder
is absent from the place of business, or by depositing in the United States
Mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid addressed to such person to
be notified at his last known business or residence address as the same
appears in the license, or in other public records pertaining to the matter to
which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been
completed at the time of the deposit in the Post Office.
§ 9-1.36. Proof of Notice. [Ord. #856, § 6131]
Proof of giving any notice herein provided may be made by the certificate
of any officer, or employee of this City, or by affidavit of any person over the
age of 18 years, which shows service in conformity with this section.
§ 9-1.37. Notification. [Ord. #856, § 6132]
The City Council shall orally or in the manner hereinbefore provided for
giving notice, notify the licensee, permittee or certificate holder of any
finding, suspension, revocation or reinstatement made by it, or any
conditions attached thereto.
holder shall be served with a notice of hearing to show cause in the
form set forth in Paragraph a of Subsection 9-1.31.
§ 9-1.32 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.38
AO:301
§ 9-1.38. No License to Be Issued. [Ord. #856, § 6133; Ord. #990;
Ord. #1,773, § 1]
The Chief of Police or the Health Officer after suspending and the City
Council after revoking or suspending any such license, permit or certificate
shall notify the City Clerk and the City License Collector of such fact, and
thereafter no license shall be issued to the licensee whose license was
revoked or to any new license applicant who seeks a license at the location
(address of business at the time of the license revocation) by the City
License Collector to any licensee, permittee or certificate holder to carry on
any business or do any act for which such license, permit or certificate was
granted until a new license, permit or certificate shall have been granted
therefor by the City Council.
§ 9-1.39. New License Required. [Ord. #856, § 6134]
No person whose license, permit or certificate has been revoked or
suspended pursuant to this Chapter shall engage in or carry on any
business, or do any act permitted to be done pursuant to such license,
permit or certificate during the period of suspension, or after revocation
thereof, until a new license, permit or certificate shall have been granted.
§ 9-1.40. False Statements. [Ord. #856, § 6135]
No person shall make any false, misleading or fraudulent statement, or
misrepresent any fact in any application for a license, permit or certificate
required to be filed with the City Council, or with any Board, Commission or
authorized person of this City. In addition to any other penalties provided in
any Chapter of this Code, such conduct shall be grounds for suspending or
revoking any license, permit or certificate issued to such person.
§ 9-1.41. Certificate of Occupancy Required. [Added by Ord. #1054,
§ 6136; Ord. #1062]
No new license to conduct a business, occupation, profession,
manufacturing or industrial use at a particular address in the City of
Compton shall be issued by the City License Collector until a Certificate
of Occupancy has been issued by the Planning Department pursuant to
requirements of § 30-33, except that the City License Collector may issue a
temporary license, pending the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. Any
temporary license issued in accordance with this section is revocable at any
time by the City License Collector upon 10 days' written notice to temporary
licensee.
§ 9-1.42. Retail Business Dispense a Receipt of Sales. [Ord. #1846,
§ 1]
a. Every individual business that has a business license in Compton for the
sale of merchandise, where a sales tax is collected, shall have a cash
register or some form of recording device which dispenses a receipt
and records a purchase for each item sold.
§ 9-1.38 COMPTON § 9-1.42
AO:302
§ 9-1.43. Assessments; Delinquent Licenses; Liens. [Ord. #1977,
§ 1]
§ 9-2. SCHEDULE OF LICENSE FEES.
§ 9-2.1. License Fees: Duration of Licenses.
The fee for any license required by § 9-1 shall be that set forth in this
section for the particular business involved. The fee and the duration of the
license shall be annual, quarterly, monthly, weekly or daily as indicated in
this section. The letter "a" following the fee shall indicate an annual fee, the
letter "d" shall indicate a daily fee, the letter "m" shall indicate a monthly
fee. The letter "q" shall indicate a quarterly fee, and the letter "w" shall
indicate a weekly fee.
b. Every employer, employee or anyone selling merchandise as described
above shall offer a receipt to all purchasers of goods.
a. Whenever delinquent business license fees and appropriate penalties
cannot be collected after proper notification to the property/business
owner, the total uncollected amount including penalties and
administrative fees shall become assessments, and the City Treasurer
shall compile a list of such assessments together with parcel number
designations and addresses upon which the assessments are being
fixed, and forward them to the City Clerk.
1. Proper Notification to the Property/Business Owner:
(a) A letter will be sent to each delinquent business owner giving
him or her 30 days to appeal this action in writing to the
Treasurer's Office.
(b) The City Treasurer will review the appeal upon receipt.
(c) If no appeal is received within the prescribed number of days,
it will be considered a waiver of right to further appeal, and we
will proceed with the proposed action.
b. The City Clerk shall file such assessments with the auditor of the
County of Los Angeles, State of California, directing that all unpaid
business license fees, penalties and administrative fees be entered as
lien charges against said property as it appears on the current
assessment rolls. Liens will be collected at the same time and in the
same manner, subject to the same penalties and interest upon
delinquencies, as the general taxes for the City of Compton are
collected. The City Clerk shall present for recording appropriate
notices of the imposition of these liens with the County Recorder.
a. Schedule of License Fees Established.
§ 9-1.42 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.1
AO:303
Business License
Fee
Term
Indicated
1. Advertising [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.1; Ord. #1500; Ord. #1604, § 1;
Ord. #1824, § 1; Ord. #2102, § 1]
By benches:
For 10 or less $100 a
For each additional bench $20 a
By banners, pennants, flags or decorations
suspended over or along any street or
sidewalk
$50 a
By billboards, erecting, manufacturing, or
operating
$400 a
For each additional billboard face $50 a
By handbills (see Subsection 9-1.1,
Definitions)
$100 a
Or $30 q
Or $10 d
By searchlight $100 a
Or $30 q
By posting $10 d
By sound truck, per vehicle $100 a
Or $30 m
Or $10 d
By methods other than those enumerated
above, based on the gross receipts of such
business:
From 0 to $10,000 $40 a
For each additional $1,000 or fraction $5 a
By supergraphic sign $2 per
square
foot of
total
sign
area
a
2. Amusements [Added by Ord. #1468, § 6200.2; Ord. #1635,
§ 1; Ord. #1672, § 1; Ord. #1688, § 1; Ord. #1824, § 1]
Bowling alleys, table tennis, and
shuffleboard:
§ 9-2.1 COMPTON § 9-2.1
AO:304
Business License
Fee
Term
Indicated
For 1 table or alley $25 a
For each additional table or alley (permit
required)
$10 a
Card clubs or school (permit required) $200 a
Carnivals:
For the first day $300 d
For each additional day $50 d
A refundable (cash) clean up deposit $400
Charity solicitations (permit required)
Children's rides (other than in amusement
zones), per machine
$15 a
Circuses (see Subsection 9-4.10):
For the first day $125 d
For each additional day $30 d
For each sideshow where separate
admission is charged:
For the first day $20 d
For each additional day $10 d
Circus processions or parades, each $500
Dance halls:
Where dances are held not oftener than
once a week
$50 a
Where more often than once a week
(permit required)
$300 a
Itinerant shows wherein theatrical
performances, acrobatic feats, or singing or
dancing is presented, not including regularly
licensed theaters (permit required)
$25 d
Mechanically and electronically operated
amusement machines:
For each amusement machine $100 a
The license fee for an arcade shall be $1,000 a
Miniature trains, auto, airplanes, boat rides,
merry-go-rounds, or other rides, automatic
picture machines, and Skee-Ball
$50 a
For each amusement conducted (in addition
to initial license)
$20 a
§ 9-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.1
AO:305
Business License
Fee
Term
Indicated
Pool and billiard halls, for each table (permit
required)
$100 a
Shooting galleries, archery ranges, or other
games of ball rolling, ring throwing, disc
throwing, stick throwing, or any game of
skill (permit required)
$15 m
Skating rinks $100 a
For each amusement conducted $10 a
Trained wild or domestic animal shows
having an established place of business in
the City where exhibitions are given and
admission is charged (no circus or carnival
may be licensed under this section)
$50 a
Traveling shows or exhibitions showing in
tents where admission is charged or
contributions are solicited:
For the first day $15 d
For each additional day $10 d
For exhibitions where an admission fee or
collection is taken or goods offered for sale
or given away and not otherwise provided
for
$30 d
Wild West shows:
For the first day $30 d
For each additional day $15 d
For each sideshow Wild West Show where
separate admission is charged:
For the first day $10 d
For each additional day $10 d
3. Auctions [Added by Ord. #1468, § 6200.3; Ord. #1674, § 1]
For Auctions establishments $800 a
For each auctioneer therein employed $300 a
For auctioneers of property other than
jewelry and other than at an auction house
$30 d
For auctioneers of jewelry other than at an
auction house (permit required)
$60 d
For the auction of motor vehicles that are
subject to sale at an auction
$5 per
vehicle
§ 9-2.1 COMPTON § 9-2.1
AO:306
Business License
Fee
Term
Indicated
4. Apartment houses, bungalow courts, hotels,
rooming and boarding houses or any other
rental income property not herein
designated [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.4; Ord. #1604, § 2; Ord. #1676,
§ 1; Ord. #1824, § 1]
$20 per
unit
a
5. Automobiles for Hire, Lease, or Rent [Added
by Ord. #1468, § 6200.5]
For 1 vehicle offered for hire, lease or rent $100 a
For each additional vehicle so offered $5 a
For ambulances and invalid coaches, per
vehicle
$40 a
6. Automobile Parking Lots [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6200.6]
(Permit required) $36 a
7. Automobile Sight-Seeing Tour Ticket
Agencies [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.7]
$25 a
8. Automobile or Taxicab for Hire — Driving
[Added by Ord. #1468, § 6200.8]
Per driver (see also Paragraph a65 of this
subsection)
$10 a
9. Auto Wreckers [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.9]
(Permit required)
Includes the sale of used auto parts and
supplies
$200 a
10. Bail Bond Brokers [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.10]
11. Bankrupt Stocks [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.11]
$25 d
12. Barbershops [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.12; Ord. #1604, § 3; Ord. #1824,
§ 1]
For shops with 1 operator $100 a
For each additional operator/chair $25 a
For each additional manicurist $15 a
For each shoeshine person $15 a
§ 9-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.1
AO:307
Business License
Fee
Term
Indicated
13. Beauty Parlors [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.13; Ord. #1604, § 4; Ord. #1824,
§ 1]
For separate business entity or location
including operator
$100 a
14. Beauticians [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.14]
House-to-house $100 a
15. Beer Parlors and Cocktail Lounges [Added
by Ord. #1468, § 6200.15; Ord. #1604,
§ 5; Ord. #1824, § 1]
For each business entity or location $500 a
16. Live Entertainment [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.15a]
For each business entity or location $250 a
17. Building Trades. (See Contractors) [Added
by Ord. #1468, § 6200.17]
18. Burglar Alarm Systems Services [Added by
Ord. #1468, § 6200.18; Ord. #1824, § 1]
$100 a
19. Businesses and Professions [Added by Ord.
#1468, §§ 6200.19, 6200.19a; Ord.
#1483; Ord. #1604, § 6; Ord. #1610, § 1;
Ord. #1659, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #1831, § 1]
(a) Generally including any business not specifically
provided for in this Chapter, based on the gross
receipts of such business:
Gross Receipts Annual
Fee
$0 to $199,999 $200
$200,000 to $249,999 $225
$250,000 to $299,999 $250
$300,000 to $349,999 $275
$350,000 to $399,999 $300
$400,000 to $449,999 $325
$450,000 to $499,999 $350
$500,000 to $549,999 $375
$550,000 to $599,999 $400
§ 9-2.1 COMPTON § 9-2.1
AO:308
Business License
Fee
Term
Indicated
$600,000 to $649,999 $425
$650,000 to $699,999 $450
$700,000 to $749,999 $475
$750,000 to $799,999 $500
$800,000 to $849,999 $525
$850,000 to $899,999 $550
$900,000 to $949,999 $575
$950,000 to $999,999 $600
Plus, per $1,000 or portion thereof over
$1,000,000
$0.25
(b) Professions. For every person engaged in any
trade, calling occupation, vocation, profession or
other means of livelihood, such as attorneys and
doctors (of any kind), and not as an employee of
another, and not specifically provided for in this
section, shall be based on the gross receipts of
such profession:
Gross Receipts Annual
Fee
$0 to $299,999 $250
$300,000 to $349,999 $350
$350,000 to $399,999 $450
$400,000 to $449,999 $550
$450,000 to $499,999 $650
$500,000 to $549,999 $750
$550,000 to $599,999 $850
$600,000 to $649,999 $950
$650,000 to $699,999 $1,050
$700,000 to $749,999 $1,150
$750,000 to $799,999 $1,250
$800,000 to $849,999 $1,350
$850,000 to $899,999 $1,450
$900,000 to $949,999 $1,550
$950,000 to $999,999 $1,650
Plus per $1,000 or portion thereof over
$1,000,000
$1
§ 9-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.1
AO:309
Business License
Fee
Term
Indicated
20. Bus Terminals or Stage Depots [Added by
Ord. #1468, § 6200.20]
Where buses used in interurban bus service
are permitted to stand, or where such
vehicles are refueled, or where passengers
board or disembark, per vehicle utilized
$25 a
21. Cemeteries [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.21; Ord. #1824, § 1]
$300 a
22. Cesspool Pumping [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.22]
$50 a
23. Checkrooms [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.23]
$25 a
24. Christmas Trees, Sales of [Added by Ord.
#1604, § 6200.24]
For each business entity or location (with or
without conjunction with a licensed
business)
$50 a
Cleanup deposit (lot must be cleaned up
within 30 days after Christmas or deposit
will be forfeited)
$300 a
25. Cigar Stand, etc. [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.25]
For the sale of candy, peanuts, popcorn,
chewing gum, ice cream, hot dogs,
hamburgers, cigars, and cigarettes
$40 a
26. Contractors [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.26; Ord. #1604, § 8; Ord. #1824,
§ 1]
General contractor, lathing, plastering,
roofing, plumbing, electrical, sewer,
refrigeration, heating, or air conditioning
(installation, maintaining, repairing); signs,
neon or electric
$200 a
§ 9-2.1 COMPTON § 9-2.1
AO:310
Business License
Fee
Term
Indicated
Boilers; hot water heating; steam fitting;
cabinet and mill work; cement and concrete;
elevator installations; fire protection;
engineering; flooring; wood; glass
installation; insulation; landscaping; masonry
ornamental materials; painting and
decorating; sheet metals; steel reinforcing;
steel structure; structural pest control; tile,
ceramics and mosaics; welding; well drilling
$150 a
Classified specialists (as defined by the
Registrar of Contractors, Contractors State
License Board), not otherwise specifically
provided for in this article
$100 a
27. Gardeners [Added by Ord. #1604,
§ 6200.26a]
Each $50 a
28. Dancing Academies [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.27]
29. Deliveries [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.28; Ord. #1604, § 10]
Groceries by traveling grocery stores or
buses (per vehicle)
$800 a
By vehicle of goods other than edibles and
not having an established place of business
in the City, including earth movers (per
vehicle)
$50 a
Gasoline or other petroleum products:
Per truck $50 a
For each trailer $10 a
By vehicle of edibles to dealers (per vehicle) $50 a
By vehicle of goods other than edibles to
dealers (per vehicle)
$50 a
By vehicle to established dealers in barber or
beauty shop supplies (per vehicle)
$50 a
Water, bottled or otherwise (per vehicle) $50 a
Delivery trucks continued earth movers (per
vehicle)
$50 a
30. (Reserved) [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.29; Ord. #1824, § 1; repealed by
Ord. #1980]
§ 9-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.1
AO:311
Business License
Fee
Term
Indicated
31. Electrical. (See Contractors) [Added by
Ord. #1468, § 6200.30]
32. Fortune-Telling [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.31]
(Permit required) 1,000 a
Advertising $500 a
33. Health Institutions [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.32]
Engaging in physical culture or exercise,
excluding private clubs, or public or private
school gymnasiums
$100 a
34. Insurance Brokers [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.33; Ord. #1604, § 11]
For each business entity or location $100 a
35. Itinerant Vendors [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.34]
$160 a
36. Junk Dealers [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.35]
(Permit required) $300 a
37. Lathing. (See Contractors) [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6200.36]
38. Laundries and Laundromats, Self-Service
[Added by Ord. #856, § 6200.37a]
For each business entity or location $100 a
39. Maintenance Services not Otherwise
Specifically Provided for
With no fixed place of business in the City
[Added by Ord. #1468, § 6200.38]
$50 a
40. Massage Establishment [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6200.39; amended by Ord.
#2031, § 1]
$400 a
41. Massage Technician [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6200.39a; amended by Ord.
#2031, § 1]
$50 a
42. Money Lenders [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.40; Ord. #1824, § 1]
Excluding bond brokers or bank institutions $500 a
§ 9-2.1 COMPTON § 9-2.1
AO:312
Business License
Fee
Term
Indicated
43. Savings and Loan Associations [Added by
Ord. #1468, § 6200.40a; Ord. #1824, § 1]
$500 a
44. Motion Pictures [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.41; Ord. #1824, § 1]
For producing pictures of photoplays:
3 days or less $300
5 days or less $500
More than 5 days $700
45. Name Change of Business [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6200.42]
For each change of name $5
46. Painting. (Also see Contractors) [Added by
Ord. #1468, § 6200.43]
No state license, painting 1 or more
structures for profit
$50 a
47. Parking Lots [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.44]
(Permit required) $36 a
48. Patrol Systems [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.45; Ord. #1824, § 1]
Including guarding against theft, fire, or
both, or performing any service customarily
performed by peace officers
$100 a
For each patrolman thus employed, including
part-time
$20 a
49. Vendors [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.46; Ord. #1604, § 15; Ord. #1732,
§ 5; Ord. #2243, § 2]
By vending vehicle (per vehicle) $100
10
a
d
By pushcart (per pushcart) $100 a
Of notions $10 d
50. Plastering. (See Contractors) [Added by
Ord. #1468, § 6200.47]
51. Plumbing. (See Contractors) [Added by
Ord. #1468, § 6200.48]
§ 9-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.1
AO:313
Business License
Fee
Term
Indicated
52. Real Estate Brokers [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6200.49; Ord. #1604, § 16]
$100 a
53. Real Estate Salespersons [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6200.49a; Ord. #1604, § 17]
(Each salesperson shall furnish the Tax
Collectors with the name and address of the
licensed real estate broker by whom the
salesperson is employed)
For the transfer of the license of a
salesperson from 1 licensed broker to
another licensed broker during the period of
the license
$5
54. Refrigeration, Heating, or Air-Conditioning
[Added by Ord. #1468, § 6200.50]
Installing, maintaining or repairing (See
Contractors)
55. Roofing. (See Contractors) [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6200.51]
56. Rubbish or Waste Collecting [Added by
Ord. #1468, § 6200.52; Ord. #1824, § 1]
For 1 truck engaged in gathering, collecting,
or removing rubbish
$500 a
For each additional truck so engaged $250 a
57. Scissors or Other Cutlery Grinding [Added
by Ord. #1468, § 6200.53]
House-to-house $12 a
58. Secondhand Dealers [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6200.54]
Excluding auto wreckers and used motor
vehicle dealers
$100 a
59. Sewers. (See Contractors) [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6200.55]
60. Shoe Shining Stands [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6200.56]
Per person employed $10 a
61. Shoe Repair Shops [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.57]
$30 a
62. Soliciting [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.58]
§ 9-2.1 COMPTON § 9-2.1
AO:314
Business License
Fee
Term
Indicated
For each solicitor $65 a
63. Storage Indoor-Outdoor. (See Subsection
9-2.1a76.) [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.59]
64. Swap Meet (Mall) Operators [Added by
Ord. #1468, § 6200.60; Ord. #1824, § 1]
1,000 a
For each participant or space (booth) owner $250 a
65. Taxicabs [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.61; Ord. #1949, § 1]
For the first vehicle (taxi) $100 a
For each additional vehicle (taxi) $50 a
For each application for a location or a
change of location, of a taxicab stand (also
see Paragraph a8 of this subsection)
$100
66. Television Installations or Services [Added
by Ord. #1468, § 6200.62]
With no fixed place of business in the City $40 a
67. Theaters [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.63; Ord. #1824, § 1]
Where a fee is charged or received:
499 seats or less $500 a
500 seats and less than 750 $600 a
750 seats and less than 1,000 $700 a
1,000 seats and less than 1,500 $800 a
More than 1,500 seats $900 a
Drive-in theaters capacity shall be computed
on the basis of 2 1/2 seats per automobile
space in the theater
68. Toilets, Portable Installations [Added by
Ord. #1468, § 6200.64]
Maintenance $75 a
69. Trailer Courts [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.65]
For each rental space $10 a
For each house trailer maintained for
occupancy rental
$10 a
§ 9-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.1
AO:315
Business License
Fee
Term
Indicated
70. 2 Types of Business [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.66]
Where 2 or more businesses are carried on
at the same address under the same
ownership, the license shall be paid for the
business conducted for which the higher fee
is required
71. Used Car Dealers [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.67]
(Permit required)
Gross receipt basis
72. Used Machinery for Resale [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6200.68]
73. Vehicle Identification Tags [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6200.69]
Replacement of $1
74. Vending or Other Machines [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6200.70; Ord. #1483; Ord.
#1604, § 18]
Amusement devices not otherwise
specifically provided for requiring 50 or
more to operate, per machine
$15 a
Cigarettes and cigars, for each machine $20 a
Ice, per machine $25 a
Music boxes or devices, remote control or
otherwise, per machine
$25 a
For each coin intake slot wherever located $10 a
Weighing machines operated by means of a
coin, per machine
$10 a
For each vending machine not otherwise
specifically provided for, per machine
$10 a
75. No Fixed Place of Business [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6200.71; Ord. #1824, § 1]
Any person conducting business in or with
the City and not having a fixed place of
business within the City
$100 a
76. Warehouses [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6200.72; Ord. #1824, § 1]
Warehouse use for any purpose:
§ 9-2.1 COMPTON § 9-2.1
AO:316
§ 9-3. ADDITIONAL TAX FOR BUSINESS LICENSES FOR
BUSINESSES CONDUCTING THEIR OPERATIONS IN A BUSINESS
PROMOTION DISTRICT.
§ 9-3.1. Definitions. [Added by Ord. #1468, § 6201.1]
As used in this section:
ADDITIONAL TAX FOR A BUSINESS LICENSE — Shall mean the tax
established by this Chapter initially, or as may be changed in accordance
with the procedures hereinafter prescribed for businesses conducting their
activities within a Business Promotion District, in addition to the regular tax
imposed upon various businesses generally not in such Business Promotion
District.
Business License
Fee
Term
Indicated
For the first 4,000 square feet of space $100 a
For each additional 1,000 square feet of
space
$10 a
77. Armored Cars [Added by Ord. #1604,
§ 6200.74]
For each vehicle $25 a
For each guard $5 a
78. Dog Kennel [Added by Ord. #1604,
§ 6200.75]
$50 a
79. Mail Orders [Added by Ord. #1604,
§ 6200.76; Ord. #1824, § 1; Ord. #1980]
Pertaining to home based businesses only,
for each operation or location
$100 a
80. Office Use [Added by Ord. #1604,
§ 6200.77]
For each operation of or location $50 a
81. Light Hauling [Added by Ord. #1604,
§ 6200.78; Ord. #1824, § 1]
$50 a
82. Tow Trucks [Added by Ord. #1604,
§ 6200.79]
Per vehicle $50 a
83. Nail Salon [Added by Ord. #1824, § 1]
For shops with 1 operator $100 a
For each additional operator/booth rented $25 a
§ 9-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3.1
AO:317
BUSINESS PROMOTION DISTRICT — Shall mean an area of the City
which has been designated a Business Promotion District pursuant to the
procedures set forth in this Chapter.
BUSINESSES — Shall mean all types of businesses.
§ 9-3.2. Notices and Hearings. [Added by Ord. #1468, § 6201.2; Ord.
#1730, § 1]
§ 9-3.3. Purpose, Intent, and Use of Revenue. [Added by Ord.
#1468, § 6201.3]
The purpose and intent of this section is to impose a tax upon the businesses
in a Business Promotion District which tax is greater than the general
business license tax in the City outside of such a district, and to use the
proceeds from the additional tax revenue for the purpose of promoting
events which take place in such district which are of a public nature and
of general interest and concern to the community and the businesses in the
district, and to promote and increase business generally in the Business
Promotion District. Such activities may include, but shall not be limited to,
the following:
a. Whenever this section provides for a hearing and notice therefor, such
notice shall be given as follows:
1. One publication in a newspaper shall be published and circulated in
the City; and
2. Mailing of such notices, postage prepaid, in a sealed envelope, by
the United States mails, addressed to all businesses which conduct
activities within any proposed or established Business Promotion
District, as shown upon the active business licenses on file with the
License Collector, and to all business property owners in such
district as shown upon the last equalized assessment roll of the
county at the addresses shown on such roll.
3. Both publication and mailing of notices shall be completed at least
10 days prior to the holding of any hearing required by this
Chapter, and such notices shall contain the designation of the time
and place of the hearing and a statement describing the subject
matter of such hearing.
b. Whenever a hearing is held under this Chapter, the Council shall hear
all protests and receive evidence for or against the proposed action: the
Council shall also rule upon all protests, which determination shall be
final; and the Council may continue the hearing from time to time.
a. Decoration of any public place in the district;
b. Promotion of public events which are to take place on or in public
places in such district;
c. Furnishing of music in any public place in the district;
§ 9-3.1 COMPTON § 9-3.3
AO:318
§ 9-3.4. Establishment of Business Promotion District Procedure.
[Added by Ord. #1468, § 6201.4]
The Council may establish a Business Promotion District by the following
procedure:
d. The acquisition, construction, or maintenance of public improvements,
including parking lots benefiting the district; and
e. The general advertising of the district and development of means to
increase business activity in the district.
This section is also intended to be construed liberally, and in the event any
part should be held invalid, the remaining part or parts shall remain in full
force and effect. The Council shall have sole discretion as to how the money
derived from this tax is to be used within the scope of the above purposes;
however, the Council may appoint existing advisory boards or commissions to
make recommendations as to its use, or the Council may create new advisory
boards or commissions for the purpose.
a. Adoption of a resolution of intention to establish a Business Promotion
District which shall contain the following information:
1. A description of the proposed boundaries of such district;
2. The time and place when a hearing shall be held by the Council to
determine whether or not to adopt a resolution to establish such
district;
3. The uses to which the additional revenue derived from the
additional tax for a business license will be put, which shall be the
same as those provided for by this section;
4. That the establishment of a Business Promotion district shall cause
an additional tax for business licenses for those businesses
conducting their activities in such district, and that such increase
shall be in accordance with the schedule provided by this section,
which schedule shall be set forth at length in the resolution; and
5. That any interested person may file a written protest prior to the
hearing and may also appear at the hearing and present evidence;
provided, however, no person may attack the proceeding on any
ground not stated in a written protest filed prior to the time of
hearing.
b. Notice of the hearing provided for by the resolution of intention shall be
published and mailed in accordance with Subsection 9-3.2, except,
however, such notice shall consist of a complete copy of the resolution
of intention to establish a Business Promotion District.
c. The hearing specified in the resolution of intention shall be held prior to
the adoption of a resolution establishing a Business Promotion District.
Such hearing shall be held in accordance with Subsection 9-3.2.
§ 9-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3.4
AO:319
§ 9-3.5. Rate of Additional Tax. [Added by Ord. #1468, § 6201.5]
There is hereby imposed the following tax for a business license for all
businesses conducting their activities in a Business Promotion District,
which tax is in addition to the regular tax imposed upon various businesses
generally not in such Business Promotion District:
d. If it is determined by the Council after the hearing that such a district
should be created, the Council may approve such a district by adopting
a resolution establishing the district. This resolution shall contain the
following information:
1. The number, date, and title of the resolution of intention pursuant
to which it was adopted;
2. The time and place the hearing was held concerning the formation
of such district;
3. The description of the boundaries of such district;
4. A statement that the businesses in the district created by the
resolution shall be subject to the provisions of the additional tax
provided by this section; and
5. A statement that a Business Promotion District has been created
pursuant to the provisions of this section.
The Council may, however, modify the boundaries of the district as
described in the resolution of intention based upon the evidence presented
provided the Council proposes such change and continues the hearing until
a later time, and notice of the proposed change and the time and place of
the continued hearing is given in accordance with Subsection 9-3.2.
a. All businesses in such district shall be subject to this additional taxation
if they are subject to taxation by the City under its business license tax
regulations.
b. The tax imposed by this Chapter as additional tax for a business license
shall be based upon the following schedule:
1. Class I Businesses:
(a) Retail sales where 75% of the gross receipts are derived from
such sales;
(b) Secondhand dealers; and
(c) Stock and bond brokers, real estate and personal loan agents,
and savings and loan associations.
Businesses in this class shall be taxed as an additional tax for a
business license 3 1/2 times their ordinary business license tax, not to
exceed $1,500, or 3/10% of their gross annual receipts:
§ 9-3.4 COMPTON § 9-3.5
AO:320
2. Class II Businesses:
(a) Advertising agencies;
(b) Apartments, motels, and rooming houses with more than two
rentals, whether located in one or various locations;
(c) Auto and appliance repairs;
(d) Barber shops;
(e) Beauty shops;
(f) Cafes and restaurants;
(g) Child care;
(h) Contractors;
(i) Equipment rental, including auto and truck rentals;
(j) Gardening;
(k) Hotels;
(l) Manufacturing and processing (including product research
and development, newspaper and job printing, and
wholesaling);
(m) Massage parlors;
(n) Medical and dental laboratories;
(o) Newspaper and magazine agencies;
(p) Photo studios;
(q) Physical culture studios and gymnasiums;
(r) Public utilities, including gas, electric, telegraph, and
telephone;
(s) Trading stamp agencies;
(t) Trailer parks;
(u) Training schools; and
(v) Undertaking establishments. Businesses in this class shall be
taxed as an additional tax for a business license twice the
ordinary business license tax, not to exceed 3/10% of their
gross annual receipts.
3. Class III Businesses:
(a) Attorneys at law;
§ 9-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3.5
AO:321
§ 9-3.6. Collection of Additional Tax. [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6201.6]
The collection of the additional tax for a business license for any Business
Promotion District shall be made at the same time and in the same manner
as any other business license tax. In the event a Business Promotion District
shall be established and become effective on a date other than the date
when the regular tax upon various businesses becomes due and payable,
then in that event additional taxes for business licenses provided for
hereunder will be assessed and become due and payable as of said effective
date of the establishment of such Business Promotion District with the
amount due to be paid on a pro rata basis depending upon the expired
(b) Accountants, including public and certified public;
(c) Chiropractors;
(d) Electronic data processing centers;
(e) Engineers;
(f) Medical and dental doctors, including osteopaths;
(g) Psychologists;
(h) Public bookkeeping;
(i) Real estate brokers; and
(j) Veterinarians. Businesses in this class shall be taxed as an
additional tax for a business license twice the ordinary
business license tax, not to exceed 3/10% of their gross annual
receipts.
4. Class IV Businesses:
This class shall include all businesses not listed as Classes I, II, or
III above. Businesses in Class IV shall be taxes as an additional tax
for a business license one times the ordinary business license.
c. New businesses in such district shall be exempt from any assessment
under this section for three months after opening their doors for
business and will then be assessed in accordance with their
classification, with the amount due to be paid on a pro rata basis,
depending upon the expired portion of the current business license tax
period for which assessments are due and payable.
d. Any business, person, or institution located within the Business
Promotion District which is exempt from the payment of a business
license tax by the State Constitution shall not be taxed under this
section but may make voluntary contributions to the Business
Promotion District. Such contributions shall be used for the purposes
provided by this section.
§ 9-3.5 COMPTON § 9-3.6
AO:322
portion of the current business license tax period for which assessments are
due and payable.
§ 9-3.7. Changes in District Boundaries. [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6201.7]
Changes may be made in the boundaries of any Business Promotion District
by resolution of the Council; however, no changes shall be made unless
and until a hearing is held and a notice thereof is given in accordance
with Subsection 9-3.2. Such notice shall contain the time and place when
the hearing shall be held and a description of the proposed change of the
district boundary.
§ 9-3.8. Changes of Rate of Additional Tax. [Added by Ord. #1468,
§ 6201.8]
Changes may be made in the rate of additional tax for a business license
by ordinance of the Council; however, no changes shall be made unless
and until a hearing is held and notice thereof is given in accordance with
Subsection 9-3.2. Such notice shall contain the time and place where the
hearing shall be held and a description of the proposed change in the rate
of additional tax for a business license:
§ 9-4. PERMIT PROCEDURE.
§ 9-4.1. Permit Required for Certain Businesses. [Added by Ord.
#898; Ord. #856, § 6300.1 to 19; Ord. #1018, § 6900.9A; Ord.
#1635, § 6300.2; Ord. #856, § 6300.12; Ord. #898; Ord. #856,
§ 6300.15; Ord. #898]
No person shall operate and no license shall be issued for any of the
businesses enumerated in the succeeding subsections of this section or in
other sections of this Code specifically requiring same, until a permit has
first been obtained therefor upon application in writing pursuant to this
section.
a. List of Businesses Requiring a Permit.
1. Advertising:
By billboard.
By bench.
2. Amusements:
Arcades.
Archery range.
Bowling alleys, pool and billiard halls.
Card club or school.
§ 9-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-4.1
AO:323
§ 9-4.2. License and Permit Fees. [Ord. #856, § 6301]
Unless otherwise stated in this Code, the fee for filing application for each
permit shall be $1 payable in advance. The license fee prescribed in section
9-2 for the particular business and the permit fee shall accompany the
application.
Dance halls.
Itinerant shows.
Shooting gallery.
3. Automobile Parking Lot.
4. Auction Establishment.
5. Auto Wrecker.
6. Carnival. (See Subsection 9-4.10)
7. Food Establishment.
8. Fortune Telling.
9. Junk Dealer.
10. Massage Parlor.
11. Massagist, House to House.
12. Patrol System.
13. Patrolman.
14. Peddler (except peddlers of food).
15. Public Eating Place.
16. Slaughterhouse.
17. Soliciting. (Except when the person soliciting has had an
established place of business, for the business for which he is
soliciting, within the City for at least six months prior to the time
such soliciting is commenced.)
18. Taxicab.
19. Taxicab Driver.
20. Trailer Courts.
21. Car Dealers.
§ 9-4.1 COMPTON § 9-4.3
AO:324
§ 9-4.3. Application. [Ord. #856, § 6302; Ord. #898]
The application for any permit required by this section shall be filed with
the License Collector, shall be signed and verified by the applicant, and shall
set forth the following:
§ 9-4.4. Granting or Refusal of Permit. [Ord. #856, § 6303; Ord.
#898; Ord. #1062]
Except as otherwise provided in this Code the Council, after investigation of
the application and of the business proposed to be conducted, may grant or
refuse to grant a permit. The Council shall have the right to refuse any such
permit if it shall determine that the granting of the same or the conduct
of the business will be contrary to the preservation of the public peace,
health, safety, morals or welfare of the City or its inhabitants. If such permit
is granted the Council may impose such terms, conditions and restrictions
upon the operation and conduct of such business, not in conflict with any
paramount law, as it may deem necessary or expedient to protect the public
peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the City or its inhabitants. Any
applicant for such permit shall be entitled to a hearing thereon before the
Council upon a request therefor. If a permit be denied the license fee paid
shall be refunded; the permit fee shall not be refunded.
§ 9-4.5. License Collector. [Ord. #856, § 6303.1; Ord. #898]
In the event of an application for a peddler's or solicitor's permit, if the
License Collector shall determine, after a reasonable investigation, that
the applicant is of good moral character and proposes to engage in an
enterprise which shall not be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety,
morals or welfare of the City or its inhabitants, the License Collector then
shall issue the permit required, provided, however, that no solicitor's permit
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. The name and address of the person by whom employed, if any. If filed
in behalf of a partnership, corporation or association, the names and
addresses of the partners, or principal officers of such corporation or
association.
c. The nature of the business for which a permit is requested.
d. The place where such business is to be conducted.
e. A brief description of the nature and amount of equipment to be used in
such business.
f. The personal description of the applicant.
g. Evidence of the identity of the applicant of such character as the
Council or the License Collector, as the case may be, may require.
h. Fingerprints and thumb prints of applicant only when specifically
required.
§ 9-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-4.5
AO:325
shall be issued until there has been deposited with the License Collector
for each person applying for the right to solicit in the City, a corporate
surety bond satisfactory in form to the City Attorney, in the sum of $1,000,
conditioned upon the observance by applicant of all the provisions of this
Code and all laws of the State of California or the federal Government,
and upon the truth of all the representations made in connection with the
application for a permit, and as a guaranty that the purchase price, or any
portion thereof, of any article purchased or ordered, will be returned to
any purchaser or person ordering, upon return of the article purchased
or upon relinquishment of the order, and upon proof that any false or
misleading statement or representation has been made concerning any
personal property or any service or any subscription sold or offered for sale
to said purchaser, by the person named in the bond.
§ 9-4.6. Posting. [Ord. #856, § 6304]
Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where
the business for which such permit is issued is conducted, and shall remain
so posted during the period the permit shall be in force.
§ 9-4.7. Non-Transferability. [Ord. #856, § 6305]
No permit issued under this section shall be transferable except by the
consent of the Council.
§ 9-4.8. Police Investigation. [Ord. #856, § 6306]
The Chief of Police shall, upon the request of the Council, investigate and
report to the Council all facts or evidence bearing upon the place where the
proposed business is to be located and the character, reputation and moral
fitness of those who will be in charge thereof.
§ 9-4.9. Revocation, Suspension, Hearing, Notice. [Ord. #856,
§ 6307]
When the Council shall issue any permit under the terms of this section, the
same may be revoked or suspended at any time thereafter by the Council in
the manner set forth in § 9-1.
§ 9-4.10. Carnivals; Permits Required. [Added by Ord. #1497,
§ 6100.15B; Ord. #1515; Ord. #1886, §§ 1 — 4]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to operate a carnival
without first having obtained a permit in writing to do so from the Parks
and Recreation Commission. No carnival shall be open on any date
determined to be a school day in the City, except for Fridays after 4:00
p.m. or during school vacations. The applicant shall complete any and
all application forms required by the City and provide proof of any
required insurance coverage prior to the approval of the appropriate
permit.
§ 9-4.5 COMPTON § 9-4.10
AO:326
§ 9-5. IDENTIFICATION AND REGULATIONS.
§ 9-5.1. Identification Required. [Added by Ord. #1080, § 6498; Ord.
#1137; Ord. #1732, § 5]
Every person entering in and upon residential property within the City, for
the purpose of collecting or gathering anything of value; or for the purpose
of soliciting, and/or for the purpose of soliciting orders for sale of services,
goods, wares and merchandise, and/or for the purpose of disposing of the
same shall display to the resident an identification card which shall be
issued by the Police Department unless it appears, in the determination of
the Council, that such issuance might be contrary to the peace, health or
safety of the public. Such card shall conform to the size and type prescribed
by the Tax and License Collector. No license to engage in any activity set
forth in this section shall be issued by the License Department until the
required identification card has been obtained.
Such identification card shall be issued for a period of one year or for the
remaining effective period of a City business license held by such person,
whichever is the shorter period.
Any person distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills in or upon
private premises, as the terms "commercial handbill," "noncommercial
handbill" and "private premises" are defined in Subsection 7-9.1 of this
Code, under such circumstances as are authorized by Subsection 7-1.8 of
this Code, shall wear upon his person, within view, an identification card
issued in the same manner and for the same period and subject to all of the
foregoing provisions.
§ 9-5.2. Application and Fee. [Added by Ord. #1080, § 6498.1; Ord.
#1355; Ord. #1393; Ord. #1564, § 1; Ord. #1670, § 1; Ord. #1794,
§ 1; Ord. #1811, § 3; Ord. #1966, § 2]
Any person desiring to engage in any activity requiring an identification
card shall make an application in person to the Police Department. Such
application will be accepted only upon the payment of a fee in the amount of
$75 and shall be made between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on any
City business day.
An identification card and work permit are one in the same as it relates to
employees of the card club. The card club employees must renew their work
permits (identification cards) every two years from the date of its issuance.
b. An application processing and property inspection fee of $100 shall be
added to the existing fee structure.
c. The $100 fee shall be deposited in the following account:
5300-3617 Processing and Inspection Fee.
d. The Parks and Recreation Department will designate specific locations
for set-ups.
§ 9-4.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-5.2
AO:327
The renewal fees for work permits and identifications cards will be $25.
All other identification cards will expire as is provided in the Compton
Municipal Code. The renewal fee for identification that must be replaced
due to being lost or misplaced will be $25.
§ 9-5.3. Exemptions. [Ord. #1080, § 6489.2; Ord. #1355; Ord.
#1393; Ord. #1564]
The provisions set forth in subsections 9-5.1 and 9-5.2 shall not apply to
the following: persons distributing milk and other food products house-tohouse
where a license has been issued for an established route; all persons
holding a valid vocational, occupational or professional license issued by
the state provided such persons shall display evidence of such license to
such residents; all persons who have not reached their sixteenth birthday;
all persons entering in and upon residential property after first having been
requested or invited so to do by the owner or occupant thereof; and all
persons entering upon residential property for the purpose of obtaining
satisfaction of a lawful obligation theretofor incurred by the occupant
thereof.
§ 9-5.4. Owner's Permission Required for Sale of Narcotic and
Other Paraphernalia. [Added by Ord. #1080, § 6498.3; Ord. #1355;
Ord. #1393; Ord. #1564]
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as set out in Section 1200 of this
Code, for any peddler or any other person to maintain, exhibit, possess
or otherwise display on a public street, alley-way, sidewalk or vacant lot,
without the express written consent of the property owner, for the purpose
of sale, or distribution to minors and adults devices, contrivances,
instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish,
PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs or devices
to ingest or inject prescription drugs, including roach clips, and cigarette
papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing.
§ 9-5.5. Fees for the Reproduction of Police Reports. [Added by Ord.
#1677, §§ 1, 2; Amended by Ord. #1750, § 1; Ord. #1793, §§ 1, 2;
Ord. #1810, §§ 2, 3]
a. The following fees shall be applicable to the furnishing of services
relating to copies of records (except as elsewhere provided by statute):
General Documents Fee Mail Request
1. Crime Report $12 $14
2. Traffic Report $15 $17
3. Photos $33 $35
4. Miscellaneous $12 $14
5. Fingerprint $12 N/A
6. Arrest Report $12 N/A
§ 9-5.2 COMPTON § 9-5.5
AO:328
§ 9-5.6. (Reserved)53
The fee for the reproduction of miscellaneous reports not identified
under Government Code § 6254 (F), shall be $12. Miscellaneous
reports may include, but are not limited to booking slips, and any
other police report deemed not confidential and available for release
pursuant to laws and statutes regulating same.
(Mail order, $14.)
b. Public records are available during office hours and every citizen has a
right to purchase any public record except those records exempted
from disclosure by Section 6254 and 6255 of the Government Code.
53.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 9-5.6, Sales of Frozen Desserts From Vehicles During
Darkness, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1385, was
deleted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2243.
§ 9-5.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-5.6
AO:329

ARTICLE II
Regulations Pertaining to Specific Businesses, Professions and
Trades
§ 9-6. AMUSEMENT AND VENDING MACHINES.
§ 9-6.1. License Required; Stamp Affixed. [Amended by Ord. #990,
§ 6497; Ord. #1107; Ord. #1242]
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, or party in possession of any
premises in the City to have therein or to remain thereon any amusement
machines, vending machines, music boxes, or like machines unless such
machines shall be registered in the office of the License Collector. All such
machines, so maintained shall bear a stamp, label, or sticker furnished by
the License Department indicating that the machine is currently licensed
and bearing the expiration date thereof.
§ 9-6.2. Cigarette Vending Machines. [Ord. #856, § 6497.1; Ord.
#990; Ord. #1107; Ord. #1242]
In addition to the payment of the required license fee, the following
provisions shall apply to all such vending machines except those which are
located in any premises which are licensed by the state for the "on sale" of
distilled spirits or wine and beer:
§ 9-6.3. Seizure of Machines. [Added by Ord. #1107, § 6497.2]
Any machine maintained in violation of subsections 9-4.1 and 9-4.2, or
maintained without having displayed thereon in a clearly visible place the
aforesaid label or sign indicating that the license therefor is unexpired, shall
be sealed by the License Collector to prohibit use or seized and held by any
duly qualified officer of the City. Any machine so seized shall be redeemable
only by the true owner, within a period of not to exceed 60 days, upon
the payment of the reasonable value for the safekeeping of such machine,
together with the license tax as herein provided for the period during which
such machine was improperly maintained.
§ 9-7. AUCTIONS.
a. Such cigarette vending machines shall be inside a building, store, or
business establishment and situated therein that they are not
accessible to the public;
b. No person shall operate or use such vending machines other than a
proprietor or employee of the building, store, or business
establishment;
c. It shall be the duty of all persons in charge of "on sale" liquor
establishments to see that no minor purchases cigarettes through any
vending machine on such premises.
§ 9-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-7.1
AO:331
§ 9-7.1. Bond Required. [Ord. #856, § 6490]
No auction house nor auctioneer license shall be issued or renewed unless
there is on file with the City Clerk a surety bond in the principal sum of
$2,000 which have been approved by the City Council as to sufficiency and
by the City Attorney as to form, and has been executed as surety by a good
and sufficient corporate surety authorized to do surety business in the state,
and as principal by the applicant for such license, indemnifying any person
against any loss through fraud or misrepresentation. Any person licensed by
the state and having deposited a bond with said state shall not be required
to file a bond with the City Clerk, provided, however, that in such case, the
City Clerk shall make a record of the expiration date of such state bond, and
note such expiration date on the City license. Any City license for an auction
house or an auctioneer shall be revoked automatically whenever either
bond mentioned hereunder becomes ineffective for any reason, unless the
principal shall file a new surety bond in compliance herewith prior to the
date that such bond may become ineffective.
§ 9-7.2. Exceptions. [Ord. #856, § 6490.1]
Any merchant within the City who desires to dispose of his entire stock
of goods at public auction may do so without securing a license provided
for herein, provided the merchant has been continuously engaged in the
business in the City for a period of one year next preceding the date of
the opening of the sale, and provided further than such auction does not
continue for a longer period than 30 days from the date of such opening.
§ 9-8. BAKERIES.
§ 9-8.1. Definitions. [Ord. #856, §§ 6491 — 6491.2]
As used in this section:
BAKERY — Shall mean each separate and distinct location or place where
bakery products are manufactured and baked.
BAKERY PRODUCTS — Shall mean bread, rolls, pies, pastries, cakes,
doughnuts and coffee cake.
§ 9-8.2. Unlicensed Sales Prohibited. [Ord. #856, § 6491.3]
No person shall sell, take orders for, or deliver or operate the business
of handling bakery products in the City unless such bakery products are
produced and baked in a bakery which shall have been duly licensed under
this section, or unless such products are delivered by vehicle licensed to
deliver such products.
§ 9-8.3. Inspection of Equipment, Fixtures, Vehicles. [Ord. #856,
§ 6491.4]
The Health Officer shall, as often as the safeguarding of the public health
in the City may reasonably require, regarding the sanitary condition of, or
§ 9-7.1 COMPTON § 9-8.3
AO:332
to inspect and examine, all equipment, fixtures, vehicles, apparatus and
the plant and establishment handling or producing any bakery products
being handled, sold or merchandised in the City. Before any license shall be
issued to any applicant therefor, the Health Officer shall first satisfy himself
that the sanitary character and condition of health and sanitation of the
equipment, fixtures, vehicles, apparatus and the plant and establishment
and food handlers concerned, in no way fail to meet the requirements of
this section; and having so satisfied himself, the Health Officer shall issue
his order directed to the License Collector authorizing the issuance of the
license applied for.
§ 9-8.4. Physical Examination of Food Handlers. [Ord. #856,
§ 6491.5]
Every handler of any bakery product shall, upon request of the Health
Officer submit to a physical examination by the Health Officer and shall
have an examination as often as the safeguarding of the public health in the
City may require; and shall in the matter thereof render the Health Officer
such information and other assistance and shall do such other things as may
be necessary to enable the Health Officer to determine whether or not such
person is suffering from or has any communicable disease; and no licensee
under this section shall exercise any privileges as such hereunder by and
through any handler of foodstuffs as such who is found by the Health Officer
under this section to be suffering from a communicable disease, until such
person shall cease to suffer from such disease and shall be by the Health
Officer found to be free therefrom and shall thereafter be by order of the
Health Officer authorized to further act as a handler of bakery products
under this section.
§ 9-8.5. Restriction. [Ord. #856, § 6491.6]
No licensee shall permit any bakery products to be by said licensee handled,
sold, delivered or merchandised in the City where the same has been
produced, baked or handled in or by any bakery or baking establishment or
person, found by the Health Officer, at the time of this production, baking
or handling thereof by such bakery or baking establishment or person, to
be a place or persons of such unsanitary or unhealthy character, condition
or nature that the consumption of said bakery products as a result thereof
would be injurious or harmful or a menace or danger to the health of the
consumer thereof.
§ 9-9. BENCHES FOR ADVERTISING.
§ 9-9.1. Definitions. [Ord. #856, § 6494]
As used in this section:
BENCH — Shall mean a seat located upon public way for the
accommodation of passersby or persons awaiting transportation.
§ 9-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-9.1
AO:333
STREET — Shall mean any public thoroughfare or way including the
sidewalk, the parkway and any other public property bordering upon a
public way.
§ 9-9.2. Permit Required. [Ord. #856, § 6494.3]
A separate permit must be obtained for each bench, which permit shall be
valid only for the particular location specified thereon. Each permit shall
bear a separate number.
§ 9-9.3. Application for Permit. [Ord. #856, § 6494.4]
In addition to the information required under § 9-4, the application for a
permit shall show:
§ 9-9.4. Fees. [Ord. #856, § 6494.5]
Each application must be accompanied by an inspection fee of $1 for each
bench in addition to the permit fee required under § 9-4a1.
If the application be granted, a minimum fee of $25 shall be collected, which
shall be the fee for permits for not more than 10 benches and for each
permit granted for benches in excess of 10 in number, an additional fee of
$2 shall be collected. Fees to be collected at the time of the issuance of the
permit or permits.
a. Name and address of the applicant who must be the owner of such
bench.
b. Location of the bench.
c. The number of bench permits held by applicant at time of making
application and the respective numbers of such respective permits.
d. A description of the bench showing its type, general dimensions, and
material of construction.
e. The written consent of the owner or person in lawful possession or
control of any improved property abutting upon the public streets at the
place where the bench is proposed to be located, giving his consent to
the installation and maintenance of the bench; or a statement that such
property is unimproved.
f. A description or statement indicating the nature of the advertising, if
any, to appear thereon, and the area or areas upon such bench where
such advertising is to appear.
g. A statement by applicant that applicant is familiar with the provisions of
this Part as same exists at the date of said application, approves the
same, and if granted the permit applied for, will observe, and abide and
be bound by, such provisions.
§ 9-9.1 COMPTON § 9-9.4
AO:334
Each permit and each renewal permit shall expire on June 30 next following
the date of its issue unless renewed. The minimum fee of $25 shall be
charged and shall be paid for renewal of each permit or permits up to 10
in number, and a fee of $2 for each permit for a bench in excess of 10 in
number.
Application for renewal shall be made prior to the expiration date of permit,
and must be accompanied by the renewal fee, otherwise a new permit must
be filed and a new inspection fee and permit fee must be paid.
Whenever a bench for which a permit has been issued has been sold, or title
or control thereof is transferred, a new permit shall be obtained by the new
owner for its location and maintenance.
The License Collector shall not collect the fees provided for in this section
where a single permit is sought and obtained by the occupant of premises
for a bench to be erected and maintained on the premises occupied by the
applicant, but such occupant shall comply with all the other provisions of
this section.
§ 9-9.5. Moving Prohibited; Inspection and Safety Required. [Ord.
#856, § 6494.6]
No permittee shall locate or maintain any bench at a point or location other
than that specified therefor in the permit for such bench. It shall be the
duty of the permittee to maintain each bench at all times in a safe condition,
and at its proper and lawful location, and to inspect each bench at frequent
intervals.
§ 9-9.6. Limitations on Displays. [Ord. #856, § 6494.7]
No advertisement, sign, printing, or writing on any bench shall display the
words "STOP," "LOOK," "DRIVE-IN," "DANGER," or any other word, phrase,
symbol, or character calculated to interfere with, mislead, or distract traffic.
§ 9-9.7. Removal Following Revocation or Expiration of Permits.
[Ord. #856, § 6494.8]
§ 9-9.8. Bonds: Insurance Policies. [Ord. #856, § 6469.9]
a. After the revocation of any permit required by the provisions of
Subsection 9-9.2, the City may remove and store the bench if the
permittee fails to do so within 10 days after notice to so remove.
b. The permittee may recover the bench if, within 60 days after the
removal, he pays the cost of such removal and storage, which shall not
exceed $2 for removal and $5 per month for storage for each such
bench. After 60 days the City may sell, destroy, or otherwise dispose of
the bench at its discretion. All of the foregoing shall be at the sole risk
of the permittee and shall be in addition to any other remedy provided
by law for violations of the provisions of this section.
§ 9-9.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-9.8
AO:335
§ 9-9.9. Permit Index File. [Ord. #856, § 6494.10]
The License Collector shall keep and maintain an index file of all permits
granted or renewed pursuant to the provisions of this section.
§ 9-9.10. Enforcement. [Ord. #856, § 6494.11]
The License Collector, the Street Superintendent, and the Chief of Police
shall enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 9-10. CARD CLUBS.54
§ 9-10.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1877, § 1; Ord. #1962, § 1; Ord. #2050,
§ 1]
As used in this section, the words and phrases hereinafter set forth shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context clearly
requires to the contrary:
a. No permit shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this section
unless the applicant shall post and maintain with the City a surety bond
or policy of public liability insurance approved by the City and
conditioned as provided in this section. Such bond or policy shall be
filed with the City Clerk.
b. The bond or policy shall be conditioned that the permittee will
indemnify and save the City and its officers and employees from any
and all loss, costs, damages, expenses, or liability which may result
from or arise out of the granting of the permit, or the installation or
maintenance of the bench for which the permit is issued, and that the
permittee will pay any and all loss or damages which may be sustained
by any person as a result of, or which may be caused by or arise out of,
such installation or maintenance. The bond or policy of insurance shall
be maintained in its original amount by the permittee as his expense at
all times during the period for which the permit is in effect. In the event
two or more permits are issued to one permittee, one such bond or
policy of insurance may be furnished to cover two or more benches, and
each bond or policy shall be of such a type that its coverage shall be
automatically restored immediately from and after the time of the
reporting of any accident from which liability may thereafter accrue.
c. The limit of liability upon any bond or policy of insurance posted
pursuant to the requirements of this section shall in no case be less
than $50,000 for property damages, $250,000 for injuries to any one
person, and $500,000 for injuries arising out of any one accident.
a. APPLICANT – Shall mean any person or entity who has applied for a
license to operate a card club in the City.
54.Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance Nos. 856
and 1368.
§ 9-9.8 COMPTON § 9-10.1
AO:336
§ 9-10.2. License Required. [Ord. #1877, § 1; Ord. #2019, § 3; Ord.
#2122, § 1]
b. CARD CLUB – Shall mean a business or enterprise licensed under the
provisions of this section for the playing of the games described in
Subsection 9-10.1f.
c. CARD GAME BUSINESS – Shall mean the conduct of the games
described in Subsection 9-10.1f and shall not include any related
business as described in Subsection 9-10.1j.
d. CITY – Shall mean the City of Compton and its representatives,
including, but not limited to:
1. Chief of Police. Chief of Police shall mean and include the
designated representative of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's
Department or other local authorized law enforcement agency, as
applicable.
2. City Manager. City Manager shall mean the City Manager of the
City of Compton or any designee, assistant or agent.
e. COUNCIL – Shall mean the City Council of the City of Compton.
f. GAME OR GAMES – Shall mean all games regulated by § 330 of the
California Penal Code (whether or not cards are used) which are not
prohibited by state law.
g. LICENSE – Shall mean a license for the operation of a card club.
h. LICENSEE – Shall mean the person or entity to whom a license has
been issued by the operation of a card club pursuant to this section and/
or in matters of operation, administration, organization, recordkeeping,
monitoring or enforcement, all designees, agents and
employees.
i. OWNER – Shall mean every person, firm, association, corporation,
partnership, or other entity having any interest, whether legal,
equitable or of any other kind or character, in any card club or license.
j. RELATED BUSINESS – Shall mean business activities occurring at a
card club other than the playing of the games, such as entertainment,
dancing, the sale of food, beverages (including alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises), sundries and other items and the
provision of services such as barber shop services.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to commence or conduct, or
purport to commence or conduct, within the City any business, activity,
enterprise, or undertaking used for the playing of any games for which
a fee, commission, or compensation is directly or indirectly charged to
or accepted or received from players or participants in any such playing
of games until such person or entity has first obtained a license in
compliance with the provisions of this section.
§ 9-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.2
AO:337
§ 9-10.3. License Application. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
b. The location of the card club license shall be restricted to commercial
or industrial zones and shall be determined by the City Council by
resolution thereof.
a. Filing of Application. Any person or entity desiring to conduct a card
club shall file with the City Clerk a written application for a license. The
application shall be executed under penalty of perjury and shall
contain, in addition to all other information that the City Clerk may
require, the following information and material:
1. An official receipt from the City Treasurer, indicating payment in
full of the application fee and license fee deposit as required by
Subsection 9-10.4;
2. The date of the application;
3. The true name of the applicant;
4. The status of the applicant as being an individual (or two or more
individuals), firm, association, corporation, partnership, joint
venture or other entity;
5. The residence and business address of each individual applicant;
6. The name, residence, and business address of each of the partners,
shareholders, and principal officers and directors of any nonindividual
applicant;
7. The business and employment history of the applicant(s) and each
proposed manager of the card club, including a list of all places of
previous residence;
8. The proposed location for the card club;
9. A list of the games to be played (which list shall be updated
whenever games are added or eliminated) and a statement that the
games to be played shall be the games described in Subsection
9-10.1f only, and that no other games are proposed;
10. The number of tables or other units to be used in the card club;
11. A description of any related businesses proposed to be conducted
at the same location (which list shall be updated whenever related
businesses are added or eliminated);
12. A description of the building in which the card club is to be located;
13. A development site plan and floor plan conforming to submittal
standards maintained by the City Planning Department;
14. In the event the proposed premises are partly or wholly owned by
persons or entities other than the applicant, the names and
§ 9-10.2 COMPTON § 9-10.3
AO:338
addresses of such other persons or entities and complete
information pertaining to the nature and percentage of ownership;
15. A one-year detailed cash flow projection, a pro forma financial
statement, a statement of pre-opening cash, a financing plan and
copies of all loan agreements of the applicant;
16. A full and complete financial statement and most recent annual
income tax return of the applicant, and a full and complete financial
and invested capital statement of each person who is a limited
partner, general partner, officer or director of the applicant;
17. A statement that the applicant understands and agrees that the
application shall be considered by the Council only after full
investigations and reports have been made by all applicable City
staff;
18. A complete listing of all criminal arrests and convictions of the
applicant and each partner, shareholder, officer and director of the
applicant, if any, not including traffic offenses, with explanations
therefor;
19. A statement that the applicant understands and agrees that any
business or activity conducted or operated under any license shall
be operated in full conformity with all the laws of the state and the
laws and regulations of the City applicable thereto, and that any
violation of any such laws and regulations in such place of business,
or in connection therewith, shall render any license subject to
immediate suspension or revocation;
20. A statement that the applicant has read the provisions of this
section and particularly the provisions of this subsection,
understands the same and agrees to abide by all rules and
regulations contained in this section.
b. Investigations and Reports. Whenever an application for a license has
been filed with the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall determine whether
such application is complete and whether licenses are available
pursuant to this section. If the application is determined to be complete,
there are licenses available and no other application is then being
processed, the City Clerk shall immediately refer such application or a
copy thereof to the City Manager's Office, where appropriate City staff
shall promptly and diligently make an investigation as follows:
1. A full and complete investigation as to the identity, character and
background of the applicant and the applicant's partners, officers,
directors, management, and staff;
2. A full and complete investigation of the building and location where
the applicant proposes to conduct the card club business;
§ 9-10.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.3
AO:339
§ 9-10.4. Application Fee and License Fee Deposit. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
The application fee and license fee are for both regulation and revenue
purposes and are levied pursuant to the authority of applicable laws. An
application for a license shall be accompanied by fees and deposits, payable
to the City in cash or a cashier's check, as follows:
3. A full and complete evaluation of the security and law enforcement
requirements of the premises;
4. A comprehensive evaluation of the applicant's financial ability to
successfully comply with the financial requirements of the
proposed card club;
5. A comprehensive evaluation of all public health, welfare and safety
matters concerning the proposed card club.
The City Clerk and/or the City Manager may request that the applicant
provide additional relevant information or data not included in the
application. Reports of the investigations required or authorized herein
shall be prepared by the City Manager and submitted to the Council
within 90 days from the date upon which the City Clerk has certified the
application as full and complete.
c. Burden of Proof. The burden of proving his qualifications to receive a
license is at all times on the applicant. By filing the application, the
applicant accepts any risk of adverse public notice, embarrassment,
criticism, or other action or financial loss which may result from action
with respect to the application and expressly waives any claim for
damages as a result thereof.
d. Obligation to Provide Information. An applicant may claim any privilege
afforded by the Constitution of the United States in refusing to answer
questions by the Council. However, a claim of privilege with respect to
an application shall constitute sufficient grounds for denial of the
application.
e. Identity of Owners. The applicant shall also file with the City Clerk a list
of the names and addresses of all of the owners. The Chief of Police
shall determine whether or not an investigation of any owner should be
made by a teletype search of the records of the State Criminal
Investigation and Identification Unit in Sacramento, California, or
otherwise.
f. Statements Confidential. Personal financial information and home
telephone numbers and addresses required to be submitted as part of
an application pursuant to this section shall be confidential and not
available for public inspection, except as may be required by law.
a. An application fee of $25, which shall be retained by the City to pay the
costs of the investigation of the applicant and the building; and
§ 9-10.3 COMPTON § 9-10.4
AO:340
§ 9-10.5. Fingerprints; Photographs. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
Concurrently with filing the application, the applicant and each owner shall
be fingerprinted and photographed by the Chief of Police.
§ 9-10.6. Control by Landlord or Financier. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
If the Council determines that a landlord or financier, by reason of the
extent of his holdings or his inherent control financially, cannot, in fact, be
separated from the card game business and that, as a practical matter, a
single entity exists regardless of the form of organization, it may require
that the landlord or financier submit a full application.
§ 9-10.7. Reports Required Before Council Consideration. [Ord.
#1877, § 1]
The Council shall not be required to consider any application for a license
until such time as the City staff reports have been filed with the Council.
In the event that any of such reports are not filed within the time provided
in Subsection 9-10.3b herein, the Council in its sole discretion may proceed
further without such reports or may extend the time in which such reports
may be filed but in no event for more than an additional 90 days.
§ 9-10.8. Hearing on Application. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
§ 9-10.9. Grounds for Denial of Application. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
The Council may, in its discretion, deny any application if the council
finds, following the hearing, that the applicant has not complied with any
requirement of this section or for any of the following grounds or reasons:
b. A license fee deposit of $12,500. In the event the license is issued, this
deposit shall be applied as a credit toward the license fee described in
Subsection 9-10.11 hereof. In the event the license is not issued, this
deposit shall be returned to the applicant, without interest.
a. Within 30 days after all staff reports have been filed, the Council shall
schedule a public hearing on the application.
b. Not less than 10 days prior to the hearing date, the City Clerk shall mail
notice of the hearing to the applicant and all owners of property within
a 1,000-foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the proposed card club
site, using for that purpose the last known name and address of such
owners as shown upon the assessment roll of the County of Los Angeles,
and shall cause notice of the hearing to be published once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. Such notices shall contain
a description of the proposed card club site, the nature of the license
applied for and the time and place of the public hearing. The failure of
any owner to receive any notice duly mailed shall not affect, in any way,
the validity of any of the proceedings undertaken by the council
pursuant to this section.
§ 9-10.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.9
AO:341
§ 9-10.10. Issuance, Termination and Renewal of License. [Ord.
#1877, § 1]
In approving an application for a license, the Council may impose conditions
upon such license in addition to the requirements contained herein. The
City Clerk shall provide to the applicant a copy of the City's acceptance
form, which shall state that the applicant is aware of and will abide by all
conditions imposed by the Council. Upon receipt of the acceptance form
signed by the applicant, the City License Collector shall thereupon issue
the license, which shall be for a term of 25 years from the date on which it
was issued, unless revoked by the Council pursuant to the provisions hereof
or surrendered by the licensee. In the event of the surrender, suspension,
revocation or expiration of the license, no portion of any license fee or
deposit shall be refunded. Not more than one year nor less than six months
prior to the expiration of a license, the licensee may file with the City Clerk
an application for renewal of the license.
§ 9-10.11. Quarterly License Fee. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
a. Indictment or conviction of any crime of violence, any crime involving
fraud, gambling, thievery or bunco, moral turpitude, or evasion of
taxes, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or
business honesty, whether committed in the State of California, or
elsewhere, whether denominated a felony or a misdemeanor, and
notwithstanding the passage of time since the conviction;
b. Failure to satisfy the Council as to the applicant's good character,
honesty or integrity, either through the applicant's actions or through
association with others;
c. Failure to satisfy the Council as to the source and adequacy of funds to
be invested in the proposed venture;
d. Prior unsuitable operation as a card club licensee in another
jurisdiction without regard to whether disciplinary action was taken at
that time or whether the acts were sufficient to justify revocation of a
license;
e. Making or causing to be made any statement in an application or
document or orally in connection with an application, which statement
was at the time and in the light of the circumstances under which it was
made false or misleading;
f. Lack of a satisfactory record of business competence and business
ethics and integrity;
g. Failure of any person named in an application when summoned by the
Council to appear and testify before it or its agent at the designated
time and place;
h. Deficient security and law enforcement accommodations and facilities.
§ 9-10.9 COMPTON § 9-10.11
AO:342
§ 9-10.12. Gross Revenue License Fee. [Ord. #1877, § 1; Ord.
#2045, § 1]
a. On the date the card club opens for business, the licensee shall pay to
the City a license fee in the sum of $12,500 for the calendar quarter in
which operations commence. Such initial fee shall be credited from the
license fee deposit as described in Subsection 9-10.4b. No proration or
refund shall be made of the initial fee under any circumstances.
b. After the calendar quarter in which operations commence, a license fee
in the sum of $12,500 shall be paid quarterly in advance on January 1,
April 1, July 1, and October 1 of each calendar year, continuing so long
as the card club remains licensed to do business in the City and subject
to such changes in amount or duration as may later be imposed by the
Council.
c. Fees paid pursuant to this section become the absolute property of the
City and shall not be refunded to the licensee except as specifically
provided herein, nor shall such fees be prorated in any manner
whatsoever in the event of cessation of business by the licensee,
whether voluntary or involuntary.
a. In addition to the quarterly license fee prescribed by Subsection
9-10.11 of the Compton Municipal Code, each licensee shall pay to the
City a monthly fee, which shall be a percentage of the total monthly
gross revenue of the card game business using the table contained
herein.
This fee shall be the greater of (i) the amount required by said table
or (ii) $104,166.66 per month ("Minimum Gross Revenue License Fee"),
except as provided in Paragraph 1(a) and 1(b) below. This fee shall
be paid to the Office of the City Treasurer by 5:00 p.m. on the 10th
day of each month. A penalty of 10% of the amount owed shall be
charged for submittal after the 10th day of the month, excepting those
months affected by the following sentence. For those months where the
10th day of the month falls on a Friday, Saturday, Sunday or legally
recognized holiday said months' fee shall be due the next business day
by 5:00 p.m.:
Total Monthly Gross Revenue Monthly Fee
Less than $300,000 5.7%
$300,000.01 to $400,000 6.7%
$400,000.01 to $1,200,000 7.7%
$1,200,000.01 to $3,000,000 10.0%
$3,000,000.01 to $7,000,000 12.0%
$7,000,000.01 and over 14.0%
§ 9-10.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.12
AO:343
§ 9-10.13. Audits, Reports and Recordkeeping. [Ord. #1877, § 1;
Ord. #1962, § 2]
1. In those instances where a licensed card club operator has made an
advance on future monthly gross revenue license fees, the advance
payment shall be refunded to the licensee as follows:
(a) For the first six months after the card club opens, the gross
revenue license fee required by Subsection 9-10.12 shall be
reduced by 100% of gross revenue license fees in excess of
$166,666.66 as a credit toward repayment of the advance
payment.
(b) Any remaining balance existing on January 1, 2001 in the
licensee's advance payment of gross revenue license fees
account shall be credited in an amount equal to 100% of the
monthly gross license fees as determined by utilizing the
gaming tax table appearing above, with respect to satisfaction
of the advance payment until such advance payment is fully
earned by the City.
b. Upon review of any audit or other yearend report required under the
audit plan described in Subsection 9-10.13, the City Manager shall
cause to be conducted an evaluation of the gross revenue license fee set
forth herein. The Council may by resolution adjust the gross revenue
license fee, provided that such fee shall not exceed the highest such fee
paid by a licensed card club located within a 50 mile radius of the card
club.
a. Each licensee shall make and maintain complete, accurate and legible
records of all transactions pertaining to revenue subject to taxes and
fees imposed by this section. Such records shall include but not be
limited to a general ledger maintained in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles, together with appropriate supporting
records such as cash receipts and disbursements logs and journals,
payroll journals, canceled checks and original paid invoices. Such
general ledger shall be maintained in a fashion suitable for producing
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles. Such records shall be maintained for at least three fiscal
years and shall be maintained on the premises of the card club and
made available for examination and copying by the City or its agents,
except there is no obligation to retain bar and restaurant patron tickets.
b. In the event information requested of a licensee can be furnished only
by someone other than the licensee (such as a landlord, supplier or an
accountant), the licensee shall make every bona fide effort to obtain
such information as requested and furnish the same or have it furnished
directly by the person who has the information available.
c. In addition to such information and data required by this regulation,
each licensee shall maintain the following:
§ 9-10.12 COMPTON § 9-10.13
AO:344
1. If a partnership or corporation:
(a) A schedule showing the dates of capital contributions, loans or
advances, the names and addresses of the contributors and
percentage of ownership interest held of record by each.
(b) A record of the withdrawals or distributions of funds or assets,
to partners or stockholders.
(c) A record of salaries paid to each partner, stockholder and key
management employees.
(d) A copy of the partnership or corporate agreement, certificate
of limited partnership and accurate corporate stock transfer
book, if applicable.
(e) Copies of any and all public filings required by the Securities
Exchange Commission.
2. If a sole proprietorship:
(a) A schedule showing the name and address of the proprietor
and the amount and date of the original investment.
(b) A record of subsequent additions thereto and withdrawals
therefor.
3. The records required to be kept by this regulation shall be in ink or
any other permanent form of recordation.
d. The licensee shall allow the City Manager unrestricted access to all
books, records and facilities pertaining to the card club, including, but
not limited to, cash-counting rooms. Any information obtained pursuant
to this section or any statement filed by the licensee shall be deemed
confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection
except in connection with the enforcement of the provisions of this
section. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to preserve and keep
such statements so that the contents thereof shall not become known
except to the persons charged by law with the administration of the
provisions of this section or pursuant to the order of any court of
competent jurisdiction.
e. Each licensee shall file with the City on or before the 15th day of each
calendar month a statement, under oath, showing the true and correct
amount of gross revenue derived from operation of the card game
business during the preceding month. Such statement shall be
accompanied by the payment of the correct amount of gross revenue
license fee due and owed in accordance with the provisions of the
license approved by the Council. A certification, signed by the licensee,
shall be attached to the statement, declaring under penalty of perjury
that it is true and correct. The licensee shall also provide the City with a
copy, to be updated annually, of its procedures for administrative
control, record-keeping and internal accounting.
§ 9-10.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.13
AO:345
§ 9-10.14. (Reserved)55
§ 9-10.15. Transfer and Assignment of License. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
No license for a card club or any interest therein shall be transferred or
assigned in whole or in part except in accordance with this section. Any
proposed transfer or assignment of any license shall be considered for all
purposes as a new application for a license, and all the provisions of this
section applicable to new and original applications shall apply.
§ 9-10.16. Change of Ownership of Premises. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
In the event that the card club business is located on property not wholly
owned by the licensee, the licensee shall notify the City Manager of any
change in the ownership of any portion of the premises at least 30 days
before such change, or, if the licensee is not a party to the transaction
effecting the change of ownership, immediately upon acquiring knowledge
of such change of ownership.
f. At the end of each fiscal year, the licensee shall employ, at its expense, a
nationally recognized firm of certified public accountants to conduct an
audit of the licensee's financial records in accordance with generally
accepted auditing standards. Such audit shall conclude with the
expression of the auditor's opinion on the financial statements
compliance with generally accepted auditing principles. The auditor
shall express a separate opinion on the computation of the licensee's
gross revenues and related permit fees paid to the City for the period
then ended.
g. Such audit report shall be filed with the City Manager no later than 120
days after the fiscal year-end. In the event that such evaluation
discloses material weaknesses or reportable conditions in the licensee's
system of internal accounting and administrative controls, the licensee
shall submit a program to the City Manager within 30 days of such
evaluation outlining the licensee's program to correct such weaknesses
or conditions. All reports or evaluations submitted hereunder shall be
confidential and shall not be available for public inspection.
h. Any failure or refusal of the licensee to file any statement within the
time required, to pay any license fee when due, or to permit inspection
of the books, records, accounts and reports of such licensee shall
constitute full and sufficient grounds for the revocation or suspension of
the license of that licensee in the sole discretion of the Council.
55.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 9-10.14, Number of Licenses Limited, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1877 was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 1986.
§ 9-10.13 COMPTON § 9-10.17
AO:346
§ 9-10.17. Transfer of Ownership Interest. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
No transfer, assignment or sale of any ownership interest in any card club,
regardless of the manner in which title is held, shall be made without
prior written notification to the City Manager, which notification shall be
accompanied by a copy of the application for initial registration filed by
the transferee with the California Department of Justice. The City Manager
shall determine whether or not such transfer shall be brought to the
attention of the Council and shall so notify the licensee within 30 days after
receipt of the notification of the proposed transfer. In the event that the
transfer represents more than 5% of the total of all interests in the card
club, the City Manager shall notify the Council. In the event of notice to
the Council, the transfer shall not become effective until the Council has
conducted such further investigations or hearings as it shall determine. If
the Council conducts a hearing on the proposed transfer, its approval or
disapproval shall be based upon the same standards as an application for a
license.
§ 9-10.18. Divestiture upon Criminal Conviction. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
§ 9-10.19. Suspension of License. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
All licenses shall be subject to:
a. Any owner who is convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude or a felony shall divest himself of such ownership interest
within 120 days after the service of a notice of divestiture by the City.
Upon receipt of a notice of divestiture, the recipient may request in
writing a hearing before the Council to appeal the notice and request a
waiver of the Council to appeal the notice and request a waiver of the
divestiture requirement. A hearing shall be scheduled before the
Council within 30 days after the receipt of such request. Upon the
conclusion of the hearing, the Council may disregard the conviction or
take other action if it is determined by the Council that mitigating
circumstances exist and that the public interest will be adequately
protected.
b. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive. Failure to
comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine or imprisonment. Each day of
noncompliance shall constitute a separate and complete offense. In
addition, the City Attorney may invoke any appropriate civil remedies
available to enforce compliance.
c. No person required pursuant hereto to divest his or her interest in a
card club may transfer the same to his or her spouse, children, siblings,
or parents or to his or her spouse's children, siblings, or parents.
a. Suspension by the Chief of Police immediately whenever the Chief of
Police is convinced that there has been a breach, violation, failure of
compliance, or disregard of any of the provisions of this section or any
§ 9-10.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.19
AO:347
§ 9-10.20. Suspension of License upon Criminal Complaint. [Ord.
#1877, § 1]
A license may be suspended by the Council following a revocation hearing
as provided in Subsection 9-10.21 for such period as the Council shall
determine in the event a criminal complaint or grand jury indictment has
been issued which involves moral turpitude or dishonesty. The Council may
provide in the resolution of suspension that the license shall be revoked in
the event that a conviction on such charges is obtained or reinstated in the
event that the charges are dismissed.
§ 9-10.21. Revocation Hearing. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
Upon receiving information of the presence of possible grounds for
revocation, the Council shall set a public hearing and give the licensee
at least 10 days' written notice thereof, together with a summary of the
grounds alleged. Any suspension of the license by the Chief of Police shall
require the setting of a public hearing. At the public hearing, the licensee
shall be accorded the right to question and cross-examine all witnesses and
to testify and submit any evidence. The licensee may require attendance
of witnesses by requesting the issuance of subpoenas by the Council at
least 24 hours prior to the hearing. The Council may impose conditions
or limitations upon any license in lieu of revocation following a hearing
as provided in Subsection 9-10.21. Any action of the Council following the
hearing shall be final. In the event that the matter constituting possible
grounds for revocation has been corrected, the Council shall not be
required to set the matter for public hearing or may cancel a hearing if
previously scheduled.
§ 9-10.22. Revocation of License. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section may be revoked
by the Council on the basis of any of the following:
of the rules or regulations established by the Council with reference
to the card game business, activities authorized or licensed by the
provisions of this section, the premises wherein the card club is located
or the manner in which such card game business or activities are being
conducted. Such suspension by the Chief of Police shall not exceed 14
days and shall terminate at the end of such period unless the Council
has ordered the suspension continued.
b. The Council may suspend any license until the Council can hold a public
hearing to consider revocation of the license, but not longer than seven
days. In no event shall any suspension have a duration in excess of 21
days unless such suspended license has been duly revoked by the
Council following a revocation hearing as provided in Subsection
9-10.21 of this section.
§ 9-10.19 COMPTON § 9-10.22
AO:348
§ 9-10.23. Rights of Licensee and Card Club. [Ord. #1877, § 1; Ord.
#1962, § 3]
a. Failure of the licensee to comply fully with the provisions of this section
or any requirement or condition imposed by the Council or by any other
applicable federal, state and local law and regulation;
b. Filing of any document by the licensee untruthfully or which in any
degree misrepresented any matter by failure fully to provide the
requested information;
c. Obtaining the license by wrongful or fraudulent means;
d. Use of the license for a different purpose than that for which it was
issued or in violation of this section;
e. Conviction of any licensee for an offense involving moral turpitude or
dishonesty;
f. Creation of a public nuisance or police problem;
g. Permitting persons who are under the influence of any intoxicating
liquor or drug to participate in games;
h. Failure to conduct advertising and public relations activities in
accordance with decency, dignity, good taste, honesty and
inoffensiveness;
i. Association with others where the repute of the City is liable to be
damaged;
j. Employing in any card club any person whom the Council or any court
has found guilty of cheating or using any improper device in connection
with any game, whether as a licensee or player at a licensed game, as
well as any person whose conduct of a licensed game as an employee of
a licensee resulted in revocation or suspension of the license of such
licensee;
k. Failure to conduct the card club in accordance with proper standards of
custom, decorum and decency;
l. Permitting any type of conduct in the card club which reflects or tends
to reflect on the repute of the City and acts as a detriment to card club
activity in the City.
a. A licensee may exclude or eject from the premises of the card club any
person who is reasonably suspected of or who is engaged in or has been
convicted of bookmaking, loansharking, sale of controlled substances,
illegal gambling activities, cheating or prostitution or whose presence
in or about such card club would be inimical to the interest of legitimate
gaming. The licensee must show, by direct or circumstantial evidence,
knowledge that such a violation has occurred or a reasonable belief that
such a violation is about to occur. Pursuant to any investigation of a
§ 9-10.22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.23
AO:349
§ 9-10.24. Refunds upon Suspension or Revocation. [Ord. #1877,
§ 1]
In the event of the suspension or revocation of the license, no part of any
license fee paid by the licensee shall be refunded.
§ 9-10.25. New Application Following Revocation. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
In the event of the revocation of a license, no new license shall be issued to
such licensee except upon application made pursuant to Subsection 9-10.3
as if the licensee were a new applicant.
§ 9-10.26. Registration, Fingerprinting and Photographing of
Employees. [Ord. #1877, § 1; Ord. #1962, § 4; Ord. #2019, § 4; Ord.
#2115, § 1]
violation of this section, the licensee may detain any person at the
security office of the card club. The licensee may temporarily exclude
or eject any person during the pendency of an investigation by the
licensee regarding a violation of this section, provided, however, that
said investigation and temporary exclusion shall run no longer than 90
days from the date of exclusion.
b. As used in this subsection, the following items, which are in no way
meant to be exhaustive, shall be deemed to be inimical to the interests
of legitimate gaming:
1. Violation of any card club rule.
2. Violations of any law or ordinance.
3. Behavior that would indicate that the person is under the influence
of a drug, narcotic or alcohol.
4. Loud, boisterous or other disruptive behavior.
5. Swearing or using profane language.
6. Failure to abide by instructions or orders of licensee's employees,
agents or management personnel, issued pursuant to state or City
laws or rules of the card club.
7. Loitering.
8. Panhandling.
c. No person shall be excluded or ejected on the grounds of race, color,
creed or sex.
a. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to employ any person or to allow
any person to do business on the premises who is not the holder of a
valid registration card or work permit issued by the Chief of Police. No
registration card or work permit shall be issued without such person
§ 9-10.23 COMPTON § 9-10.26
AO:350
having first been fingerprinted for a criminal history background check
by the Department of Justice and photographed by the City of Compton
Police Department, and the submission of a certified copy of the results
of a drug test conducted within the previous 72 hours by a licensed
laboratory approved by the Chief of Police.
In recognition of the delays, which may be encountered in obtaining all
information on each applicant, the Chief of Police is hereby authorized
to issue temporary registration cards or work permits, which shall be
issued under the terms and conditions to be determined by the Chief of
Police.
b. Every licensee shall, before employing any person, ascertain that such
person holds a valid registration card or work permit issued in
accordance with this regulation, and shall cause his or her employment
records to reflect such fact.
c. Applications for registration cards or work permits shall be lodged with
the City of Compton Police Department. Upon being provided with the
required information concerning the employment of any person, the
Chief of Police shall investigate the applicant. The Chief of Police may
refuse to issue or revoke a registration card or work permit for any of
the following grounds or reasons, without being limited thereto, or for
any other reason consistent with state or federal law:
1. Indictment or conviction for any crime punishable as a felony.
2. Conviction for any misdemeanor involving violence, dishonesty or
moral turpitude.
3. Conviction or other form of discipline for any act involving fraud,
gambling, loan sharking, bookmaking, money laundering,
embezzlement, thievery, bunco, moral turpitude, evasion of taxes,
or otherwise indicating a lack of business integrity or honesty,
whether committed in the State of California, or elsewhere,
whether denominated a felony or a misdemeanor, and
notwithstanding the passage of time since the conviction.
4. Association of the applicant with criminal profiteering activity or
organized crime as defined by Section 186.2 of the California Penal
Code.
5. Identification by any law enforcement agency, legislative body or
crime commission as a member of, or an associate of, organized
criminal elements.
6. Making, or causing to be made, any statement in an application or
document or orally in connection with the application, which
statement was, at the time and in light of the circumstances under
which it was made, knowingly false or misleading.
§ 9-10.26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.26
AO:351
If the investigation reveals convictions or conduct of the type described
herein, or evidence of substance abuse, the Chief of Police may refuse to
issue or revoke a registration card or work permit, in which event the
Chief of Police shall immediately notify the licensee in writing of the denial
or revocation. In the event the Chief of Police notifies the licensee that a
registration card or work permit will not be issued to a person, or that the
registration of any person is revoked, then the licensee shall immediately
discharge such person.
d. Following issuance of the registration card, whether permanent or
temporary, the person issued the card shall be required to prominently
display the card on the outermost garment at all times while working on
the premises.
e. No registration card or work permit shall be issued to any applicant
who has been denied a work permit by the State of California, and the
duly constituted state regulatory authority shall be permitted to object
to registration of any applicant or employee, in which event the
registration card or work permit shall be denied or revoked.
f. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the Chief of Police to establish
the necessary procedures to implement and administer the provisions
of this section. The information received by the Chief of Police shall be
treated as confidential and shall be accessible only to the City Council,
the City Manager, the Chief of Police, and the licensee.
g. If an application for a registration card or work permit is denied,
suspended or revoked, the applicant may appeal such denial,
suspension or revocation by written notice to the City Manager or a
designee.
1. The City Manager or designee shall cause a hearing to be held
before a hearing officer within 30 days.
2. The hearing officers shall be unrelated to the City or any of its
officers or employees and shall be an attorney, qualified arbitrator
or retired judge.
3. The hearing officer shall schedule and conduct all hearings in
accordance with the rules and regulations established by the City
Manager or designee.
4. The hearing officers shall approve, conditionally approve or deny
the appeal, in writing, within 10 days of the conclusion of the
hearing.
5. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final.
6. The entire cost of the appeal, including the hearing officer's fee and
an administrative fee of $500 shall be paid by the applicant.
§ 9-10.26 COMPTON § 9-10.27
AO:352
§ 9-10.27. City Oversight and Monitoring. [Ord. #1877, § 1; Ord.
#1962, § 5]
The City and its authorized governmental officials shall have full authority
to inspect and monitor all card club and accessory premises, operations
and facilities to prevent fraudulent acts and to verify compliance with all
provisions of this section and state and federal law.
a. Access and Visibility of Premises. It shall be the responsibility of the
licensee to maintain and enforce the following regulations:
1. All "card rooms" shall be accessible and visible to all patrons and
shall have no less than eight tables per room. The playing of all
games shall be confined entirely to one floor which shall be
designated as the "playing floor," and no playing of any game shall
be permitted at any location other than a designated card room
approved by the Chief of Police on the card club premises. No card
game shall be permitted in any restaurant or lounge.
2. No person under the age of 21 years shall be permitted to play any
game authorized by this section.
3. No person under the age of 21 years shall be permitted inside a
card room or card playing area.
4. No person, other than players and card club employees displaying
valid photo registration cards, shall be permitted in any card room
or card playing area. Spectators and those waiting to play shall be
excluded from all card rooms and card playing areas in a manner
that clearly defines, controls and delineates one area from the
other and that shall be approved by the Chief of Police.
5. No individual player or other unauthorized person shall enter any
secure areas within the card club site.
6. Each card room shall have facilities that will permit authorized
governmental officials to observe all portions thereof on a twentyfour-
hour basis, and the entire premises, including all secure areas,
shall be open for inspection during all hours by the City Manager or
Chief of Police without a search warrant.
b. Fraudulent Acts. All acts which could deceive, mislead or defraud a
member of the public shall be prohibited. It shall be the responsibility of
the licensee to take reasonable steps to prevent fraudulent acts and to
cooperate fully with the Chief of Police and other local, state and
federal authorities to prevent such activities and to enforce the
following regulations:
1. Each and every game conducted pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall be operated in full conformity with, and subject to, all
the provisions of the laws of the United States of America, State of
§ 9-10.27 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.27
AO:353
California and City of Compton. Unlawful gambling shall not be
permitted anywhere on the card club premises.
2. Players financed in whole or in part by the licensee or the house or
any agent thereof shall be required to wear an insignia or
identifying badge.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or misrepresent the
outcome of a game or other event on which wagers have been made
after the outcome has been determined but before it is revealed to
the players.
4. It shall be unlawful to place, increase or decrease a bet or to
determine the course of play after acquiring knowledge not
available to all players of the outcome of the game or any event that
affects the outcome of the game or which is the subject of the bet or
to aid any in acquiring such knowledge for the purpose of placing,
increasing or decreasing a bet or determining the course of play
contingent upon that event or outcome.
5. The following actions, activities, words and phrases refers to
fraudulent acts within the meaning of this section. They shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context clearly
indicates the contrary:
(a) Blind cut or false cut shall mean the maneuver which appears
to cut the deck, but does not in fact do so.
(b) Blind shuffle shall mean to false shuffle or to give the deceptive
impression of intermixing playing cards, while actually
retaining the same sequence of all or a group of cards.
(c) Bottom dealing shall mean to deal a card from the bottom of
the deck; includes "Greek dealing".
(d) Burn shall mean a discard in accordance with the rules of the
game made before the draw when playing draw poker.
(e) Capping the deck shall mean to place cards onto the top of the
deck.
(f) Cheating shall mean, in addition to those acts defined herein,
any and all undefined acts of misrepresentation, dishonesty,
false pretense, use of device or manipulation of card done with
the purpose of defrauding or gaining an unfair advantage over
another player whether or not an actual advantage is gained.
(g) Cooler shall mean a deck of cards secretly prearranged in a
known sequence or marked to be substituted for the deck in
play.
(h) Daubing shall mean to mark cards by applying a faintly visible
substance to the back of the cards.
§ 9-10.27 COMPTON § 9-10.27
AO:354
(i) Hand mucking shall mean the surreptitious switching of cards
from those that are dealt to a player.
(j) Hold-out shall mean a mechanical device used for the purpose
of surreptitiously switching or retaining cards.
(k) Hopping the cut shall mean to surreptitiously nullify the
cutting of the deck.
(l) Middle dealing shall mean to deal a card from the center of the
deck.
(m) Past posting shall mean to place a bet after acquiring
knowledge of the outcome of the game or event with the intent
to claim or collect money or anything of value from winning
said bet.
(n) Pinching shall mean to reduce the amount wagered by
removing the bet or a portion thereof after action on the
current round of play has commenced.
(o) Playing partners shall mean any scheme or action in which two
or more players act in concert to communicate information or
to otherwise act for the purpose of defrauding or gaining an
unfair advantage over another player, whether or not an actual
advantage is gained.
(p) Pressing shall mean to add to or increase a bet after action on
the current round of play has commenced.
(q) Punching shall mean to mark the back of the cards by creating
a dimple or indentation thereon.
(r) Roughing fluid shall mean a liquid chemical applied to the back
of the cards for the purpose of marking them by roughening
the surface.
(s) Run-up or stacking or stocking shall mean to shuffle the cards
in such a fashion as to surreptitiously arrange the sequence to
known cards.
(t) Sanding shall mean to mark cards by applying an abrasive
substance to the cards.
(u) Second dealing or seconds shall mean to deal a card which is
second from the top of the deck.
(v) Shiner shall mean a mirror or other reflecting device used for
the purpose of enabling a player to see cards which the player
is not entitled to see under the rules of the game being played.
(w) Slick sleeve or mohair sleeve shall mean a long sleeve on a
clothing garment to assist in holding out a playing card or
cards:
§ 9-10.27 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.27
AO:355
(x) Slug shall mean a group of cards.
(y) Transmitter shall mean the electronic or radio device used for
the purpose of transmitting signals or information to another
player who receives such signals or information by use of a
"receiver".
(z) White flash shall mean a form of daubing whereby a chemical
is used to create a "white on white" marking on the back of the
cards.
6. No cheating or fraudulent activity shall be permitted or tolerated
by the licensee. All provable cases of cheating shall be reported to
the appropriate enforcement authorities and the licensee shall
cooperate fully in the prosecution of any individual who is
criminally charged with cheating. Cheating devices shall be
confiscated and shall not be returned to the individual using or
bringing such devices onto the premises whether or not the
offender is arrested or prosecuted. Permitting or tolerating
cheating shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation
of the license or imposition of additional conditions.
7. It shall be unlawful for any individual, as a player or dealer, to deal,
draw, distribute or burn any playing card other than the top card of
the deck. The "top card" is defined as the uppermost face down
card of a face down deck. It shall be unlawful to deal or cause to be
dealt or to participate in a second, middle, bottom or Greek deal.
8. It shall be unlawful for any individual to shuffle or cause to be
shuffled any playing cards that are to be used or are being used in a
game other than in a random manner. It shall be unlawful to
predetermine or to prearrange the sequence of playing cards by
value or suit or to retain or hold back a card or cards either
individually or as a group or slug as an effort to circumvent a
random mixing of the playing cards. Any blind shuffle, run-up,
stacking or stocking of the deck to gain an unfair advantage in play,
whether or not an advantage is gained, is unlawful.
9. It shall be unlawful for any individual other than the licensee to
bring cards into a card club. It shall be unlawful for any individual
other than the licensee or a patron while playing cards to have
playing cards in his or her possession while in a card club. It shall
be unlawful for any individual other than on-duty employees with
valid registration cards to have playing cards in his or her
possession outside of a designated card playing area. Nothing
herein shall apply to punched or otherwise destroyed or mutilated
cards or any souvenir or designer decks that could not be
misconstrued as playing cards used on the playing floor.
10. It shall be unlawful for any individual, player or dealer to palm,
hold out or conceal any card or cards during a game whether by
sleight of hand, mechanical apparatus or clothing such as a slick
§ 9-10.27 COMPTON § 9-10.27
AO:356
sleeve. It shall also be unlawful for any individual, player or dealer
to switch, exchange or cause to be exchanged any playing card or
cards as a means of deception. The deception practices known as
hand mucking, capping the deck, introducing additional cards into
a game or switching the deck with a cooler are unlawful.
11. It shall be unlawful for any individual to use any technique in a
game designed to accomplish a blind or false cut, use a fraudulent
technique to nullify a cut once performed by a player or influence
or indicate to another individual to cut the deck at a specific
location.
12. It shall be unlawful for any individual, player or dealer to
deliberately mark or alter any card or cards when there is a
likelihood that such cards will be used in a game or when such
cards are in play. It shall be unlawful to knowingly use any altered
or marked cards in a game. "Marking and altering" as used herein
includes sanding, daubing, white flash, white on white, punching,
adding to, removing from or blocking out the existing design
whether on the face, backside or edge of any card or cards. Any
deliberate crimping, warping, bending, cutting, trimming, shaving
or alteration by any means that would or could cause an advantage
for any player over other players, whether or not such advantage is
gained, is unlawful.
13. It shall be unlawful for any individual to use any mechanical or
electrical apparatus or other device so as to gain any advantage or
to gain information that would enable a player or dealer to deceive
others. Such devices include, but are not limited to, hold-outs, table
bugs, shiners, transmitters, receivers, punches, chemical solutions,
shading, roughing fluids, inks or dyes.
14. It shall be unlawful to claim, collect or take or attempt to claim,
collect or take money or anything of value in or from a gambling
game with intent to defraud or to claim, collect or take an amount
greater than the amount won.
15. It shall be unlawful for any individual to play partners or to
knowingly aid or abet another in any cheating action prohibited by
this section.
16. It shall be unlawful for any individual or group to use any of the
cheating techniques prohibited by this section or to cheat in any
manner whatever, whether or not such techniques are specifically
defined or are successful. The licensee shall immediately notify the
Chief of Police upon the detection of any individual suspected of
cheating.
17. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to fully cooperate with
security personnel, whether it is provided by a government policing
agency, a City contracted or administered service or is licensee
assigned, in the detection, apprehension and identification of those
§ 9-10.27 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.27
AO:357
§ 9-10.28. Seat Rental Fees. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
Seat rental rates shall be determined by the licensee. Such rates and the
effective dates thereof shall be posted in full and unobstructed view and in
appropriate locations within the card room.
§ 9-10.29. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #1877, § 1; Ord. #1962, § 6;
Ord. #1967, § 1; Ord. #2019, § 5]
The Council may, from time to time, enact rules and regulations governing
the operation of card clubs and the activity conducted in card clubs. The
Council reserves the right to adopt by resolution additional rules and
regulations which shall become effective immediately upon adoption.
Copies of such rules and regulations shall be given to the licensee on or
prior to the date of Council consideration. It shall be unlawful for the
licensee or other person or entity to violate any such rules or regulations.
individuals involved in cheating or fraudulent practices. Security
shall retain and deliver to the Chief of Police as evidence in arrests
or detention all playing cards and implements suspected of
involvement in cheating.
18. The Chief of Police, upon being notified by card club security that
an individual is being detained for cheating at play, shall respond to
the security office. The Chief of Police shall ascertain the identity of
those involved in the cheating and the circumstances involved and
decide what police action, if any, is deemed appropriate. The Chief
of Police shall assist as legally required in any citizen's arrest.
19. The licensee shall cause these rules to be reproduced and available
in the licensed premises.
a. It shall be unlawful for any City employee or City official to directly or
indirectly own, operate or have any interest, legal or equitable, in any
card, club or card club license. It shall be unlawful for any City
employee or City official to directly or indirectly conduct business with
or be employed in any manner whatever by a card club or card club
licensee. For purposes of this subsection, the term "conduct business"
shall include but not be limited to the provision of loans or any other
form of financing, sale or lease of any real or personal property, and the
provision of any services, supplies, goods or other materials, but shall
not include the conduct of business as a patron or customer in a manner
available to the general public.
b. The licensee shall be permitted to play those card games which are not
prohibited by local ordinance or state or federal law. Prior to operation,
the licensee shall complete a gaming directory which shall contain the
name, description and complete rules of play for each and every game
to be played within the card club premises. The gaming directory shall
be submitted to the City Manager and the Chief of Police for review and
approval prior to the card club being opened to the public. A
§ 9-10.27 COMPTON § 9-10.29
AO:358
§ 9-10.30. Non-Discrimination; Compliance with Laws and
Regulations. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
The licensee agrees for himself, and his successors and assigns, and every
successor in interest to the card club or any part thereof, as follows:
certification, signed by the licensee, shall be attached to the statement,
declaring under penalty of perjury that the licensee will add no games
nor change any rules of play without submitting a request for
modification of the gaming directory to the City Manager 30 days prior
to proposed implementation of the change. A certified copy of the
gaming directory signed by the City Manager and the Chief of Police
shall be maintained in the Office of the City Clerk and the security office
of the card club at all times.
c. Any individual who has a financial or management interest in the
Radisson Crystal Park Hotel and Casino shall not participate directly or
indirectly in any casino games on the premises.
The Radisson Crystal Park Hotel and Casino has adopted certain rules
and regulations that govern the following subject matter: purchasing,
revenue audit, accounting operations, cage, casino operations, table
games, and forms. The Radisson Crystal Park Hotel and Casino shall
follow its rules and regulations herein referred to and hereafter
adopted. The rules and regulations must be followed in a manner that
is consisted with City, state or federal law. The City must be notified in
writing immediately of any changes in any rules and regulations herein
referred to and hereafter adopted.
Any violation of this section shall constitute full and sufficient grounds
for the revocation or suspension of the license of the licensee at the sole
discretion of the City Council.
d. There is an authorized maximum limit of 300 gaming tables for each
licensee, subject to the approval of the Compton Fire Department.
a. The licensee shall not discriminate nor permit any discrimination in
connection with the operation of the card club, based upon race, sex,
marital status, color, creed, religion, national origin or ancestry.
b. The licensee shall use his best efforts to employ as many persons as
reasonably possible who live within the City, who reflect the
demographic makeup of the City, and who otherwise satisfy the
employment requirements of the card club. The licensee shall use the
facilities of the City to obtain employees and shall advertise in
publications that are circulated in the general area of the licensee's
location. The City shall cooperate with the licensee in seeking such
employees.
c. The licensee will from time to time, upon request by the City, furnish to
the City reasonable data concerning the residence and ethnic
§ 9-10.29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.30
AO:359
§ 9-10.31. Presumptions. [Ord. #1877, § 1]
The Council, in adopting the provisions of this section and regulating the
businesses to be operated by a licensee who permits the playing of the
games, hereby declares that the playing of games not prohibited by statute
is conducive to public morals when such games are played and conducted
according to all laws, rules, regulations, and provisions set forth herein,
and that in any proceedings to revoke or suspend a license, to abate
the business conducted thereunder, or to prosecute the licensee or his
employees for any act authorized thereby, it shall be presumed that such
acts are not unlawful and that such business is not a public or private
nuisance.
§ 9-10.32. Hours of Operation. [Ord. #2019, § 6]
A card club is authorized to conduct gambling operations 24 hours a day,
every day of the year. The licensee shall determine actual hours of operation
of the gambling establishment. The licensee shall post in full and
unobstructed view and in appropriate locations within and outside the
premises, the hours of operation of the gambling establishment.
§ 9-10.33. Wagering Limits. [Ord. #2019, § 7; Ord. #2154, § 1]
There shall be no mandatory limit on the amount wagered in any permitted
game. However, the licensee of a gambling establishment may impose
wagering limits on any game at the licensee's discretion. The licensee shall
post in full and unobstructed view and in appropriate locations within the
card room(s) any local house or table wagering limits.
§ 9-10.34. Security. [Ord. #2019, § 8]
Subject to the approval of the Chief of Police, the licensee shall implement,
provide and maintain a security plan that provides and maintains
reasonable security on its premises, including the parking areas. The
licensee shall employ a professional security staff, which shall monitor the
activities on the premises and in the parking areas. The licensee shall make
use of surveillance camera equipment and take reasonable steps to assure
that the patrons and visitors are not involved in criminal activity, or the
victims of criminal activity.
On an annual basis, a detailed security plan, including staffing and
deployment, shall be submitted to the Chief of Police for review and
approval. The licensee shall modify any security plan within 30 days after
receipt of written notification from the Chief of Police that the existing plan
is inadequate. All modifications shall be subject to the approval of the Chief
of Police prior to implementation.
background of persons employed by the card club and of the nature of
the efforts by the licensee to otherwise comply with this section.
§ 9-10.30 COMPTON § 9-10.34
AO:360
The Director of Security of the licensee shall maintain a close working
relationship with the Compton Police Department in meeting the
requirements of this section.
§ 9-10.35. Violations. [Ord. #1877, § 1; Ord. #2019, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any of the provisions
of this section or any of the rules and regulations set forth, established, or
promulgated hereunder.
§ 9-10.36. Penalties. [Ord. #1877, § 1; Ord. #1967, § 2; Ord. #2019,
§ 2]
Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor. The penalty for the violation
of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $1,000 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 9-11. CHARITY SOLICITATIONS.
§ 9-11.1. Definitions. [Ord. #856, § 6430]
As used in this section:
CONTRIBUTION — Shall mean and include "alms," "food," "clothing,"
"money," "property," or "donations under the guise of a loan of money or
property."
PHILANTHROPIC — Shall mean and include "charitable," "social service,"
"benevolent," "patriotic," "civic activity" or "purported philanthropic,"
"purported social service," "purported benevolent," "purported patriotic,"
"purported charitable" or "purported civic activity."
SOLICITATION — Shall mean not only a direct oral or written asking or
request but also the distribution, circulation, mailing to an address within
the City, posting or publishing of letters, posters, handbills, cards, folders,
pamphlets, books or circulars or the giving or making of an announcement
to the press or over the radio or telephone or telegraph concerning or
involving an appeal, assemblage, athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit,
campaign, contest, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition,
party, performance, picnic, sale or social gatherings which the public or
any portion thereof is requested to meet or patronize or to which the
public or any portion thereof is requested to make a contribution, by reason
of or because of any philanthropic (as defined in this section) purpose
or benefit connected with or involved in any such appeal, assemblage,
athletic, or sports event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, contest, dance, drive,
entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale or
social gathering. "Solicitation" also shall mean the sale of, offer to sell, or
attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance,
coupon, device, magazine, membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket
or thing whatsoever, in connection with which or when or where any appeal
is made for any philanthropic purpose whatever (as philanthropic is defined
in this section) or the name of any philanthropy or philanthropic association
§ 9-10.34 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-11.1
AO:361
(as philanthropic and association are so defined) is used or referred to in
any such appeal as an inducement or reason for the making of any such sale,
or when or where in connection with any such sale, offer to sell or attempt
to sell, any statement is made that the whole, or any part of the proceeds
from any such sale or selling will go to, or be donated to, any philanthropic
purpose or association as "philanthropic" and "association" are defined in
this section. A solicitation, as defined herein, shall be deemed completed
when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any
contribution (as defined in this section) or makes any sale herein referred
to.
§ 9-11.2. Misstatement; Deception; Fraud. [Ord. #856, § 6431]
No person shall make or perpetrate any misstatement, deception, or fraud
in connection with the solicitation of any contribution for any philanthropic
purpose or association.
§ 9-11.3. Written Authority Required. [Ord. #856, § 6431.1]
No person shall solicit any contribution in the name of, or on behalf of, any
philanthropic association, unless such person is authorized in writing by
such association to make such solicitation, aid authorization to be signed
by at least two officers of the association, and unless a copy of such
authorization has been previously filed with the City Clerk, which said
authorization and the copy thereof so filed with the City Clerk shall each
bear a specimen signature of the solicitor, and unless the solicitor shall have
such written authorization with him when making any such solicitation and
exhibit such authorization on request of the person solicited, or any police
officer. Such authorization shall expressly state on its face that it is valid
for a period of no longer than three months from the date of the insurance
thereof, which date shall be stated therein.
§ 9-11.4. Use of Name of Charity. [Ord. #856, § 6431.2]
No person shall use the name of any association in charge or control of
any charity, philanthropy or benevolent, social service or patriotic or civic
activity, in any solicitation without having written permission from two of
the officers of such association to so use its name of the name of, and/
or reference to, such charity, philanthropy or benevolent, social service or
patriotic or civic activity, which written permission shall be for a specific
event or a specified period of time, and a copy of which permission must be
filed with the City Clerk prior to any such use.
§ 9-11.5. Permit Required. [Ord. #856, § 6432]
No person shall authorize any other person to solicit any contribution for
any philanthropic purpose or association unless within one year, and at
least 10 days prior to the beginning of such solicitation, there shall be
obtained by such person or association a permit from the Chief of Police
of the City of Compton to so solicit. Such permit shall be issued by the
§ 9-11.1 COMPTON § 9-11.5
AO:362
Chief of Police upon the filing with the City Clerk of a Notice of Intention to
Solicit within the City of Compton, which Notice of Intention shall contain
complete information as follows:
a. The purpose of the solicitation and use of the contributions to be
solicited.
b. A specific statement, supported by reasons, and, if available, figures,
showing the need for the contribution proposed to be solicited.
c. The character of such solicitation and how it will be made or conducted.
d. The expenses of the solicitation, including all commissions, costs of
collection, salaries and other items, if any, regardless of from what
funds such expenses are payable.
e. What portion of the contributions collected as a result of the solicitation
will remain available for application to the specific purposes declared in
the Notice of Intention as the object of such solicitation.
f. A specific statement of all contributions collected or received by such
association or by such person filing such Notice of Intention within the
calendar year immediately preceding the date of such filing. The
expenditures or use made of such contributions, together with the
names and addresses of all persons or associations receiving salaries,
wages, compensation, commissions or emoluments from such
contributions and the respective amounts thereof.
g. The names and addresses of the officers and directors of any such
association for which the solicitation referred to in such Notice of
Intention is proposed therein to be made.
h. A statement that the signers of such Notice have read and are familiar
with provisions of this section and will require all solicitors engaged in
such solicitation to read and be familiar with the provisions of this
section prior to making any such solicitation. Whenever in the opinion
of the Chief of Police the Notice of Intention filed with the City Clerk
does not disclose sufficient information for the public concerning the
facts hereinabove required to be stated in such Notice of Intention, or
concerning the person or association making such solicitation or on
whose behalf such solicitation is made, then, upon the request of the
City Clerk therefor, there shall be filed, in writing, by such person or
association, with the City Clerk, within 48 hours after such request
made upon such person or association, such additional information as
may specifically be required by said Chief of Police upon the foregoing
subjects. Provided, however, that the Chief of Police, for good cause,
may extend the time for so filing such additional information. The
Notice of Intention and such additional information herein provided for
shall be signed by such person intending to make such solicitation, or if
such solicitation is to be made by or on behalf of any association, by at
least two officers of such association and shall be open to the inspection
of the public.
§ 9-11.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-11.6
AO:363
§ 9-11.6. Investigation by Chief of Police. [Ord. #856, § 6432.1]
In connection with any solicitation within the City for any contribution for
any philanthropic purpose with respect to which the Notice of Intention
hereinbefore provided shall have been filed with the City Clerk, the Chief of
Police shall have the power to investigate the allegations of such Notice of
Intention or any statements or reports filed with the City Clerk pertaining to
the solicitation and to have access and to inspect and make a copy of all the
books, accounts and papers of such person by or on whose behalf any such
solicitation is made, pertaining to such solicitation or the use or expenditure
of any contribution so solicited. The Chief of Police shall also have power
to investigate at any time the methods of making or conducting any such
solicitation.
The Chief of Police may revoke any permit issued as aforesaid upon being
satisfied that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this
section or any of the provisions of any other law or ordinance regulating
charities or philanthropic work in the City, or has made any misstatement
in the application for a charity permit or is found to be a person of immoral
character or that the holder of said permit or its agents have been guilty
of making false statements in order to procure donations or that the
contributions solicited are being diverted in whole or in part, improperly,
from the purpose for which such solicitations are proposed to be made.
§ 9-11.7. Appeal from Revocation; Procedure. [Ord. #856, § 6432.2]
Any applicant not satisfied with the revocation by the Chief of Police of
any charity permit is entitled to an appeal from the decision of the Chief
of Police to the City Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the
City Clerk a notice thereof, in writing, setting forth the grounds of appeal.
The appeal shall come on regularly for hearing before the City Council at
the next regular meeting after the filing of the notice thereof and shall be
heard at such meeting unless continued to a future date at the request of
the appellant. On the hearing of such appeal all facts connected with the
revocation of said permit shall be presented to the City Council and the City
Council may make such further investigation as it shall deem necessary and
may affirm or reverse the decision of the Chief of Police as the case may be;
and in the event the decision of the Chief of Police in revoking any permit
be reversed, the City Council shall order the Chief of Police to reinstate said
permit and the Chief of Police shall so do.
§ 9-11.8. Revocation of Permit Not Bar to Prosecution. [Ord. #856,
§ 6432.3]
The revocation of a permit as herein provided shall not be a bar to the
prosecution of the holder thereof for a violation of any provision of this
section.
§ 9-11.9. Information Cards. [Ord. #856, § 6433]
§ 9-11.6 COMPTON § 9-11.9
AO:364
a. No person shall solicit any contribution for any philanthropic purpose,
or in the name of, or on behalf of, any charitable association, unless
such person exhibits to every person solicited an Information Card to be
issued by the City Clerk, which Information Card shall bear a statement
that the City Clerk issued it only for the information of the public and
not as an endorsement of the solicitation, and shall set forth so much of
the pertinent facts stated in the Notice of Intention hereinabove
provided for, filed with said City Clerk or disclosed by any additional
information obtained by the City Clerk as shall, in the opinion of the
Chief of Police be of assistance to any person solicited for any such
contribution to enable such person to determine the nature and
worthiness of the purpose for which such solicitation is made. When
making any solicitation the solicitor shall read the Information Card to
the person solicited or present it to the person for his perusal, allowing
him sufficient opportunity to read the same, before accepting any
contribution so solicited. Provided that when any solicitation referred to
in this section is conducted by printed matter or published article, or
over the radio, or telegraph, such publicity shall contain data and
information required to be set forth on the Information Card. Provided
further, that when a campaign or drive for raising funds for any
philanthropic purpose is given general publicity through the press or
otherwise and when more than 25 persons serve as solicitors without
compensation for their services, the Chief of Police may, upon
application by the association or person filing the Notice of Intention
hereinbefore in Subsection 11-9.5 provided for, waive the requirements
of this section with respect to Information Cards and the filing of copies
of written authorizations (hereinabove provided for in Subsection
9-11.3) of the solicitors serving without compensation, if it shall be
proven to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police, and the Chief of Police
finds that the publicity concerning the solicitation fully informs the
general public and the persons to be solicited as to the facts required
herein to be set forth on the Information Card. Provided, further, that
upon receipt of additional information, which, in the opinion of the
Chief of Police, may render incorrect any statement set forth in any
such Information Card, the Chief of Police shall recall every such
Information Card, and amend or correct the same or shall issue in lieu
thereof a new Information Card amended or corrected in accordance
with such additional information, and upon receipt of notification to
return any Information Card for amendment or correction or new issue,
as above provided, the association or persons who filed the Notice of
Intention for the solicitation for which any such card was issued shall
present such recalled Information Card to the City Clerk within 24
hours from the time of receipt of the notification. Provided, further, that
upon request therefor by the Chief of Police, all Information Cards
issued under the provisions of this section shall be returned to the City
Clerk upon completion of the solicitation for which they are issued or at
the expiration of the period for which they are valid. Provided, further,
that the City Clerk may charge a fee for supplying Information Cards at
the rate of $0.05 per card.
§ 9-11.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-11.9
AO:365
§ 9-11.10. Report of Contributions to Be Filed. [Ord. #856, § 6434]
Every person soliciting any contributions within the City for any
philanthropic purpose shall file with the City Clerk within 30 days after a
demand therefor by the City Clerk, a report to the City Clerk stating the
contributions secured from or as a result of any solicitation, and in detail
all expenses of, or connected with, such solicitations, and showing exactly
for what uses and in what manner all such contributions were or are to be
disbursed or distributed. Every such report shall be made on forms to be
furnished by the City Clerk and signed by the persons or association filing
or obligated to file the Notice of Intention for such solicitation hereinbefore
provided for, and such report, if made by any association, shall be signed
by at least two officers thereof. Provided that when any such solicitation
is made by any such association, such report need be filed only by such
association and not by an individual solicitor engaged in any solicitation.
§ 9-11.11. Solicitation by Box or Receptacle. [Ord. #856, § 6435]
No person or association shall solicit nor shall any officer or member of any
association authorize any person to solicit, within the City, any contribution,
for any purpose whatever, by means of any box or receptacle, upon or in any
public park, street or alley, or upon or in any publicly owned or controlled
place or premises within the City except by written permission of the Chief
of Police.
§ 9-11.12. Accounting System. [Ord. #856, § 6436]
No person shall solicit any contribution for any charitable purpose for or on
behalf of any association, unless such association is maintaining a system of
accounting whereby all donations to it and all disbursements made by it are
entered upon the books or records of its treasurer or other financial officer.
§ 9-11.13. Exceptions. [Ord. #856, § 6437]
The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any solicitation
made upon premises owned or occupied by the association upon whose
behalf such solicitation is made, nor to any solicitation for the relief of
any individual specified by name at the time of the solicitation where the
entire amount collected, without any deduction whatever, shall be turned
over to the named beneficiary, nor to the solicitation or collection of gifts,
contributions, donations, or subscriptions or the promotion of any bazaar,
sale, or exhibition or any other act of appeal to the public for a charity made
by members of any religious or charitable organization which has been in
existence in, and which has regularly maintained headquarters or a place
b. No person or association shall solicit, nor shall any officer or member of
any association authorize any person to solicit within the City any
contribution for any of the purposes set forth in this section or for the
solicitation of funds for any purported charitable or philanthropic
organization by the use of telephones.
§ 9-11.9 COMPTON § 9-11.13
AO:366
of worship in, the City for a period of at least five years next preceding the
date on which such activity shall be begun.
§ 9-11.14. Emergencies; Waiver of Certain Provisions. [Ord. #856,
§ 6438]
The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to waive the whole or any part
of the provisions of Subsection 9-11.3 through Subsection 9-11.8, as and if
he shall deem such waiver necessary, when, and only in the case of, any
charitable association applies for such waiver for the purpose of meeting
any extraordinary emergency or calamity when time is of the essence for
needed succor or relief.
§ 9-11.15. Giving Fictitious Names. [Ord. #856, § 6439]
No person or association, in making any solicitation for any philanthropic
purpose or association within the City or in connection with any such
solicitation, shall use or give to any person or association a fictitious name,
or an alias, or any other than his or its own full, true, and correct name,
or make any such solicitation without at the time giving to the person or
association solicited for such contribution the full, true, and correct name
of the person or association soliciting, or impersonate any other person or
association in making any such solicitation.
§ 9-12. DANCES AND ENTERTAINMENT.
§ 9-12.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1211, §§ 6440 — 6440.2, §§ 6441.1 —
6441.3, §§ 6443 — 6443.3; Ord. #1366]
As used in this section:
BALLROOM DANCE HALL — Shall mean a place where there is a hotel or a
motel of 50 or more rooms and the ballroom is a part of the hotel or motel.
DANCE PERMIT — Shall mean a required permit issued by the City upon
the order of the Council in accordance with the provisions of this section.
ENTERTAINMENT — Shall mean any act, play, review, pantomime, scene,
song, dance act, song and dance act, or poetry recitation conducted or
participated in by any professional entertainer in or upon any premises to
which the public is admitted.
LICENSE DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the License Department of the City.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT — Shall mean and include a fashion or style show
except when conducted by a bona fide nonprofit club or organization as a
part of the social activities of such club or organization and when conducted
solely as a fund raising activity for charitable purposes. "Live
entertainment" shall not include:
a. Mechanical music alone; or
§ 9-11.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-12.1
AO:367
PRIVATE DANCE — Shall mean any dance:
PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER — Shall mean a person who entertains in
an establishment which has as its business, in whole or in part, the service
of food, beverages, or food and beverages, including, but not limited to,
alcoholic beverages, whether or not the owner of such establishment in
which such activity is performed employs or pays any compensation to such
person to perform such activity.
PUBLIC DANCE — Shall mean any dance at which attendance is not limited
to members and guests of a bona fide club or invited guests at private social
functions.
PUBLIC DANCE HALL — Shall mean any room, place, or space where a
public dance is held, carried on, or permitted.
THEATER — Shall mean a building, playhouse, room, hall, or other place
having a permanent stage upon which movable scenery and theatrical or
vaudeville or similar performances are given, with permanently affixed
seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view
of the stage, which primary function is to give such performances.
WAITER OR WAITRESS — Shall mean any person who serves food,
beverages, or food and beverages, including, but not limited to, alcoholic
beverages, in an establishment which has as its business, in whole or in
part, the service of such food or beverages, whether or not the owner of
such establishment in which such activity is performed employs or pays any
compensation to such person to perform such activity.
Part 1: Entertainment Permits
§ 9-12.2. Entertainment Permits Required. [Added by Ord. #1366,
§ 6441]
No person shall operate, conduct, or manage any public place or theater
where any form of live entertainment is provided or furnished or where
Instrumental music alone, except between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. when the provisions of Subsection 9-12.11 shall apply; or
b.
Dancing participated in only by customers; however, the provisions
of this subsection shall not exempt exhibition dancing by a person
receiving compensation for such exhibition dancing.
c.
a. Which is not advertised publicly;
b. To which the general public is not invited; and
For which no admission is charged, or offering is solicited or accepted,
or any collection is taken and where nothing of value is requested or
required for admission other than a membership in the group for and by
whom the dance is given and admission to which is limited to members
and guests of members of the group for and by whom the dance is
given.
c.
§ 9-12.1 COMPTON § 9-12.2
AO:368
any motion picture, still picture, or slide, the main subject of which is the
depiction of the human body, or any portion thereof, whether clothed or
unclothed, whether or not food or beverages are sold, offered for sale, or
given away, without a written permit from the Council.
§ 9-12.3. Accessories. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.4]
Every person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor who permits, counsels, or
assists any person to violate any provision of this section.
§ 9-12.4. Rules Enacted by Council. [Added by Ord. #1366,
§ 6441.5]
The Council shall enact such rules and conditions for the approval of
entertainment permits as are consistent with the protection of the public
health, peace, morals, safety, and welfare.
§ 9-12.5. Public Hearings. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.6]
When an application has been filed for an entertainment permit, other than
a renewal permit, and the required fee has been paid, the City Clerk shall
fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon by the Council. Not less
than seven days before the date of such hearing, the City Clerk shall:
a. Notify the applicant, in writing, of the date, time, and place of such
hearing;
b. Cause a notice of such hearing to be posted in a conspicuous place on
the property on which or in which it is proposed to conduct the
business; and
c. Cause a notice of such hearing to be published once in a newspaper of
general circulation printed, published, and circulated within the City.
The applicant shall bear all the expenses involved in the mailing,
printing, publishing, and posting of such notice.
Each such notice shall contain the data set forth in the application in
substantial form and shall advise the public that persons objecting to the
issuance of such entertainment permit may appear and be heard at the time of
the hearing before the Council.
At the specified time and place the Council shall hold a public hearing and shall
consider any written protests to the application and shall ascertain all facts
deemed by it to be relevant to the issuance of the permit. The Council may take
sworn testimony or make such investigations as it deems necessary or proper
in the premises.
In addition to the conditions set forth in this section, the Council may make
a part of any permit such conditions and restrictions as the Council deems
necessary and proper, and any permittee shall, upon receiving such permit,
sign a written agreement to abide by the terms and conditions in any such
permit.
§ 9-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-12.6
AO:369
§ 9-12.6. Application Forms. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.7; Ord.
#1445]
Except as otherwise provided in this section, an application for an
entertainment permit shall set forth the following:
a. The address of the location for which the permit is required, together
with the business name of such location;
b. The name and proposed business address of the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth
exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation, and the applicant shall
also set forth the date and place of incorporation and the names and
residence addresses of each of the officers, directors, and each
stockholder owning more than 10% of the stock of the corporation. If
the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name
and residence address of each of the partners, including limited
partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions
of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply;
c. Whether or not the applicant, or any officer or director or member of
the applicant, as the case may be, has ever been convicted of any crime
except misdemeanor traffic violations. In addition to the foregoing, any
corporate applicant whose securities have been conditioned by the
Commissioner of Corporations pursuant to the provisions of Section
25141 of the Corporations Code of the state shall state whether or not
any stockholder owning more than 10% of the stock of such corporation
has ever been convicted of any crime except misdemeanor traffic
violations. If any person named in this subsection has been so
convicted, a statement shall be made giving the name of the person so
convicted, the place and court in which the conviction was had, the
specific charge under which the conviction was obtained, and the
sentence imposed as the result of such conviction;
d. The names and addresses of the persons who have authority or control
over the place for which the permit is requested and a brief statement
of the nature and extent of such authority or control;
e. The name and address of each of the owners of the premises upon
which the permitted activity is to be conducted if the applicant is
leasing such premises from the owner;
f. Such information pertinent to the operation of the proposed activity,
including information as to the management, authority, control,
financial agreements, and lease arrangements, as the Council may
require of an applicant in addition to the other requirements of this
section. The examples set forth in this subsection are in explanation and
not in limitation of the information which the Council may require;
g. The address to which any notice, when required, is to be sent or mailed,
and the name and address of a person authorized to accept service or
process, if not otherwise set forth therein;
§ 9-12.6 COMPTON § 9-12.6
AO:370
§ 9-12.7. Verification of Applications. [Added by Ord. #1366,
§ 6441.8]
Every application for an entertainment permit shall be verified as provided
in the Code of Civil Procedure of the state for the verification of pleadings.
§ 9-12.8. Suspension or Revocation of Permits. [Added by Ord.
#1366, § 6441.9]
The City Manager, the Chief of Police, the License Collector, or the Council
on its own motion may file a complaint with the Council claiming a violation
of the permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this section and request
a hearing to suspend or revoke such permit.
Any such permit may be revoked or suspended at any time by the Council
after a public hearing, due notice of which shall be given in writing to
the permittee. Such notice shall be in writing and may either be served
personally or by registered mail, addressed to the permittee at the address
set forth in the application, and the posting of a notice on the premises
for which the permit was granted. At the hearing if the Council shall find
on evidence heard that the continuation of such entertainment does not or
will not comport with the public peace and welfare for any reason, or that
the entertainment has been conducted in an illegal, improper, or disorderly
manner, or that any condition or restriction of the permit has been violated,
or that the owner, operator, or person in charge thereof has violated or
permitted the infraction of any law of the state or of any section of this Code
in the conduct of the permitted activity, the Council may revoke, suspend,
or cancel the permit, and it shall be of no further force or effect, and all
charges, bonds, or securities deposited with the City in connection with the
operation shall be forfeited.
The hearing required for the suspension, cancellation, or revocation of a
permit shall be held as soon as possible and in no event more than 21 days
after a complaint is filed with the Council, and the Council shall determine
whether or not such permit shall be suspended or revoked within 21 days
after closing the public hearing on such complaint.
The conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction in the county of any
permittee or the responsible officers of any corporation or association of a
violation of any provision of this section or a violation of any permit which
h. The applicant shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by at least
12 persons who are, at the time of signing, residents of the City and
who know the applicant personally or know of the applicant's
reputation in the business community and have knowledge of the
applicant's good moral character or his reputation for peacefulness;
i. The nature of the business for which the permit is requested;
j. The personal description of the applicant; and
k. The fingerprints and thumbprints of the applicant.
§ 9-12.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-12.8
AO:371
may have been granted to any permittee pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall cause such permit to be automatically suspended, and notice
thereof shall be posted on the premises by the City, and written notice shall
be given to the permittee of such action.
§ 9-12.9. Noise Abatement. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.10; Ord.
#1445]
No person in control of a commercial or noncommercial public hall, private
club, or establishment normally open to the public shall permit the
entertainment conducted therein to be audible for a distance in excess of
five feet beyond the property lines of the premises, nor shall it conduct the
entertainment so that the noise is unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, or
a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility on the outside of the
premises.
§ 9-12.10. Posting Permits. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.11]
Entertainment permits shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises for which such permit is issued and shall remain posted at all
times.
§ 9-12.11. Hours. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.12; Ord. #1445;
Ord. #1707, § 1]
§ 9-12.12. Private Clubs. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.13]
No establishment issued a permit pursuant to the provisions of this section
may allow the premises to be used for the purpose of conducting a private
club between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
a. No entertainment, as defined in Subsection 9-12.1 of this section, may
be conducted in any establishment, club, structure, or place which is
open to members of the general public or which directly or indirectly
levies, collects, or receives an admission charge or membership fee
from those persons remaining on the premises between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., or which receives payment for or donations for
refreshment, beverages, or food served therein, between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. without the approval of the Council.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no permit or license
issued hereunder shall be construed as authorization for such live
entertainment between such hours without the approval of the Council.
b. In no event shall any live or mechanically produced entertainment be
conducted by an entertainer or allowed by any person in control of any
structure or establishment in which the entertainment is conducted in
violation of the provisions of Subsection 9-12.9.
§ 9-12.8 COMPTON § 9-12.13
AO:372
§ 9-12.13. Minors. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.14]
No person under 21 years of age shall enter, be, or remain in or on any
premises on or in which any live entertainment, as defined in Subsection
9-12.1, is presented. A permittee shall not permit such a person to enter, be,
or remain in or on any such premises.
§ 9-12.14. Persons Intoxicated or Under the Influence of Drugs.
[Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.15]
It shall be unlawful for any person who is intoxicated or under the influence
of any drug to appear in or be in any establishment issued a permit pursuant
to the provisions of this section. A person who conducts or assists in
conducting any such establishment shall not permit any intoxicated person
or person who is under the influence of any drug to appear, be, or remain at
such place.
§ 9-12.15. Exits. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.16]
No entertainment shall be permitted in any establishment where a permit is
required which does not provide unlocked doors with free and easy egress
while patrons are in the establishment.
§ 9-12.16. Visibility from the Street. [Added by Ord. #1366,
§ 6441.17]
There shall be no entertainment of any kind where an entertainment permit
is required which is visible at any time from the street, sidewalk, or
highway.
§ 9-12.17. Solicitation of Drinks. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.18]
No entertainment may be conducted in establishments where a permit is
required where employees solicit or accept drinks of alcoholic beverages
from customers.
§ 9-12.18. Gambling. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.19]
No entertainment may be conducted in any establishment where a permit is
required in which gambling in any form is permitted or tolerated or in which
there is kept any machine or other device designed or commonly used for
the purpose of gambling in any form.
§ 9-12.19. Solicitation of Trade. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.20]
No entertainment may be conducted in any establishment where a permit
is required at which solicitation of trade is made at or near the entrance,
either by personal solicitation or otherwise, by means of any device whereby
the voice of the person soliciting can be heard at or near such entrance.
§ 9-12.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-12.20
AO:373
§ 9-12.20. Indecent Performances. [Added by Ord. #1366,
§ 6441.21]
No entertainment may be conducted where an entertainment permit is
required in which any person participating directly or indirectly signs or
speaks any obscene or indecent words or performs any lewd or indecent
act.
§ 9-12.21. Lighting. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.22]
Every establishment issued a permit pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall be lighted throughout to an intensity of not less than three
footcandles during all hours of operation except while a floor show is in
progress.
§ 9-12.22. Parking Lots. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.23]
Every person operating an establishment issued a permit pursuant to the
provisions of this section who owns, operates, or controls any parking
lot adjacent to such establishment and used in connection therewith shall
adequately and uniformly light such parking lot to an intensity of not less
than two footcandles.
§ 9-12.23. Number of Employees. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.24]
At every establishment issued a permit pursuant to the provisions of this
section having a capacity of less than 200 persons, not less than two
employees, including one female, for the first 200 persons and one
additional employee for each additional 100 persons, up to 500 persons,
who could be accommodated, whether actually present or not, shall be
constantly in attendance during the entire time any entertainment is in
progress and shall devote their entire time and attention to the keeping
of order, the checking of the admission of minors, and seeing that all the
provisions of this section are complied with. The Council may require such
additional employees or guards on an individual basis as the Council deems
in the public interest.
§ 9-12.24. Adoption of Additional Rules. [Added by Ord. #1366,
§ 6441.25]
The Council may adopt rules and regulations relating to the conduct of
entertainment for which an entertainment permit of any type is required.
Such rules and regulations shall be such as may be proper or necessary
for the maintenance of public order, the orderly conduct of establishments
wherein entertainment is conducted, the better enforcement of the
provisions of this section relating to such establishments, or to assure that
the conduct of such entertainment will comport with the public welfare.
§ 9-12.20 COMPTON § 9-12.25
AO:374
§ 9-12.25. Police Inspections. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.26]
The Chief of Police or his officers shall inspect any and all establishments
issued a permit pursuant to the provisions of this section.
§ 9-12.26. Police Admission. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.27]
The Chief of Police and/or his officers shall be permitted by every permittee
to enter free of charge any establishment issued a permit pursuant to the
provisions of this section for the purposes of inspection.
§ 9-12.27. Manager. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.28]
All establishments issued a permit or required to have a permit pursuant
to the provisions of this section shall have a manager on the premises at
all times when entertainment is being conducted. Such manager shall be
registered with the Police Department and approved by the Council.
§ 9-12.28. Motion Pictures Prohibited. [Added by Ord. #1366,
§ 6411.29]
No person issued a permit or required to be licensed by the provisions of
this section shall show, project, or permit to be shown or projected in any
establishment issued a permit pursuant to the provisions of this section
or required to have such permit any motion picture, still picture, or slide,
the main subject of which is the depiction of the human body, or any
portion thereof, whether clothed or unclothed, unless and until the permit
of such establishment is specifically endorsed by the Council to permit such
showing.
§ 9-12.29. Violations Misdemeanors. [Added by Ord. #1366,
§ 6411.30]
A violation of any provision of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
§ 9-12.30. Constitutionality. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6441.31]
If the constitutionality of any provision or clause of this section, or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this section
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and
to this end the provisions of this section are declared to be severable.
Part 2: Dance Halls
§ 9-12.31. Permit Fees for Dance Halls. [Added by Ord. #1366,
§ 6443.5]
At the time of filing the application, the applicant shall pay to the License
Department the sum of $1,000 as a permit fee for the fiscal year and for
§ 9-12.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-12.31
AO:375
the consideration and investigation of the applicant. Such fee shall not be
refundable for any cause.
§ 9-12.32. Public Hearings for Dance Halls. [Added by Ord. #1366,
§ 6443.6]
When an application has been filed for a permit, other than a renewal
permit, and the required fee has been paid, the City Clerk shall fix a time
and place for a public hearing thereon by the Council. Not less than seven
days before the date of such hearing, the City Clerk shall:
§ 9-12.33. Application Forms. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6443.7]
In addition to the matters required by subsections 9-12.6 and 9-12.7, the
application for a permit for a public dance or ballroom dance hall shall set
forth the following:
a. Notify the applicant, in writing, of the date, time, and place of such
hearing;
b. Cause a notice of such hearing to be posted in a conspicuous place on
the property on which or in which it is proposed to hold the dance; and
c. Cause a notice of such hearing to be published once in a newspaper of
general circulation printed, published, and circulated within the City.
Each such notice shall contain the date set forth in the application in
substantial form and shall advise the public that persons objecting to the
issuance of the permit may appear and be heard at the time of the hearing
before the Council.
At the specified time and place the Council shall hold a public hearing and shall
consider any written protests to the application and shall ascertain all facts
deemed by it to be relevant to the issuance of the permit. The Council may take
sworn testimony or make such investigations as it deems necessary or proper
in the premises.
In addition to the conditions set forth in this section, the Council may make
a part of any permit such conditions and restrictions as the Council deems
necessary and proper, and any permittee shall, upon receiving such permit,
sign a written agreement to abide by the terms and conditions of any such
permit.
a. The number, dates, and times of the dances to be held under the permit;
b. A description of the physical facilities, designating the portion of the
building and facilities to be utilized by persons attending such dances,
including the nature and location of vehicle parking facilities;
c. The nature of any special policing or chaperoning of the dances; and
d. Whether the application is for a new permit or for the renewal of an
existing permit.
§ 9-12.31 COMPTON § 9-12.33
AO:376
§ 9-12.34. Floor Space. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6443.8; Ord.
#1459]
No permit shall be issued for the conduct of any dance hall, public dance, or
ballroom dance hall in any establishment having less than 1,000 contiguous
square feet exclusively reserved for dancing, such area to be exclusive
of hallway space. Dance hall floor space convertible to or reservable for
dancing may be added to exclusively reserved space to satisfy the stated
minimum area requirement of this subsection. If the space used for dancing
includes convertible or reservable space, the permit shall state such
conditions with respect to the reservation of the floor space for dancing as is
deemed necessary by the Council to assure the quiet enjoyment of adjoining
properties, seismic safety, parking requirements, the orderly conduct of the
dancing, and the general welfare and public interest.
§ 9-12.35. Unauthorized Dances and Dance Halls Prohibited;
Exceptions. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6443.9; Ord. #1459]
No person, firm, corporation, organization, or group of persons or
organizations, as owner, principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, shall
establish, organize, sponsor, provide, maintain, or conduct any public dance
or public dance hall, except that a permit for a single dance may be
issued upon the approval of the Council upon the payment by the applicant
of a permit fee. The permit fee shall be $100; provided, however, for
educational, fraternal, or charitable organizations, the fee shall be $50.
No person, firm, or corporation, as owner, principal, agent, employee, or
otherwise, shall establish, organize, sponsor, provide, maintain, or conduct
a ballroom dance hall unless a permit therefor is obtained from the City and
the dance is carried on in accordance with the provisions of this section.
The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the holding of any school
dance or any dance sponsored by the Parks and Recreation Department,
and the sponsors of such dances need not obtain a permit to hold such
dances, except as otherwise provided for in this Code.
§ 9-12.36. Issuance of Permits. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6443.10]
No permit shall be issued by the Council except upon a reasonable showing,
satisfactory to the Council, that the facilities proposed to be utilized are
suitable for such purposes, that the applicants are of good moral character
and reputation, that the requirements of this section and any other
provisions of this Code will be complied with by the applicant, and that
Each application for a dance permit shall be filed with the License Department
which shall immediately transmit the application, or a copy thereof, to the Chief
of Police for an investigation and report on the applicant. Likewise, copies of
such application shall be forwarded to the Chief of the Fire Department and the
Building Departments for reports on the locations and buildings described in
the application.
§ 9-12.33 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-12.36
AO:377
the issuance of the permit will not be contrary to the public interests and
welfare.
§ 9-12.37. Term of Permits: Nontransferable. [Added by Ord. #1366,
§ 6443.11]
Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be for a
period of one year and may be renewed as set forth in Subsection 9-12.41.
Any such permit granted shall be nontransferable, and no permittee shall
sell, assign, transfer, or convey such permit without the written consent and
approval of the Council.
§ 9-12.38. Violation of the Terms of Permits. [Added by Ord. #1366,
§ 6443.12]
No permittee, or the agents or employees thereof, shall violate or fail to
observe any term or condition of a permit issued by the Council.
§ 9-12.39. Suspension or Revocation of Permits. [Added by Ord.
#1366, § 6443.13]
The City Manager, the Chief of Police, the License Collector, or the Council
on its own motion may file a complaint with the Council claiming a violation
of the permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this section and request
a hearing to suspend or revoke such permit.
Any such permit may be revoked or suspended at any time by the Council
after a public hearing, due notice of which shall be given in writing to
the permittee. Such notice shall be in writing and may either be served
personally or by registered mail, addressed to the permittee at the address
set forth in the application, and the posting of a notice on the premises
for which the permit was granted. At the hearing if the Council shall find
on evidence heard that the continuation of such dance does not or will not
comport with the public peace and welfare for any reason, or that the dance
has been conducted in an illegal, improper, or disorderly manner, or that
any condition or restriction of the permit has been violated, or that the
owner, operator, or person in charge thereof has violated or permitted the
infraction of any law of the state or of any section of this Code in the conduct
of the permitted activity, the Council may revoke, suspend, or cancel the
permit, and it shall be of no further force or effect, and any and all fees,
charges, bonds, or securities posted with the City in connection with the
operation shall be forfeited.
The hearing required for the suspension, cancellation, or revocation of a
permit shall be held as soon as possible and in no event more than 21 days
after a complaint is filed with the Council, and the Council shall determine
whether or not such permit shall be suspended or revoked within 21 days
after closing the public hearing on such complaint.
§ 9-12.36 COMPTON § 9-12.39
AO:378
The conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction in the county of any
permittee or the responsible officers of any corporation or association of a
violation of any provision of this section or a violation of any permit which
may have been granted to any permittee pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall cause such permit to be automatically suspended, and notice
thereof shall be posted on the premises by the City, and written notice shall
be given to the permittee of such action.
§ 9-12.40. Noise Abatement. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6443.14]
No establishment shall permit the entertainment conducted therein to be
audible for a distance in excess of 25 feet from such establishment, nor
shall it conduct the entertainment so that the noise is unreasonably loud,
raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons within the area of
audibility on the outside of the premises.
§ 9-12.41. Renewal of Dance Permits. [Added by Ord. #1366,
§ 6443.15]
Thirty days before any permit required by the provisions of this section
expires the permittee may, in writing, request the renewal thereof,
providing no action is pending to revoke, cancel, or suspend the permit,
without the holding of a public hearing. A fee of $500 shall be paid at the
time the request for the renewal of the permit is filed with the Licensing
Department, which fee shall be for the processing of the application and the
investigation required by the Council.
§ 9-12.42. Alcoholic Beverages. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6443.16]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary, alcoholic
beverages may be served in a ballroom dance hall or at a place where public
dances are held when the sale and serving of such beverages are permitted
by state laws.
§ 9-12.43. Exits. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6443.18]
No public dance, public dance hall, or ballroom dance hall shall be
conducted where a permit is required which does not provide unlocked
doors with free and easy egress while patrons are in the establishment.
§ 9-12.44. Posting Permits. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6443.19]
Every permit and the current renewal thereof shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises where the dance for which such permit
is issued is conducted and shall remain so posted during all times.
§ 9-12.45. Police Inspections. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6443.20]
The Chief of Police or his officers shall inspect any and all establishments
issued a permit pursuant to the provisions of this section.
§ 9-12.39 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-12.46
AO:379
§ 9-12.46. Police Admission. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6443.21]
The Chief of Police and/or his officers shall be permitted by every permittee
to enter free of charge any establishment issued a permit pursuant to the
provisions of this section for the purposes of inspection.
§ 9-12.47. Persons Intoxicated or Under the Influence of Drugs.
[Added by Ord. #1366, § 6443.22]
It shall be unlawful for any person who is intoxicated or under the influence
of any drug to appear in or be in any establishment issued a permit pursuant
to the provisions of this section. A person who conducts or assists in
conducting any such establishment shall not permit any intoxicated person
or person who is under the influence of any drug to appear, be, or remain at
such place.
§ 9-12.48. Number of Employees. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6443.23]
At every public dance or dance hall having a capacity of less than 200
persons, not less than two adult employees, including one female, for the
first 200 persons and one additional employee for each additional 100
persons, up to 500 persons, who could be accommodated, whether actually
present or not, shall be constantly in attendance during the time any
dance is in progress. Such employees shall be of good moral character and
reputation and shall be employed by the permittee or person in charge
of any public dance or dance hall, and each such employee shall devote
his entire time and attention to keeping order at any dance hall and shall
display appropriate identification to his official status. Such employees shall
specifically check the admission and presence of minors, check disorderly
conduct, enforce the provisions of this section, and require compliance with
the conditions of any permit issued for such dance.
Not less than one able-bodied male adult employee shall be employed by
the permittee or person in charge of any public dance or dance hall as a
parking lot attendant or custodian, which employee shall be continuously
on duty at such parking lot when any dance is in progress. Such employee
shall devote his entire time and attention to keeping order in the parking
lot and shall display appropriate identification of his official status. He shall
specifically enforce the provisions of this section and require compliance
with the provisions of any permit issued for the dance which the parking lot
serves.
No person shall be in or about any public dance or public dance hall for the
purpose of acting as a dance partner with the patrons of such place for hire
on a salary, percentage, or in any other method of employment.
§ 9-12.49. Lighting. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6443.24]
Every public dance hall or ballroom dance hall and every place where any
dance regulated by this section is held shall be lighted throughout to the
§ 9-12.46 COMPTON § 9-12.49
AO:380
intensity of not less than three footcandles during all times when any dance
is being held except while a floor show is in progress.
§ 9-12.50. Adoption of Additional Rules. [Ord. #1366, §§ 6443.25]
The Council may from time to time adopt rules and regulations governing
public dances and dance halls, which shall be by resolution and which may
be made a part of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this
section. Such applicant, or person in charge of any public dance or dance
hall shall comply with such rules and regulations as the Council may adopt
by resolution. Upon the adoption of any such rules or regulations, a copy
of such resolution shall be forwarded by registered mail to each applicant
holding such permit.
§ 9-12.51. Approval of Employees. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6443.26]
Before any employee required by the provisions of this section is employed,
the name of such person shall be registered by the Chief of Police, and
unless such employee is approved by the Council for such employment, he
shall not be employed and shall not constitute an employee required by the
provisions of this section.
§ 9-12.52. Parking Lots. [Added by Ord. #1366, § 6443.27]
Every person conducting any dance or dance hall shall provide parking for
motor vehicles as required by the Council. All parking lots so provided shall
be lighted, and such lights shall be sufficient to permit the reading of a clean
automobile license plate at a distance of 25 feet or, in the alternative, shall
have a light intensity of not less than two footcandles.
§ 9-12.53. Violations Misdemeanors. [Added by Ord. #1366,
§ 6443.28]
A violation of any provision of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
§ 9-12.54. Minors. [Ord. #856, § 6445]
No person operating a public dance hall or a public dance in the City shall
permit any person under the age of 18 years to be present in any public
dance hall or to participate in any public dance at any time between 6:00
p.m. and 1:00 a.m. following unless accompanied by the parent or legal
guardian of such person.
§ 9-12.55. Teenage Dances. [Added by Ord. #991, § 6445.1]
Except as provided in this section, it is a misdemeanor for any person,
parent or guardian to permit any person under the age of 18 years to enter,
be or dance in any public dance or dance club, unless accompanied by
parent or legal guardian.
§ 9-12.49 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-12.55
AO:381
a. A permit to conduct and sponsor a teenage dance at which minors
within the ages hereinafter specified may be in attendance may be
issued to an adult sponsoring group subject to the terms and conditions
of this section.
b. Permits secured under the terms and conditions of this section shall be
granted with fee waived.
c. A teenage dance as used in this section shall mean a nonprofit public
dance held or conducted exclusively for minors between the ages of 13
and 19 years of age, inclusive.
A dance is a nonprofit dance within the meaning of this subsection if
the dance expenses incurred in connection therewith are reasonable
and net receipts of any admission fees or contributions collected in
connection therewith are expended exclusively for child welfare or
charitable purposes.
d. A permit for a teenage dance shall be issued only to an adult sponsoring
group which has assumed full responsibility for the event, its direction
and its funds, and which has been recommended by the City Police
Department and granted by the City Council. Those social agencies
recommended by the City Police Department may be granted a permit
to conduct and sponsor teenage dances, which shall be valid for a
period not to exceed one year.
e. The application shall specify the name and address of the sponsoring
group and contain the names and addresses of its officers. It shall
contain the dates upon which and the address of the place where the
dance is to be held, the approximate attendance expected and the
minimum number of adult supervisors who will be in attendance at all
times during which dancing is in progress. Not more than 20% of the
total number of persons admitted as participants to any teenage dance
may be over 19 years of age.
f. The application shall be accompanied by adequate certification by the
Building Department and Fire Department that the place where the
dance is to be held is reasonably adequate for the purpose and
conforms with existing safety and fire ordinances and specifying the
maximum number of persons that may safely be accommodated at the
dance.
g. All places where teenage dances are held must, at all times when open
for dancing, be adequately lighted and the volume of illumination must
not be less than one footcandle in all parts of the building accessible to
participants. Any off-street parking facilities made available for the use
of participants in any teenage dance shall also be adequately lighted.
h. No minor admitted to a teenage dance will be permitted to leave and
reenter the dancing premises during the course of the evening, and no
passout checks shall be issued unless required by the physical
arrangements of the premises.
§ 9-12.55 COMPTON § 9-12.55
AO:382
§ 9-12.56. Vagrants. [Ord. #856, § 6446.2]
No prostitute, male or female procurer, vagrant, bootlegger, or other lewd
or dissolute person, or any person who has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted, within one year, of being a vagrant, shall be present in any public
dance hall or at any public dance.
§ 9-12.57. Taxi Dancers. [Ord. #856, § 6446.3]
No person shall be employed for compensation or promise of compensation
of any nature whatsoever at any public dance or public dance hall to act as
a dancing partner for visitors or guests or anyone in the dance hall.
§ 9-12.58. Registry. [Ord. #856, § 6447]
Every person seeking admission to a public dance hall or public dance shall,
upon the request of the manager, proprietor, doorkeeper, or managing agent
of the proprietor of such public dance hall or public dance, register his true
name, age, and address in his own handwriting.
§ 9-12.59. Inspections. [Ord. #856, § 6448]
All public dance halls, and all places appurtenant thereto, shall be at all
times, and without any charge, open to the members of the Dance Hall
Committee of the Council and to the Chief of Police and his deputies or
assistants.
i. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, consumed or available on the
premises in or about which any teenage dance is held. Admission to a
teenage dance shall be denied to any person showing evidence of
drinking or who has any alcoholic beverage on his person.
j. All dancing shall be of an acceptable social standard, and the dress of
participants must be in conformity with accepted standards. Sufficient
adult supervision shall be provided at all teenage dances to ensure that
accepted standards of social conduct are followed.
k. No dancing at any teenage dance shall be permitted after the hour of
12:00 midnight unless the permit issued for that dance specifically
authorizes the continuance of dancing for a later hour. Such
continuances may be authorized in the discretion of the issuing agency.
l. Any person who loiters around or about the premises at which a
teenage dance is being conducted is guilty of a misdemeanor.
m. The provisions of this section relative to securing a permit shall not
apply to any teenage dance conducted and sponsored by any agency or
department of any City, county, school district or other political
subdivision of this state which is normally engaged in youth or childserving
activities.
§ 9-12.55 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-12.60
AO:383
§ 9-12.60. Outside Illumination. [Ord. #856, § 6449]
The Council Committee may order the outside of any dance hall illuminated
at the expense of the management.
§ 9-13. FORTUNE TELLING.
§ 9-13.1. Application; Information Required. [Ord. #856, § 6493]
No license can be granted for fortune telling until an application has been
filed with and approved by the City Council.
The application shall be accompanied by an investigation fee of $50, and in
addition to the information required by § 9-4 the applicant shall furnish the
following information to the City Council:
§ 9-14. GASOLINE PRICE SIGNS.
§ 9-14.1. Signs Required. [Added by Ord. #1448, § 6419.1; Ord.
#1628, adopted 8-11-1981, § 2]
Every person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation offering for
sale or selling any gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel to the public from
any place of business in the City shall post or display a sign which is clearly
visible from any street or highway adjacent to such place of business, which
sign indicates the actual price per gallon, including all taxes, at which each
grade of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel is currently being offered for
sale or sold.
a. The number of persons to be employed therein.
b. A detailed account of the manner in which the business will be
conducted.
c. Affirmative proof that the conduct of the business at the location
desired will not be detrimental to the values of surrounding properties
and will not detrimentally affect the health, morals, comfort and
general welfare of the community.
a. Liters. Every person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation
selling, offering for sale or advertising for sale at retail to the general
public any gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel from any place of
business in this City by use of or through or from any dispensing
apparatus and displaying any sign showing the actual total price per
liter shall, in addition, display in a conspicuous fashion in full view of
the retail purchaser in accordance with provisions of this Chapter a
gallon-to-liter conversion table showing quantity and price equivalents;
and this requirement shall become effective within three months of the
date this section was adopted and approved. [August 11, 1981]
b. Air and Water Apparatuses. Every person, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation selling, offering for sale or advertising for
§ 9-12.60 COMPTON § 9-14.1
AO:384
§ 9-14.2. Advertising Unavailable Products. [Added by Ord. #1448,
§ 6419.2]
No person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation shall advertise,
either in connection with the sign required by the provisions of Subsection
9-14.1 or otherwise, any grade of gasoline, motor fuel or other similar
product which is not immediately available for sale to the public on the
business premises.
§ 9-14.3. Conflicts With State Laws. [Added by Ord. #1448,
§ 6419.3]
Any sign posted or displayed pursuant to the provisions of Subsection 9-14.1
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of Article 8 of Chapter 7 of
Division 8 (Sections 20880, et seq.) of the Business and Professions Code of
the state.
§ 9-15. MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND TECHNICIANS56
§ 9-15.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
sale at retail to the general public any gasoline or other motor vehicle
fuel from any place of business in this City by use of or through or
from any dispensing apparatus shall maintain on its premises, in a place
readily accessible to the public, air and water dispensing apparatuses
operative during business hours; and this requirement shall become
effective within six months of the date this section was adopted and
approved. [August 11, 1981]
a. It is the purpose and intent of this section to provide for the orderly
regulation of massage establishments and massage technicians, as
defined herein, in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare
by providing certain minimum building, sanitation and health standards
for massage establishments and by providing certain minimum
qualifications for the operators of massage establishments and for
massage technicians.
b. It is the purpose and intent of this section to address the negative
impacts identified in the legislative findings to reduce or prevent
neighborhood blight, to protect and preserve the quality of the City's
neighborhoods and commercial districts, to protect the City's retail
trade, to maintain property values, to protect and preserve the quality
of urban life, to deter criminal activity, to enhance enforcement of
criminal statutes relating to the conduct of operators and employees of
the establishments and to promote the health, security and sanitation of
customers.
c. It is the purpose and intent of this section to establish reasonable
requirements and standards to ensure the protection of the health,
56.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 856.
§ 9-14.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-15.1
AO:385
§ 9-15.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
As used in this section, the words and phrases hereinafter set forth shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context clearly
requires to the contrary.
APPLICANT — Shall mean any person who applies for a license to operate
a massage establishment or a permit to act as a massage technician.
CHIEF OF POLICE — Shall mean the Chief of the Compton Police
Department or designee, assistant or agent.
CITY — Shall mean the City of Compton and its representatives.
COUNCIL — Shall mean the City Council of the City of Compton.
LICENSE — Shall mean the business license to operate a massage
establishment as required by this section.
LICENSEE — Shall mean the person to whom a license has been issued for
the operation of a massage establishment and/or in matters of operation,
administration, organization, record-keeping, monitoring or enforcement all
designees, agents and employees.
MANAGERIAL PERSONNEL — Shall mean the designee(s) of the owner
or operator responsible for managing the operation of the massage
establishment, keeping records, supervising massage technicians and other
employees and ensuring that the massage establishment conforms to the
provisions of this section.
MASSAGE — Shall mean any method of treating any of the external parts of
a person, including but not limited to rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping,
pounding, vibrating or stimulating with the hands, feet, elbows or any
other part of the body, with or without the aid of any instrument or device
and with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniment,
antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment or other similar
preparations. The term "massage" shall include, but is not limited to,
acupressure, shiatsu, alcohol rubs, Russian, Swedish or Turkish Baths,
showers and other similar actions.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean a place where massage is
performed or offered. It includes any place, including a private club or
organization, wherein any person engages in, conducts or carries on, or
permits others to engage in, conduct or carry on, massages, baths or health
treatments involving massage or baths as the principal functions.
safety and welfare of both customers and employees of massage
establishments, to reduce the opportunities for acts of prostitution
and other illegal activities from occurring in these establishments, to
minimize confusion caused by misleading and deceptive advertising
and to provide for effective utilization of public safety resources
commensurate with the level of criminal activities.
§ 9-15.1 COMPTON § 9-15.2
AO:386
MASSAGE TECHNICIAN — Shall mean any person who administers to
another person a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, electric or
magnetic massage procedure or other similar procedure.
MUNICIPAL CODE — Shall mean the Compton Municipal Code.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person who manages or who is otherwise
primarily responsible for the operation of a massage establishment, and
shall include each and every person responsible for establishing personnel
policy, hiring personnel, ensuring that the massage establishment complies
with the requirements of this section and of other laws and of establishing
and administering any and all policies established by the licensee for the
operation of the massage establishment.
PERMIT — Shall mean the permit to engage in the activities of a massage
technician as required by this section.
PERMITTEE — Shall mean the person to whom a permit has been issued for
engagement in the activities of a massage technician.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual or combination of individuals, firm,
association, partnership, corporation or joint venture and shall include
owners, partners, whether full or limited, directors and stockholders of any
of the foregoing.
RECOGNIZED SCHOOL OF MASSAGE — Shall mean any school or
institution of learning which teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession
or work of massage, which school or institution complies with California
Education Code Section 94310 or 94311 and which requires a resident
course of study of at least 300 hours over a period of at least three months
before the students shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of
graduation. Any school or institution of learning offering or allowing
correspondence course credit not requiring actual attendance at class shall
not be deemed a "recognized school of massage."
§ 9-15.3. Massage Establishment License Required. [Ord. #2031,
§ 2]
§ 9-15.4. License Application. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or allow to be operated a
massage establishment in or upon any premises within the City unless a
valid business license shall have been issued for such operation in
accordance with the provisions set forth in this section. All massage
establishments shall be required to obtain any other licenses or permits
required by local, state and federal law.
b. There shall be a maximum of one massage establishment license
granted for every 30,000 residents within the City of Compton.
a. Application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall be
made to the Chief of Police. A nonrefundable fee of $600 shall be
required when the application is submitted. This fee shall be used to
§ 9-15.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-15.4
AO:387
defray, in part, the costs of investigation and reports and is not made in
lieu of any other fees or taxes required under the Municipal Code.
b. Submittal of an application does not authorize the operation of a
massage establishment until such license has been granted.
c. Each application for a license shall include the following information:
1. The exact name, including any fictitious name, under which the
massage establishment is to be operated.
2. The present or proposed address where the massage establishment
is to be conducted.
3. A description of all service(s) to be provided.
4. The full name of all applicants, including maiden names, all
married names, aliases, nicknames and any other names used.
5. The type of ownership of the business — i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise.
6. If the applicant is a corporation, a certified copy of its articles of
incorporation and any authorization to issue stock.
7. If the applicant is a partnership or limited partnership, a certified
copy of the partnership agreement.
8. Each applicant, including officers, directors and/or stockholders
holding 10% or more of the stock in the case of a corporate
applicant, shall furnish the following information:
(a) The present and two previous residence addresses of each
applicant.
(b) The names and present residence addresses of at least five
bona fide residents of the state who will attest that each
applicant is of good moral character.
(c) Written proof of the age of each applicant.
(d) Each applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, driver's
license number and Social Security number.
(e) The business, occupation or employment of each applicant for
the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the
application.
(f) Each applicant's business license history as it relates to
massage establishments or similar businesses; whether the
applicant has had such a license revoked or suspended in this
or any other state and the reason therefor and the applicant's
business activity or occupation subsequent to said suspension
or revocation.
§ 9-15.4 COMPTON § 9-15.4
AO:388
(g) A complete listing of any conviction, forfeiture of bond or plea
of nolo contendere upon any criminal violation or City
ordinance violation (except minor traffic violations) and the
place and court in which such conviction, plea or forfeiture was
heard, the specific charge and the sentence imposed as a result
thereof.
(h) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime
specified in Section 51032 of the California Government Code
and, if so, the circumstances thereof and the sentence therefor.
(i) A statement that each applicant has read the provisions of this
section, understands same and agrees to abide by all rules and
regulations contained herein.
9. Concurrent with filing the application, each applicant shall be
fingerprinted and photographed by the Chief of Police.
10. A complete plot plan and floor plan of the massage establishment
showing the following information:
(a) A professionally prepared plot plan and floor plan drawn to 1/8
inch scale and 1/4 inch scale, respectively, showing all property
boundary lines and off-street parking; and
(b) Location of all counters, equipment, partitions, sinks,
plumbing, walls, electrical and any other alteration or
improvements necessary for the operation of the massage
establishment.
11. A map of the subject property and all properties within 1,000 feet
of its exterior boundary. The map shall be drawn to scale and shall
show all street names, lot lines and street addresses as well as the
land use of each individual parcel.
12. A list of all businesses owned or controlled by each applicant within
1,000 feet of the massage establishment.
13. The name and residence addresses of the owner of the real
property where the massage establishment is to be conducted; a
copy of the lease or rental agreement if the applicant is not the
legal owner and a notarized acknowledgment from the owner that a
massage establishment will be located thereon.
14. A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all
managerial personnel, massage technicians, employees and
attendants at the massage establishment.
15. Authorization for the City to seek information and conduct an
investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the
application and the qualifications of each applicant for the license.
§ 9-15.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-15.4
AO:389
§ 9-15.5. License Procedures. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
§ 9-15.6. Issuance of License. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
16. Such other identification and information as may be necessary to
verify the truth of the matters herein specified as required to be set
forth in the application.
d. Falsification of any of the above information shall be deemed sufficient
reason for denial of the application.
a. The Chief of Police shall have a reasonable time in which to investigate
the license application and the background of each applicant and the
premises for the protection of the public interests. The Chief of Police
shall approve or deny the license application in the manner provided
herein.
b. The Police Department shall conduct an investigation to verify the facts
contained in the license application and any supporting data. The
investigation shall be completed and a report and recommendation
made in writing to the Chief of Police. The Building and Planning
Department, the Fire Department and the Los Angeles County Health
Department shall inspect the premises proposed to be devoted to the
massage establishment and shall make separate recommendations to
the Chief of Police concerning compliance with the provisions set forth
in this section. The applicant shall pay all fees associated with the
required inspections.
c. The Chief of Police shall notify the applicant of the approval or denial of
the license application within 90 days of its submittal. The Chief of
Police shall deliver the notification to the applicant by registered or
certified mail at the address as shown on the license application. The
foregoing ninety-day deadline is directory only; failure to meet such
deadline shall not affect the power of the Chief of Police to deny or
otherwise act on such license application.
d. In the event the license application is approved, the Chief of Police shall
include an authorization to issue the business license to operate a
massage establishment for submittal to the City Treasurer.
e. In the event the license application is denied, the Chief of Police shall
include a statement of the grounds for the decision in the notice to each
applicant, and each applicant shall have the right of appeal within the
time limits set forth in Subsection 9-15.14.
a. The Chief of Police shall approve an authorization to issue the business
license to operate a massage establishment if he finds:
1. The required fees have been paid;
2. The application conforms in all respects to the provisions set forth
in this section;
§ 9-15.4 COMPTON § 9-15.6
AO:390
§ 9-15.7. Massage Technician Permit Required. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a massage technician unless
a valid permit has been issued for such activity in accordance with the
provisions set forth in this section.
3. The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the
application;
4. The applicant has not been convicted of an offense specified in
Section 51032 of the California Government Code;
5. The applicant has not had a massage establishment license or
massage technician permit or similar license or permit denied or
revoked for cause by the City or any other municipality located in
or out of this state within five years prior to the date of this
application, nor has the applicant or any employee of the applicant
at a massage establishment operated by the applicant engaged in
any actions which, had the applicant been operating under a
license or permit, would have constituted grounds for revocation or
suspension of such license or permit within five years of the date of
the application. The Chief of Police may waive compliance with this
paragraph for applications submitted under subsections 9-15.26 or
9-15.28;
6. The applicant is a minimum of 21 years of age;
7. The proposed massage establishment is not located within a
1,000-foot radius of any other massage establishment, any
residentially zoned property, any church, school or park; and
8. The proposed massage establishment would comply with all
applicable laws, including, but not limited to, building, fire,
electrical, plumbing, health and zoning requirements and
standards.
b. Failure to obtain the business license to operate a massage
establishment within 180 days from the date the Chief of Police
approved the authorization to issue the license shall result in its
automatic expiration and a new application shall be required.
c. The City Treasurer shall issue the business license to operate a
massage establishment if he finds:
1. The Chief of Police has authorized the issuance of a license and the
authorization is current;
2. A certificate of occupancy for the proposed massage establishment
location has been approved in accordance with § 30-33 of the
Municipal Code; and
3. All required fees have been paid.
§ 9-15.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-15.8
AO:391
§ 9-15.8. Permit Application. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
§ 9-15.9. Permit Procedures. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
a. Application for a permit to act as a massage technician shall be made to
the Chief of Police. A nonrefundable fee of $300 shall be required when
the application is submitted. This fee shall be used to defray, in part, the
costs of investigation and reports and is not made in lieu of any other
fees and taxes required under the Municipal Code.
b. Submittal of the application does not authorize performing as a
massage technician until such permit has been granted.
c. Each applicant for a permit shall furnish all the information required by
Subsection 9-15.4c8 and shall be fingerprinted and photographed by
the Chief of Police.
d. In addition, each applicant shall furnish the following information:
1. A certificate from a medical doctor licensed to practice in the State
of California stating, under penalty of perjury, that the applicant
has been examined within 30 days immediately preceding the date
of application and found to be free of any contagious or
communicable disease of a type which could be transmitted as a
result of performing the massage service.
2. A diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school of
massage.
3. Proof that the applicant has qualified for, taken and passed the
National Certification Examination given by the National
Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork
(NCETMB).
4. The name and address of the massage establishment at which the
applicant proposes to work.
5. Such other identification and information as may be necessary to
verify the truth of the matters herein specified as required to be set
forth in the application.
e. Falsification of any of the above information shall be deemed sufficient
reason for denial of the application.
a. The Chief of Police shall have a reasonable time in which to investigate
the permit application and the background of the applicant for the
protection of the public interests. The Chief of Police shall approve or
deny the permit application in the manner provided herein.
b. The Chief of Police shall notify the applicant of the approval or denial of
the permit application within 60 days of its submittal. The Chief of
Police shall deliver the notification to the applicant by registered or
certified mail at the address as shown on the permit application. The
§ 9-15.8 COMPTON § 9-15.9
AO:392
§ 9-15.10. Issuance of Permit. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
§ 9-15.11. Registration Cards. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
Every licensee and every person employed at a massage establishment
including managerial and security personnel, clerks, attendants and
massage technicians shall obtain a registration card, containing a current
foregoing sixty-day deadline is directory only; failure to meet such
deadline shall not affect the power of the Chief of Police to deny or
otherwise act on such permit application.
c. In the event the permit application is approved, the Chief of Police shall
include an authorization to issue a massage technician permit for
submittal to the City Treasurer.
d. In the event the permit application is denied, the Chief of Police shall
include a statement of the grounds for the decision in the notice to the
applicant, and the applicant shall have the right of appeal within the
time limits set forth in Subsection 9-15.14.
a. The Chief of Police shall approve an authorization to issue the permit to
act as a massage technician if he finds that the applicant complies with
all the requirements of Subsection 9-15.6a1 through 9-15.6a6 and in
addition finds:
1. The applicant has furnished an acceptable medical certificate in
compliance with Subsection 9-15.8d1;
2. The applicant has furnished an acceptable diploma or certificate of
graduation from a recognized school of massage; and
3. The applicant has passed the National Certification Examination
for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork (NCETMB).
b. Failure to obtain the permit to act as a massage technician within 180
days from the date the Chief of Police approved the authorization to
issue the permit shall result in its automatic expiration and a new
application shall be required.
c. The City Treasurer shall issue the permit to act as a massage technician
if he finds:
1. The Chief of Police has authorized the issuance of a permit and the
authorization is current; and
2. All required fees have been paid.
d. The permit shall include the name and address of the massage
establishment listed in the permit application and shall only authorize
the permittee to perform massage services at that massage
establishment.
§ 9-15.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-15.11
AO:393
photograph, issued by the Chief of Police. The card shall be worn and plainly
visible at all times the person is on the premises.
There shall be an initial fee of $75 for each registration card. The initial
registration card fee shall be included in the application fee for licenses and
permits.
All registration cards shall be renewed annually. There shall be a fee of $25
for the renewal or replacement of any registration card.
§ 9-15.12. Annual Renewal. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
§ 9-15.13. Massage Technician Trainee. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
No massage technician trainee shall perform massages, baths or health
treatments to or upon a member of the general public while on the premises
of a licensed massage establishment.
§ 9-15.14. Appeal. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
a. Every license to operate a massage establishment and permit to act as a
massage technician shall be renewed annually in accordance with § 9-2
of the Municipal Code.
b. Thirty days prior to expiration of a license the licensee shall apply to the
Chief of Police for renewal of the registration cards for all managerial
and security personnel as well as all other employees who are not
massage technicians.
c. Thirty days prior to expiration of a permit the permittee shall submit to
the Chief of Police the following items:
1. A certificate from a medical doctor licensed to practice in the State
of California stating, under penalty of perjury, that the permittee
has been examined within 30 days immediately preceding the date
the renewal request was submitted and found to be free of any
contagious or communicable disease of a type which could be
transmitted as a result of performing the massage service.
2. An update on the information contained in the original permit
application setting forth any changes thereto.
3. An application for renewal of the permittee's registration card.
d. If the licensee or permittee has failed to submit the items required
herein within 30 days following the annual anniversary date of the
permit, then the underlying license or permit shall be null and void and
shall automatically be revoked.
a. In the event a license or permit application has been denied or a license
or permit suspended or revoked the applicant shall have the right to
appeal such decision to the Council. An appeal must be filed, in writing,
with the City Clerk within 15 days after the notice of denial, suspension
§ 9-15.11 COMPTON § 9-15.14
AO:394
§ 9-15.15. Massage Establishment Facilities. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
Every massage establishment shall maintain facilities meeting the following
requirements:
or revocation is sent by registered or certified mail to the applicant and
shall state the grounds wherefore and wherein the Chief of Police failed
to conform to the requirements of this section. An appeal which is not
filed within the time prescribed or which does not set forth the grounds
upon which it is based shall not constitute an appeal in compliance with
this section.
b. Upon the receipt of an appeal from the action of the Chief of Police, the
Council shall set the matter for a hearing and shall serve a notice of the
time and place thereof by registered or certified mail at the address as
shown on the appeal at least 15 days in advance of the hearing.
c. The Council may affirm the denial, revocation or suspension, or order
the issuance or reinstatement of any license or permit upon adoption of
findings in support of its decision. The determination of the Council
shall be final.
a. Compliance with all Municipal Code requirements.
b. A minimum distance of 1,000 feet shall be maintained from any other
massage establishment, residential zone, church, school or park.
c. Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of the Uniform Building Code. To allow for adequate
ventilation in cubicles, rooms and areas provided for patron use which
are not serviced directly by required window or mechanical systems of
ventilation, partitions shall be constructed so that their height does not
exceed 75% of the floor-to-ceiling height of the area in which they are
located.
d. Doors that are used to enter or exit a room to be used for performing
massage shall not contain any locking mechanism.
e. All plumbing and electrical installation shall be installed under permit,
shall be inspected by the Building Inspection Division of the
Department of Building and Planning and shall conform to the Uniform
Building, Plumbing and Fire Codes.
f. A recognizable and readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance
identifying the premises as a massage establishment. All such signs
shall comply with the sign requirements of the City and shall not imply
that services other than those identified in Subsection 9-15.2 are
available.
g. Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform
Building Code, and at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts
§ 9-15.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-15.15
AO:395
§ 9-15.16. Massage Establishment Operation. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
Every massage establishment shall comply with the following requirements:
shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage
services are being performed.
h. Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in
performing massage services shall be provided.
i. Massage tables shall be a minimum of 30 inches in height. Pads used on
massage tables shall be covered with durable, washable plastic or other
acceptable waterproof material.
j. Closed cabinets shall be provided for the storage of clean linen.
k. Separate massage rooms, separate dressing facilities and separate
toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons. Dressing
and toilet facilities shall be clearly marked for male or female patrons.
l. Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided
for patrons. There shall be a minimum of one tub or shower. There shall
be a dressing room containing a separate locker capable of being
locked for each patron to be served. There shall be separate rest rooms
for males and females, each having a minimum of two toilets and two
washbasins.
m. The walls in all rooms where water or steam baths are given shall have
washable, mold-resistant surfaces.
n. Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron
of the massage establishment receiving massage services. No common
use of towels or linens shall be permitted.
o. A minimum of one separate washbasin shall be located within or
adjacent to the area devoted to the performing of massage services and
shall be provided with soap or detergent, hot and cold running water
and single-serving, sanitary towels placed in permanently installed
dispensers at all times.
a. There shall be managerial personnel on the premises at all times the
massage establishment is open for business. Managerial personnel
must be familiar with the requirements of this section and be capable of
communicating its provisions to employees and patrons. All managerial
personnel must be capable of effectively communicating with any City
official, employee or patron.
b. Each person performing massage shall have a valid, unrevoked permit
to act as a massage technician issued by the City and it shall be
unlawful for any managerial personnel to employ or permit a person to
act as a massage technician who is not in possession of said permit.
§ 9-15.15 COMPTON § 9-15.16
AO:396
c. Each massage establishment shall have at least one person who has a
valid, unrevoked permit to act as a massage technician on the premises
at all times while the massage establishment is open for business.
d. The operator of a massage establishment shall maintain a register of all
persons employed as massage technicians and their permit numbers.
Such register shall be made available for inspection by the City at any
time during the massage establishment's business hours.
e. No massage establishment shall operate or conduct business between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. All customers, patrons and visitors
shall be excluded from the premises when the massage establishment is
closed.
f. A list of services available and the costs of such services shall be posted
in an open, public place on the premises. The list of services shall be in
English and in readily understandable language and all letters and
numbers shall be capitals not less than 1/2 inch in height. No
managerial personnel shall permit and no massage technician shall
offer to perform services other than those posted nor charge a price in
excess of those posted for the provision of any service.
g. No massage establishment shall place, publish, distribute, disseminate
or broadcast, or cause to be placed, published, distributed,
disseminated or broadcast, any advertising matter that would
reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any service is available
other than those services described in Subsection 9-15.2, nor shall any
massage establishment indicate in the text of any advertising that any
service is available other than those services described therein.
h. All massage establishments shall provide clean and sanitary towels,
sheets and linens in sufficient quantity. Towels, sheets and linens shall
not be used by more than one person. Reuse of such linen is prohibited
unless the same has first been laundered. Heavy white paper may be
substituted for sheets provided that such paper is used once for each
patron and then discarded in a sanitary receptacle.
i. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, shower
rooms and compartments, toilet rooms and pools shall be thoroughly
cleaned and disinfected as needed and at least once each day the
premises are open with a disinfectant approved by the Los Angeles
County Health Department. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned with
disinfectant approved by the Health Department after each use. All
walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all
other physical facilities of the massage establishment shall be in good
repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
j. All employees and massage technicians shall perform all services on the
premises in full outer garments. For the purposes of this section, the
term "full outer garments" shall refer to the person being clothed in a
fully opaque garment that covers all parts of the person's body from and
§ 9-15.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-15.16
AO:397
§ 9-15.17. Display of Licenses, Permits and Registration Cards.
[Ord. #2031, § 2]
The license to operate a massage establishment and all permits to act as
a massage technician shall be displayed in a conspicuous place so that the
same may be readily seen by persons entering the massage establishment
premises. In addition, all managerial personnel, all massage technicians and
any other employees shall wear, whenever they are on the premises, the
registration card issued by the Chief of Police.
§ 9-15.18. Business Name. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
No licensee shall operate under any designation not specified in the license.
§ 9-15.19. Change of Location. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
The Chief of Police may approve a change in the location of a license to
operate a massage establishment or a permit to act as a massage technician
provided the change complies with the provisions of subsections 9-15.6,
9-15.10 and all other applicable ordinances and regulations of the City.
including the top of the person's shoulders to a point no higher than
one inch above the top of the knee.
k. No person shall enter, be in or remain in any part of a massage
establishment while in possession of, consuming or using any alcoholic
beverage or drugs except pursuant to a prescription for such drugs.
Managerial personnel shall not allow any such person to enter or
remain upon such premises.
l. No massage establishment shall operate a school of massage nor use
the same facilities as that of a school of massage. It shall be unlawful for
any person to perform any massage upon a member of the general
public while on the premises of a school of massage. Instructors and
students of such schools may practice massage only upon a bona fide
employee or student of the school. A dummy may be used.
m. No managerial personnel shall allow any person to touch the genitals of
another person during the performance of any massage service.
n. No massage technician shall touch the genitals of another person
during the performance of any massage service.
o. Due to the requirement and need for accountability in the performance
of massage, it shall be unlawful for any massage establishment to
permit a massage technician to provide massage services within the
establishment unless that massage technician is an employee directly
accountable to the licensee.
p. The violation upon the premises of any massage establishment of any
provision of this section by any person shall constitute a violation by the
licensee.
§ 9-15.16 COMPTON § 9-15.19
AO:398
There shall be a change of location fee of $200 for licenses and $100 for
permits.
§ 9-15.20. Licenses and Permits Nontransferable. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
Licenses and permits are nontransferable. Any effort to transfer, sell or
hypothecate a license or permit shall render it null and void.
§ 9-15.21. Inspections. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
The Chief of Police and any and all investigating officials of the City shall
have the right to enter massage establishments from time to time during
regular business hours to make reasonable inspections to observe and
enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health
regulations.
§ 9-15.22. Treatment Records. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
Each and every patron shall be required to supply reliable verification of
his or her identity. Every licensee shall keep a record of the date and hour
of each treatment, the name and address of the patron and the name of
the massage technician administering such treatment. Said record shall be
open to inspection by officials of the City charged with the enforcement
of these provisions and shall be maintained for a period of two years. The
information furnished or secured as a result of any such record shall be
used only to ensure and enforce compliance with the Municipal Code and
other applicable laws and shall otherwise be confidential. Any unauthorized
disclosure or use of such information shall constitute a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this section in addition to any
other penalties provided by law.
§ 9-15.23. Financial Records. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
The licensee shall maintain and make available to the Chief of Police,
upon request, ledger books, daily journals and other accounting records
which truly and correctly show the income, expenses and distribution of
all profits, if any, pertaining to the massage establishment. The purpose of
the foregoing is to provide the City with a means to determine whether or
not there has been a transfer of any interest in the massage establishment
and to determine the identity of any and all persons that own an interest
therein. The Chief of Police may require such other financial information
and records to effectuate this purpose. Additionally, the foregoing financial
records shall be provided to the Chief of Police when a previously existing
massage establishment applies for licensing, renewal or relocation.
§ 9-15.24. Suspension and Revocation. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
a. The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke any license or permit at any
time upon a determination of any of the following:
§ 9-15.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-15.24
AO:399
§ 9-15.25. Surrender of Permits. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
Each licensee or permittee shall immediately surrender his or her license or
permit to the Chief of Police upon its revocation or suspension.
§ 9-15.26. New Application After Denial or Revocation. [Ord. #2031,
§ 2]
No person may apply for a license or permit under this section within one
year from the denial of a license or permit to such applicant or within one
year from the revocation of a license or permit issued to such licensee or
permittee, unless the cause of denial or revocation has been cured to the
satisfaction of the Chief of Police or the Council.
§ 9-15.27. Sale or Transfer. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage establishment the
license issued pursuant to this section shall be null and void unless the
1. There has been a failure to fully comply with the provisions of this
section, any requirement or condition imposed by the Chief of
Police or any law of the State of California regulating massage
establishments or massage technicians;
2. There has been a material false statement made in the application;
3. There has been a transfer of an ownership interest in the massage
establishment;
4. There has been false, misleading or deceptive advertising as
specified in this section;
5. There has been a failure to correctly keep and make available for
inspection the records and documents specified by this section;
6. The license or permit was used for a different purpose than that for
which it was issued or in violation of this section; or
7. The licensee, applicant, managerial personnel, operator or
massage technician has been convicted of any crime specified in
Section 51032 of the California Government Code.
b. Notice of a decision to suspend or revoke a license or permit shall be
given in writing. The notice shall be delivered by registered or certified
mail to the licensee or permittee at the address shown on the license or
permit application.
c. The licensee or permittee may appeal the action by the Chief of Police
within 15 days in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 9-15.14.
d. Any suspended license or permit must either be reinstated or revoked
by the Chief of Police within 90 days after the date of suspension
thereof.
§ 9-15.24 COMPTON § 9-15.27
AO:400
sale or transaction is to an applicant shown on the application for the
license pursuant to which the massage establishment was operated. A new
application under this section shall be made by any person desiring to own
or operate such massage establishment.
§ 9-15.28. Applicability to Previously Existing Massage
Establishments and Technicians. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
Any massage establishment and all persons who had been engaged in
performing massages and had been licensed prior to the effective date of
this section shall have 90 days to comply with all application and other
requirements of this section. Any previously existing massage establishment
located within 1,000 feet of any other massage establishment, residential
zone, church, school or park shall be permitted to apply for that location
and, if a license is approved, remain thereon for a period of three years,
at which point it must relocate in accordance with the locational standards
contained in subsections 9-15.6a7 and 9-15.5a.
Failure to submit an application for a massage establishment license or
massage technician permit or failure to comply with subsections 9-15.8
through 9-15.23 within the ninety-day compliance period shall render any
previously issued license or permit automatically null and void. Denial of
an application for a massage establishment license or massage technician
permit shall likewise render any previously issued license or permit
automatically null and void.
§ 9-15.29. Exemptions. [Ord. #2031, § 2; Ord. #2100, § b1]
a. This section shall apply to all facilities at which massage services are
performed and all persons performing massage services unless
specifically exempted herein.
b. Subsection 9-15.7 shall not apply to the following classes of individuals
while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective
professions and while performing activities encompassed by such
professional licenses:
1. Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths and physical
therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective
professions in the State of California.
2. Health care professionals licensed by the State of California to
provide services or treatments included in the term "massage" as
herein defined.
3. Nurses registered under the laws of the State of California.
4. Coaches and trainers in accredited high schools, junior colleges
and colleges or universities acting within the scope of their
employment.
§ 9-15.27 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-15.29
AO:401
§ 9-15.30. Violation and Penalty. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
5. Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of
the State of California but only when lawfully engaged in providing
the professional services performed pursuant to such licenses.
c. Subsection 9-15.3 shall not apply to the following classes of facilities:
1. The offices of licensed physicians, surgeons, chiropractors,
osteopaths, physical therapists or other health care professionals
licensed by the State of California that employ a maximum of one
massage technician to provide massage services while such
licensed medical or health care professional is on the premises, the
services are performed under direct supervision and medical
recommendation and the massage technician has obtained a permit
in accordance with this section.
2. The premises of a bona fide, licensed barber shop or beauty parlor
that employs a maximum of one massage technician to provide
massage services while the business is open to the public for
nonmassage services and provided the massage technician has
obtained a permit in accordance with this section.
3. Hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoria or other health care facilities
duty licensed by the State of California.
d. Section 9-15 of this chapter shall not apply to a licensed health club or
health spa that operates as an accessory to a hotel with more than 150
rooms and that only offers massage services in the health club or health
spa or within publicly accessible areas of the hotel.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
section or any of the rules and regulations set forth, established or
promulgated hereunder.
b. Any violation of this section shall constitute full and sufficient grounds
for the suspension or revocation of a license to operate a massage
establishment or a permit to act as a massage technician at the sole
discretion of the Chief of Police.
c. Any failure or refusal of any person to allow premises inspections or to
make immediately available for inspection the records and documents
specified by this section upon demand by the Chief of Police during the
operating hours of any massage establishment shall be a violation of the
provisions of this section and shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of the license.
d. Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor and shall be punishable
by a fine of $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months
or both.
§ 9-15.29 COMPTON § 9-15.30
AO:402
§ 9-15.31. No Effect on Zoning Law. [Ord. #2031, § 2]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to modify, repeal or affect the
zoning laws of the City.
§ 9-16. PARKING LOTS.
§ 9-16.1. Definitions. [Ord. #856, § 6450]
As used in this section:
PARKING LOT — Shall mean any lot or parcel of land where more than two
motor vehicles are stored or parked in the open air for a consideration.
§ 9-16.2. Permit and License Required. [Ord. #856, § 6451]
No person shall establish, conduct, maintain, or carry on a parking lot
without first obtaining a permit from the Chief of the Fire Department and
paying the license fee herein required.
§ 9-16.3. Units of Equipment. [Ord. #856, § 6452]
One unit of portable fire extinguishers shall consist of:
§ 9-16.4. Units Per Square Footage. [Ord. #856, § 6452.1]
Units of portable fire extinguishers of the following number and type shall
be installed and maintained as follows:
e. Any massage establishment operated contrary to the provisions of this
section shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public
nuisance. In addition to any other penalty provided by law, the City
Attorney may commence an action or proceeding for the abatement,
removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and the
City Attorney shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts
as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove
such massage establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from
operating a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this
section.
a. One carbon tetrachloride type, one quart size;
b. One foam type, 2 1/2 gallon size;
c. One carbon dioxide type, 15 pound size.
a. In every parking lot, during business hours, for the first 2,500 square
feet of ground area or fractional part thereof, at least one unit, and for
each additional 25,000 square feet of ground area or fractional part
thereof, one additional unit.
§ 9-15.30 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-16.5
AO:403
§ 9-16.5. Attendant and Signs. [Ord. #856, § 6453]
At least one competent male person over the age of 21 years shall be in
charge of and on duty at each parking lot during the hours that the same is
open for business, and there shall be installed and maintained at each street
entrance thereto, a sign plainly visible from the street with letters not less
than six inches high stating the time that such parking lot opens and closes
and the schedule of prices charged for parking.
§ 9-16.6. Receipt for Parking. [Ord. #856, § 6453.1]
A receipt, bearing the name of the person operating such parking lot, and
the address thereof, shall be delivered to every person parking any vehicle
therein otherwise than on a weekly or monthly basis, which receipt shall be
presented to the attendant thereof by any person demanding such vehicle
unless such attendant is otherwise satisfied as to the right of such person to
receive the same.
§ 9-16.7. Entrances. [Ord. #856, § 6454]
Each parking lot shall have one separate entrance and exit to each parking
lot.
§ 9-16.8. Extending Over Sidewalk; No Sign Required. [Ord. #856,
§ 6455; Ord. #886]
Regardless of the existence of warning signs, no vehicle shall be parked in
or on any parking lot in such a manner that any portion thereof extends over
any portion of any sidewalk or walkway or into any street.
§ 9-16.9. Barrier or Guard Rail. [Ord. #856, § 6455.1]
A barrier or guard rail shall be placed on each parking lot in such manner
as to prevent any vehicle from rolling back or going over any portion of any
sidewalk or walkway or street.
§ 9-16.10. Solicitation. [Ord. #856, § 6455.2]
No operator of any parking lot holding a permit and license hereunder shall
solicit patronage by standing on the streets or sidewalks and ask or request
or ballyhoo members of the public to use the parking lot, or to make any
unnecessary noise or disturbance for any reason whatsoever.
§ 9-16.11. Use of Planks or Boards. [Ord. #856, § 6455.3]
No entrance or exits to any parking lot shall be by means of planks or boards
laid against the curbing except on special permit from the City Manager,
and no such permit shall be granted by the City Manager if the granting
thereof would cause injury or damage to such curbing.
§ 9-16.5 COMPTON § 9-16.12
AO:404
§ 9-16.12. Backing Vehicles From Parking Lot. [Ord. #856,
§ 6455.4]
No operator of any parking lot holding a permit and license hereunder shall
back any vehicle out of any parking lot into or on any street, or other public
thoroughfare.
§ 9-16.13. Permit. [Ord. #856, § 6456]
Application shall be made to the Chief of the Fire Department for a permit,
which application shall contain the following information in addition to the
information required by § 9-4:
§ 9-16.14. Compliance with Other Requirements. [Ord. #856,
§ 6457]
Nothing in this section contained herein shall be construed to relieve the
holder of a license hereunder from complying with any and all other
ordinances or regulations applicable to the conduct of its business.
§ 9-17. SALE AND DISPLAY OF NARCOTIC AND OTHER
PARAPHERNALIA.
§ 9-17.1. Regulated. [Added by Ord. #1595, § 2-6500]
a. The area comprising the premises where the auto park is to be
conducted.
b. The hours of business and the schedule of rates to be charged.
c. The Fire Chief shall also require such other information as will enable
him to determine that all of the provisions of this section or other
regulation applicable to the operation of a parking lot have been
complied with.
a. Minors. No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any
room in any place of business selling, or displaying for the purpose of
sale, any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia for smoking
or injecting, or consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled
substance, as defined in the Health and Safety Code of the State of
California, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject
prescription drugs, as well as roach clips, and cigarette papers and
rollers designed for the smoking of the foregoing, shall allow or permit
any person under the age of 18 years to be, remain in, enter or visit
such room unless such minor person is accompanied by one of his or
her parents, or by his or her legal guardian.
b. Minors Excluded. A person under the age of 18 years shall not be,
remain in, enter or visit any room in any place used for the sale of, or
displaying for sale, devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia
for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled
substance, other than prescription drugs, and devices to ingest or inject
§ 9-16.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-17.1
AO:405
§ 9-17.2. Penalty. [Added by Ord. #1595, § 2-6500]
Violation of this section may result in revocation or suspension of business
licenses and permits in accordance with Subsection 9-1.31. This remedy
is in addition to any other remedy provided by law, including the penalty
provisions applicable for violations of this Code.
§ 9-18. SALES INVOLVING FALSE ADVERTISING.
§ 9-18.1. False or Fraudulent Representation; Going-Out-of-
Business Sale, Etc. [Added by Ord. #980, § 6500; Ord. #990]
It shall be unlawful for any person to present and/or hold out that any sale
of goods, wares and merchandise is an insurance, bankruptcy, mortgage,
insolvency, assignee's, executor's, administrator's, receiver's, trustee's,
creditor's, forced liquidation, closing-out sale, or a sale of goods, wares and
merchandise damaged by fire, smoke, water, or otherwise, or to use any
other word or phrase, which would reasonably convey to the public the
belief that said person was retiring from or closing his business, in the City,
unless he shall have first obtained a license from the City License Collector
so to do. This section shall not apply to public or court officers or to any
person acting under direction of state or federal Court in the course of their
official duties.
§ 9-18.2. Definitions. [Added by Ord. #980, § 6501]
As used in this section:
PERSON — Shall mean and include both the singular and plural and shall
also mean and include any person, individual, firm, corporation,
copartnership, association, club; society or any other organization.
prescription drugs, including roach clips, and cigarette papers and
rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, unless such
person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or his or her legal
guardian.
c. Sale and Display Rooms. A person shall not maintain in any place of
business to which the public is invited the display for sale, or the
offering to sell, of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia
for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled
substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject
prescription drugs, including roach clips, and cigarette papers and
rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, unless within a
separate room or enclosure to which minors not accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian are excluded. Each entrance to such a room
shall be signposted in reasonably visible and legible words to the effect
that narcotic paraphernalia are being offered for sale in such a room,
and minors unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are
excluded.
§ 9-17.1 COMPTON § 9-18.3
AO:406
§ 9-18.3. Application for License; Inventory. [Added by Ord. #980,
§ 6502; Ord. #990]
§ 9-18.4. License Fee. [Added by Ord. #980, § 6503]
§ 9-18.5. Sale Restricted to Inventory. [Added by Ord. #980, § 6504]
It shall be unlawful for any person managing, conducting and/or carrying
on a sale as specified in Subsection 9-18.1 to secure goods other than those
enumerated in said inventory for the purpose of selling same at said sale.
a. Every person managing, conducting or carrying on a sale specified in
Subsection 9-18.1 shall make written application to the City License
Collector for a license so to do. This application shall be signed and
sworn to by the applicant and shall state all the facts in regard to the
contemplated sale, the period of time during which the sale shall be
held, which period shall not exceed 60 days, but may be extended by an
additional application to the City Council for another 30 days. The
applicant shall also furnish satisfactory evidence by way of a statement
in the application or otherwise that the merchandise which he proposes
to sell is a bona fide part of his stock in trade and that the same has not
been secured, purchased, or brought into the applicant's place of
business for or in anticipation of such sale. Such application shall also
contain the reason for such sale, an inventory of goods, which inventory
shall show the actual purchase price, names of persons from whom
such goods were obtained, the date of purchase of such goods, and all
details necessary to identify fully the goods to be sold.
The applicant shall also state whether or not the goods to be sold were
purchased at a former sale, conducted in compliance with Subsection
9-18.1. No license shall be issued to any person if it appears that the
stock of goods was purchased at a former sale, as hereinabove set forth,
less than one year prior to the date of his application.
b. The City License Collector shall file the application and shall enforce
thereon the date such license is granted or refused.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person to make a false statement in such
application.
a. Every person managing, conducting, or carrying on a sale as specified
herein shall pay the license fee required in the sum of $25 if the
inventory is $25,000 or less, and a further fee of $25 for each $25,000
of inventory in excess of $25,000.
b. A license issued under the provisions of this section shall be valid only
for the inventoried goods.
c. A license issued under the provisions of this section shall not be
transferable.
§ 9-18.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-18.6
AO:407
§ 9-18.6. Adding Goods Prohibited. [Added by Ord. #980, § 6505]
It shall be unlawful for any person having a license under this section to add
any goods to the inventoried stock and no goods shall be sold except that
included in the original inventory.
§ 9-18.7. Fake Sale Prohibited. [Added by Ord. #980, § 6506]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct, maintain,
operate or advertise at retail any fake sale of goods, wares or merchandise
within the City.
§ 9-18.8. Term 'Fake Sale' Defined. [Added by Ord. #980, § 9507]
For the purpose of this section, a fake sale is hereby defined to be:
§ 9-19. SECONDHAND DEALERS, PAWNBROKERS, JUNK DEALERS,
AUTO WRECKERS AND SWAP MEETS.
§ 9-19.1. Definitions. [Ord. #856, § 6480; Ord. #1221; Ord. #1391]
As used in this section:
AUTO WRECKER — Shall mean every person who buys or receives any
motor vehicle, as the term "motor vehicle" is defined in the State Vehicle
Code, or other vehicle for the purpose of dismantling or disassembling
any such motor vehicle or other vehicle, or reconditioning any such motor
vehicle or other vehicle, or selling or otherwise dealing in the materials or
parts of such motor vehicle or other vehicle.
BUY-FORM — Shall mean the form furnished by the Chief of Police to the
licensee for the purpose of the recording and furnishing by the licensee
to the Chief of Police of the required information relative to purchases,
pledges, or consignments.
a. The sale of goods, wares or merchandise at auction or otherwise to
agents, or any other persons purchasing the same for or on behalf of the
owner or other person interested in the sale thereof;
b. The sale of goods, wares or merchandise or the offering of goods, wares
or merchandise for sale in limited quantity or quantities of less than the
full amount of such merchandise owned or carried in stock by the
person, firm or corporation offering the same for sale;
c. The sale or offering for sale of goods, wares or merchandise of a
differing quality or brand and/or bearing a different trade mark as a
substitute for merchandise previously advertised for sale;
d. The sale or offering for sale of any goods, wares or merchandise
misrepresented as to quantity, quality, brand or otherwise;
e. The sale or offering for sale of any goods, wares or merchandise which
is contingent upon the concurrent purchase or sale of any other article.
§ 9-18.6 COMPTON § 9-19.1
AO:408
JUNK COLLECTOR — Shall mean a person not having a fixed place of
business in the City who goes from house to house, or from place to place,
gathering, collecting, buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in any old rags,
sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metal (including gold or mercury), or other
articles commonly known as junk.
JUNK DEALER — Shall mean a person (not an auto wrecker) having a fixed
place of business in the City and engaged in conducting the business or
buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in, either at wholesale or retail, any old
rags, sacks, bottles, cans, paper, metal (including gold or mercury), or other
articles known as junk.
PAWNBROKERS — Shall mean a person engaged in carrying on the
business of pawnbroking; or the business of lending money for himself or
any other person upon personal property, pawns, or pledges; or the business
of purchasing articles of personal property and reselling, or agreeing to
resell, such articles to the vendors or their assignees at prices agreed upon
at or before the times of such purchase.
PAWNSHOP — Shall mean any room, store, building, or other place in which
any business of a pawnbroker is engaged.
SECONDHAND DEALER — Shall mean a person (other than a used car
dealer or a dealer in secondhand books or magazines) engaged in carrying
on a business of buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in secondhand goods.
SWAP MEET — Shall mean the act or practice of carrying on, on a single
location or premises, the exchange, barter, trade, sale, or purchase of
personal property among or between 25 or more persons, not otherwise
licensed to do business in the City, less frequently than six times per week.
SWAP MEET OPERATOR — Shall mean that person or group of persons who
organizes or administers any swap meet.
SWAP MEET PARTICIPANT — Shall mean that person or group of persons
who sets up a table or booth or establishes any location within swap meet
premises to exchange, sell or purchase goods.
§ 9-19.2. Licenses Required. [Ord. #856, § 6481]
Before engaging in any of the businesses defined in this section, the person
proposing to enter into or conduct any such business shall obtain the license
so to do required by this section, and in addition thereto, such licensee
shall be subject to each and all of the terms, conditions, and provisions
of this section. No such license shall be granted until an application has
been filed with and approved by the Council. Such application shall include
a statement of all other locations, within and without the City, where the
applicant is conducting similar businesses. Applicants shall furnish the
fingerprints of all persons, including the applicant, who will be active in
dealing with the public in connection with the proposed business.
§ 9-19.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-19.3
AO:409
§ 9-19.3. Issuance and Revocation of Licenses. [Amended by Ord.
#1221, § 6481.1]
No license shall be issued to any applicant, and any license issued to carry
on any of the businesses defined in this section may be revoked by the
Council upon evidence satisfactory to the Council that the applicant or
the licensee, his agents or employees in connection with his proposed or
existing business, or any person connected or associated with the applicant
or licensee as a partner, director, officer, stockholder, or person who is
exercising, or is proposing to exercise, managerial authority of or on behalf
of the licensee at such premises has:
§ 9-19.4. Buy-Forms. [Ord. #856, § 6482]
The Chief of Police shall cause to be prepared such numbers of the Buy-
Form referred to in this section as may be necessary in order to enable the
respective licensees under the provisions of this section to execute and file
the same and shall furnish such forms free to such licensees for the purpose
of their complying with the provisions of this section.
a. Knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a
material fact in an application for a permit or in any record or report
required to be filed with the Police Department or City; or
b. Violated any provision of this Code or of any statute relating to his
permitted activity; or
c. Been convicted of a felony or other crime involving theft,
embezzlement, or moral turpitude; or
d. Committed any act constituting dishonesty or fraud; or
e. Committed any unlawful, false, fraudulent, deceptive, or dangerous act
while conducting a licensed business; or
f. Published, uttered, or disseminated any false, deceptive, or misleading
statements or advertisements in connection with the operation of a
licensed business; or
g. Violated any rule or regulation adopted by the Council or Police
Department relating to the business of the licensee; or
h. Wilfully failed to comply with the terms of any contract made as a part
of the exercise of the licensed business; or
i. Conducted the licensed business in a manner contrary to the peace,
health, safety, and general welfare of the public; or
j. Demonstrated that he is unfit to be trusted with the privileges granted
by such licensee.
§ 9-19.3 COMPTON § 9-19.5
AO:410
§ 9-19.5. Copies of Regulations. [Ord. #856, § 6482.1]
A copy of this section, together with any amendments thereto that affect the
type of business of the licensee, shall be furnished each new licensee upon
the first delivery to such licensee of the Buy-Form. A reasonable number of
additional copies of this section, and amendments thereto, may be procured
from the office of the Chief of Police by any licensee upon request.
§ 9-19.6. Reports. [Ord. #856, § 6482.2]
Every such licensee shall obtain from the Chief of Police, and fill out and
complete in quadruplicate, an appropriate Buy-Form covering each day's
transactions of such licensee. Within three hours after the close of business
of any business day, each such licensee shall mail or deliver to the Chief
of Police the original Buy-Form, together with two duplicate copies thereof,
covering the business transacted on such day.
§ 9-19.7. Contents of Buy-Forms; Fingerprint. [Ord. #856, § 6482.3
— 6482.4; Ord. #1349]
The Buy-Forms referred to in this section shall contain a full, true, and
complete report of all goods or things received on deposit, consigned,
pledged, or purchased during the day covered by such form, and shall also
contain such other information as may be required by the Chief of Police
and which, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, considering the type of
business of the licensee, may assist in the detection of stolen property.
Each such licensee shall enter, or cause to be entered, upon the Buy-Form
positive identification furnished by the seller, pledgemaker, or consignor,
such as his driver's license number, work badge number, auto or truck
license number, or junk collector's business license number, in addition to
the true name and address of the seller, pledgemaker, or consignor. The
licensee shall require the seller, pledgemaker, or consignor to furnish a
plain impression fingerprint of his right index finger, or next finger in the
event of amputation, upon the reverse side of the original sheet of the Buy-
Form.
a. Copies. Every licensee shall preserve for a period of at least two years
the fourth, or quadruplicate, copy of the Buy-Form containing a carbon
copy record thereon of the original writing made, or caused to be made,
by the licensee, the original of which has been furnished to the Chief of
Police. Every such record shall be produced by the licensee for
inspection by any peace officer within such two-year period, and any
property pledged, purchased, or received by such licensee which is
described or referred to in any such Buy-Form shall likewise be
produced by such licensee for inspection by the peace officer upon
request, if such request is made within the period during which the
licensee is required by the provisions of this section.
§ 9-19.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-19.8
AO:411
§ 9-19.8. Police Records. [Ord. #856, § 6482.5]
The Chief of Police shall maintain a file consisting of the originals of all Buy-
Forms received pursuant to the provisions of this section for a period of at
least two years after receipt thereof, and such Buy-Forms shall be open to
inspection by any peace officer.
§ 9-19.9. English Language. [Ord. #856, § 6482.6]
Every such Buy-Form, report, or record made by or through the licensee
shall be written or printed entirely in the English language in a clear and
legible manner.
§ 9-19.10. Correct Name. [Ord. #856, § 6482.7]
Every person making any Buy-Form report shall sign his true name and give
the true name and correct address of the licensee.
§ 9-19.11. Identification. [Ord. #856, § 6482.8; Ord. #1221]
Every person who sells, pledges, or consigns any property to any licensee
in the course of business covered by the license of such licensee, shall
furnish on the "Buy-Form" report or record, true positive identification to
the licensee by which such person can be located by the Chief of Police.
Such person shall also sign his true name and age and write or print his true
address upon the "Buy-Form" in the space provided for same at the same
time such business is transacted. No person shall sign a fictitious name or
age or any other than his true name and age, or give any address other than
his true and correct address.
§ 9-19.12. Signature. [Ord. #856, § 6482.9]
No person shall write the name of any other person as a signature to any
"Buy-Form," report or record, as all such "Buy-Forms," reports and records
shall bear as signatures only the true names of the persons so subscribing
the same.
§ 9-19.13. Compliance. [Ord. #856, § 6482.10]
No person shall fail, refuse or neglect to submit the "Buy-Forms" to the
Chief of Police within the time required by, and in full compliance with, the
provisions of this section, if such forms have not been so submitted by some
other person, and if such person is:
a. A person required by this section to obtain a license; or
b. A person in charge of the business of such person required by this
section to obtain a license; or
c. An agent or employee of such person required by this section to obtain
a license; and the duties of such agent or employee include the
submission of such "Buy-Forms."
§ 9-19.8 COMPTON § 9-19.14
AO:412
§ 9-19.14. Juveniles. [Ord. #856, § 6482.11; Ord. #1221]
No licensee engaging in, managing, conducting or carrying on the business
of a "Junk Dealer", "Junk Collector", "Secondhand Dealer", "Auto Wrecker",
or "Pawnbroker", or his employee or agent, shall receive, buy, trade,
exchange or otherwise acquire an interest in any goods or things, from any
person under the age of 18 years. Any statement to such licensee, employee
or agent by a person under the age of 18 years to the effect that he or she
is over the age of 18 years shall not excuse such licensee or his agent or
employee of such licensee from any violation of this section.
§ 9-19.15. Peace Officers Entering Property. [Added by Ord. #1221,
§ 6482.12]
No person shall interfere with, prevent, or refuse to permit a police officer
to make an examination, inspection, or copy of any record of a licensee
hereunder, or to examine the premises of the business establishment as
described in said business license or to examine or inspect any property
acquired by the licensee or his agents in the course of their business.
§ 9-19.16. Disposition of Metals. [Ord. #856, § 6483]
A foundry or junk dealer shall not melt, destroy, sell or otherwise dispose of
any metal purchased or received by such dealer which is, or by economically
feasible repair can be made usable for the purpose for which it was
originally designed, until at least 21 days after making a report to the Chief
of Police, as required by the provisions of this section, that such metal has
been received by such foundry or junk dealer.
§ 9-19.17. Rules and Regulations Governing Junk Dealers. [Ord.
#856, § 6483.1; Ord. #1221]
The following rules and regulations shall govern junk dealers:
a. Rules Listed:
1. All articles of property defined as junk under Subsection 9-19.1
received or purchased shall be described fully and reported within
24 hours on a form approved by the Police Department. The report
shall be filled out completely and legibly written in the English
language. A duplicate record shall be kept at the place of business
and shall be open for inspection by any peace officer.
(a) Exceptions. The following articles of property shall be exempt
from Rule 1: Old rags, papers, boxes, bottles, sacks, rope and
metals other than those described in Rules 2 and 3.
2. All non-ferrous metals and nickel alloys (including Monel and
Nickeloy) defined as junk received or purchased shall be held 21
days in the same condition as when received and shall be open to
public view.
§ 9-19.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-19.17
AO:413
(a) Exceptions. Non-ferrous metals and nickel alloys may be
released or sold within 21 days of reporting to the Chief of
Police providing authorization has been received from the
Chief of Police. The licensee shall for a period of two years
keep a record of the destination and disposition of property
released in this manner and such record shall be made
available for inspection of any peace officer. Such authorization
shall not relieve the licensee of any responsibility, in the event
said property is later determined to be stolen.
(b) Whenever a licensee contracts to purchase scrap metals from
the responsible head of public utility companies, airplane
factories, manufacturers of metal products or other prime
"generators" of metal products and the payment for such scrap
metals is by check made payable to the company involved, the
holding and reporting provisions set forth shall not apply. The
recording provisions of Subsection 9-19.20, however, shall
remain in full force and effect.
3. The following ferrous metals defined as junk received or purchased
shall be held three days after the report reaches the Police
Department. Such metals must remain in the same condition as
when received, and shall be open to public view during this holding
period: fence material, pipe, chain, foundry castings, and cable.
4. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to notify the Chief of
Police in writing immediately of any change in management or
ownership or location.
5. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to familiarize himself
and his agents with all the laws whether state or local, relating to
the junk business.
6. No storage facilities, other than those approved by the Chief of
Police, shall be maintained.
7. Articles of property defined as junk received or purchased from
another licensee who has recorded, reported and held such junk as
required, shall be exempt from further holding or reporting
providing the selling licensee gives the buying licensee written
assurance of such recording, reporting and holding. In this
instance, the selling licensee shall be held responsible for any
failure to report or hold.
8. The licensee shall enter on the required form the license number of
the junk collector from whom the property was purchased or
received.
9. All bicycles or bicycle parts received, purchased or disposed of (as
junk) by a licensee shall be recorded, reported and held in
accordance with instructions from the Juvenile Division of the
§ 9-19.17 COMPTON § 9-19.17
AO:414
§ 9-19.18. Rules and Regulations Governing Pawnbrokers. [Ord.
#856, § 6483.2; Ord. #1221; Ord. #1337; Ord. #1349]
The following rules and regulations shall govern pawnbrokers:
§ 9-19.19. Rules and Regulations Governing Swap Meets. [Added by
Ord. #1391, § 6483.3]
The following rules and regulations shall govern swap meets:
Police Department. Licensee, before dealing in bicycles or their
parts, shall contact the Juvenile Division of the Police Department.
10. A copy of these Rules and Regulations shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises.
a. Rules Listed.
1. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to notify the Chief of
Police in writing immediately of any change of management,
ownership, or business location.
2. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to familiarize himself
and his employees and agents with all the laws, whether state or
local, relating to the pawn broker business.
3. No storage facilities, other than those approved by the Chief of
Police, shall be maintained.
4. All goods or personal property purchased shall be held 24 hours
from the time of such purchase in the same condition as when
received.
5. A copy of these Rules and Regulations shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises.
a. The provisions of this section shall apply to the operators of all swap
meets in the City. The provisions of this section shall apply to all items
or articles of property sold and exchanged at or in any swap meet or in
connection with the business of operating a swap meet. The operator of
each swap meet shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions
of this section on the part of each participant therein. The operator of
each swap meet shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions
of this section as to all the items or articles of property sold or
exchanged in connection with the operation of such business.
b. Swap meet operators shall be required to employ persons approved by
the Chief of Police and in such numbers as he shall determine
appropriate, based on the size and sponsorship of the swap meet.
c. Swap meet operators shall confirm that all vendors selling or offering
for sale at the swap meet possess a valid City license and verify the
ownership of merchandise offered for sale.
§ 9-19.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-19.20
AO:415
§ 9-19.20. Hold Orders. [Ord. #856, § 6484]
The Chief of Police may place a hold order upon any property acquired
by the licensee in the course of any business subject to the provisions of
this section for a period of not to exceed 90 days, and in such case the
licensee shall retain such property for the prescribed period and shall not
dispose of such property in the meantime unless upon written release of the
Chief of Police. The Chief of Police may also require the licensee to keep
a true record of any such property and to ascertain and report therewith
the true name and address of the person to whom such property was sold,
transferred, or otherwise disposed of.
§ 9-19.21. Sales Between Licensees. [Ord. #856, § 6485]
Except as hereinafter provided, goods covered by duly executed and filed
Buy-Forms and with respect to which any waiting periods provided for
herein are being observed may be sold or conveyed by the licensee
possessing the same to any other licensee of the City engaged in the same
or a similar business who is complying with the provisions of this section
without the necessity of executing and delivering new Buy-Forms therefor;
provided, however, both the seller and the buyer in such cases shall notify
the Chief of Police, in writing, of such transfer at or before the time the
transfer is actually made, and provided, further, the transferee shall observe
all unexpired withholding periods with reference to any such goods.
§ 9-19.22. Junk Dealers Excepted. [Ord. #856, § 6485.1]
The exceptions set forth in Subsection 9-19.21 shall not apply to purchases
made by junk dealers from junk collectors or to transfers of property
between such dealers and collectors.
§ 9-19.23. Exceptions. [Ord. #856, § 6485.2]
The waiting period required by this section shall not apply to property
purchased on a bill of sale or invoice from a regularly established place
of business. As used in this section, "established place of business" shall
mean a place of business within the county which has been dealing in the
type of articles purchased at the same location for not less than two years.
Until any articles, goods, or things pledged or consigned to or purchased by
any licensee subject to the provisions of this section are held for the time
required by this section or released by the Chief of Police, such licensee
shall not clean, alter, repair, paint, or otherwise change the appearance
of such articles, goods, or things. At all times during business hours such
licensee shall expose the same to public view.
a. Release. The Chief of Police in his discretion may, in writing, release
any property covered by this section which he has inspected, either
personally or through his authorized officers, if after such inspection he
is satisfied that such property is in the lawful possession of the licensee.
§ 9-19.20 COMPTON § 9-19.24
AO:416
§ 9-19.24. Exporting. [Ord. #856, § 6486]
No licensee subject to the provisions of this section shall export from the
City any goods or things pledged or consigned to or received by such
licensee in his capacity as such licensee until the Chief of Police has
inspected and released such property.
§ 9-19.25. Other Exceptions. [Ord. #856, § 6486.1; Ord. #1221]
The provisions of this section requiring withholding and the making and
filing of Buy-Forms shall not be deemed to apply to:
§ 9-19.26. Compliance. [Ord. #856, § 6487]
No person engaged in conducting any business affected by or to which this
Chapter relates shall fail to make or file any Buy-Form, statement, or report
required by this Chapter in the form, in the manner, at the time, and in all
respects as required by and in full conformity with the requirements of this
Chapter; or fail to keep the records required in the form and in the manner
required by this Chapter, or fail to exhibit to the Chief of Police, or to any
police officer of the City or other duly authorized person, immediately upon
demand for the privilege of such inspection, any such record or any goods
in his possession or under his control.
§ 9-19.27. Hours of Business. [Ord. #856, § 6488; Ord. #1221; Ord.
#1391]
No person engaging in any business defined in this Chapter shall accept any
pledge of, or loan money upon, personal property, or purchase or receive
any goods, article, or thing, or engage in or conduct any such business in
any manner:
a. The purchase or sale by junk dealers or junk collectors of rags, bottles
(other than milk or cream bottles), secondhand sacks (other than cloth
cement sacks), shoes, lamps, stoves, or household furniture (with the
exception of sewing machines, televisions, radios, all musical
instruments, or any items to which the manufacturer thereof has
assigned a serial number);
b. The purchase or sale by secondhand dealers of household furniture
(with the exception of sewing machines, televisions, radios, all musical
instruments, typewriters, or any other items to which the manufacturer
has assigned a serial number); and
c. The receipt or sale of a secondhand article by any person who received
such secondhand article as part payment of a new article, if such person
is the authorized representative or agent of the manufacturer of the
new article sold.
a. Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day from Monday
to Saturday, inclusive;
§ 9-19.24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-19.27
AO:417
§ 9-19.28. Permits: Applications: Fees. [Ord. #856, § 6489; Ord.
#1062]
Before receiving or acting upon an application for the granting of a permit
to an auto wrecker or junk dealer, the Council shall as hereinafter defined
require:
§ 9-19.29. Renewal of Annual Permits. [Ord. #856, § 6489.1]
The Council shall, before granting a renewal of any yearly permit, require
the payment of a $10 fee therefor.
§ 9-19.30. Transfer of Location. [Ord. #856, § 6489.2; Ord. #1062]
Any person having a permit issued for the conduct of the business of
auto wrecker or junk dealer under the provisions of this subsection, or
under this section, may file an application for a transfer of location upon
the payment of a $10 fee for so doing, and it shall not be necessary to
pay any other permit fee herein required in connection with a change of
location; provided, however, the permit fee of $300 heretofore mentioned
shall entitle any person to operate only one auto wrecking yard or junk
yard in the City, and any person desiring an additional, separate, and new
b. Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. Saturday and 8:00 a.m. of the following
Monday; provided, however, any such place of business may be kept
open between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any day from
Monday to Saturday, inclusive, provided the only business done therein
during such overtime hours shall be that of selling goods or other
personal property;
c. On any of the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth
of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas; provided,
however, from December 14 to December 24, inclusive, excluding
Sundays, any such place of business may be kept open until 10:00 p.m.
provided the only business done therein during such overtime hours
shall be that of selling goods or other personal property;
d. Except in the case of swap meet, where no such business may be
conducted in any manner between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
Monday through Sunday, inclusive, and on the following holidays: New
Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day,
and Christmas; provided, however, from December 14 to December 24,
inclusive, any such swap meet may be kept open until 10:00 p.m.
a. The payment of $300 as a permit fee therefor.
b. Any person having a permit or City license as an auto wrecker or junk
dealer which has been previously issued to him shall comply with all of
the provisions of this section and, upon the expiration of his yearly
permit, shall secure a renewal thereof in conformity with the provisions
hereof.
§ 9-19.27 COMPTON § 9-19.30
AO:418
location shall make a new application to the Council, in conformity with
the procedure heretofore outlined in this section, and shall pay an initial
filing fee of $300 for so doing; providing, further, that any person holding
a license or permit to conduct an auto wrecking yard or junk yard at a
given location should desire to enlarge or extend the area of said place of
business by adding thereto adjoining or contiguous property, shall not be
deemed to be operating more than one auto wrecking yard or junk yard,
but in the event such adjacent or contiguous property is desired to be
used in connection with the original business location, the holder of said
permit shall file an application with the Council for a permit to include such
additional adjoining or contiguous property and shall pay therefor a fee of
$10 for so doing. Permits are not assignable.
§ 9-19.31. Enclosure of Premises. [Added by Ord. #1279, § 6489.3]
No person shall be granted a permit by the Council to conduct an auto
wrecker or junk dealer business, nor shall any such permit previously
granted be renewed, unless, as a condition thereof, the subject premises
shall be entirely enclosed with either a solid masonry wall, a concrete block
wall, a solid wood fence, or a solid metal fence not less than eight feet in
height, with such entrances thereto equipped with solid gates not less than
eight feet in height; except that corrugated metal shall not be utilized in
the construction of such fence or gates. This provision shall not be deemed
to limit the duty of the Council to impose other or further conditions to
the granting or renewal of any such permit reasonably deemed necessary
to protect and preserve the public peace, health and safety, and general
welfare.
An auto wrecker or junk dealer business lawfully existing on September
8, 1966, is hereby granted an automatic variance so as to permit the
continuation of said use for a period not exceeding three years from
September 8, 1966, provided no additions or enlargements of such use are
made during the period of such automatic variance except those required
by law unless full compliance with the provisions hereof are effected prior
to such additions or enlargements, and the same are otherwise approved as
may be required by law.
§ 9-20. SILENT BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS.
§ 9-20.1. Definitions. [Added by Ord. #1406, § 6-1200]
As used in this section:
SILENT BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM AND ALARM SYSTEM — Shall mean
any telephonic system comprised of electronic equipment or devices which
is designed to:
Operate automatically through the use of public telephone facilities;
and
a.
§ 9-19.30 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-20.1
AO:419
§ 9-20.2. Permits Required. [Added by Ord. #1406, § 6-1201; Ord.
#1795, § 1; Ord. #1812, § 3]
Every alarm user shall obtain an annual Alarm User's Permit prior to the
installation and use of an alarm system.
§ 9-20.3. Applications for Permit. [Added by Ord. #1406, § 6-1202;
Ord. #1795, § 2; Ord. #1812, § 4]
Applications for Alarm Users' Permits shall be filed with the City Treasurer's
Office. A $25 filing and processing fee for residential users and $50 for
commercial users shall be paid at the time of filing and said permits shall
be valid for one year from date of issuance and renewable at a fee of $15
and $40, respectively, thereafter. Copies of permits and renewals shall be
forwarded to the Office of the Chief of Police.
§ 9-20.4. Approval of Applications. [Added by Ord. #1406, § 6-1203]
The City Manager shall approve an application for a silent burglar alarm
system if he finds that the use of such alarm system to transmit a signal,
message, or warning to the Police Department through its telephone lines
will not interfere with the orderly conduct of City business over such
telephone lines.
§ 9-20.5. Operations and Maintenance of Alarm Systems. [Added by
Ord. #1406, § 6-1204]
§ 9-20.6. Inspections. [Added by Ord. #1406, § 6-1205]
The City Manager, or his designated representative, shall have the right to
inspect any silent burglar alarm system on any premises from which signals
to the Police Department shall originate prior to the issuance of any permit
for the operation of the silent alarm system, and he may cause an inspection
Transmit through such telephonic facilities a signal message or
warning to the Police Department.
b.
a. The City shall maintain the alarm system from the telephone company
terminal panel to the alarm system board located at the Police
Department.
b. The City shall furnish the necessary relay, which shall be compatible to
the alarm system.
c. The alarm system company shall be responsible for the maintenance
and service of the equipment located at the location of the subscriber
and shall lease from the telephone company the telephone line from the
subscriber's location to the Police Department.
d. The City Manager, or his designated representative, may impose
reasonable rules and conditions for the operation of the silent burglar
alarm system as he finds necessary to protect the public safety.
§ 9-20.1 COMPTON § 9-20.6
AO:420
of such alarm system to be made at any time on such premises after the
issuance of the permit to determine whether such alarm system is used in
conformity with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this section.
§ 9-20.7. False Alarms. [Ord. #1795, § 3; Ord. #1812, § 5]
Any alarm which generates more than three false alarms within a twelvemonth
period shall be deemed an excessive user. Following the third false
alarm, the Chief of Police shall cause notification to be made to the user of
the false alarm ordinance and the administrative fee schedule for additional
false alarms.
A false alarm response is defined as police personnel initiating any law
enforcement response where no activity requiring a law enforcement effort
is deemed necessary to maintain public safety or the protection of property.
An alarm user whose alarm system has generated more than three false
alarms within a twelve-month period shall be notified by the Police
Department within 10 days of police response to a false alarm that a penalty
has been assessed, and payment of an administrative fee is due within 30
days of said notification.
Said user shall pay the assessed fee to the City Treasurer's Office within 10
days and provide written notification to the Chief of Police that said alarm
has been inspected and repaired by a certified alarm company and is in
good working order.
The fee schedule for responding to such alarms is as follows:
Alarm Number Fee
4 $50
5 $100
6 $150
§ 9-20.8. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #1795, § 4; Ord. #1812]
That installation and/or operation of a burglary or robbery alarm within the
City of Compton without a valid alarm user's permit shall be deemed an
infraction subject to a $100 fine.
a. The City Treasurer's Office shall revoke Alarm Users' Permits for those
whose alarm systems have generated more than six false alarms within
a twelve-month period or those whose False Alarm Response Fees are
delinquent, and forward notice of same to the Office of the Chief of
Police.
b. Alarm users, upon proof of payment of all delinquencies, verification
that corrective action has been taken to prevent false alarm responses,
and approval of the Chief of Police may re-apply for an alarm permit
following a thirty-day waiting period.
§ 9-20.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-21
AO:421
§ 9-21. TAXICABS.
§ 9-21.1. Definitions. [Ord. #856, § 6460]
As used in this section:
DRIVER — Shall mean any person in charge of driving, or operating any
taxicab, either as agent, employee, or otherwise.
STAND — Shall mean a place designated by the Traffic Authority for the
use, while awaiting employment, of any taxicab.
TAXI-METER — Shall mean a mechanical instrument or device, by which the
charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated either for distance
traveled or for waiting time, or both, which charges shall be indicated by
means of figures.
TAXICABS — Shall mean any automobile or motor-propelled vehicle of a
distinctive color, of public appearance, such as is in common usage in this
country for taxicabs, used for the transportation of passengers for hire over
the streets of the City, and not over a defined route, irrespective of whether
the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of said City, at rates for
distance traveled, or for waiting time, or for both, and such vehicle is routed
under the direction of such passenger or person hiring the same.
TRAFFIC AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Chief of Police.
§ 9-21.2. Application. [Ord. #856, § 6461; Ord. #1296]
Applications for permits shall contain, in addition to the matters required
under § 9-4, such information as may be provided by the rules and
regulations of the Traffic Authority or the Council pertinent to the operation
of such, the character and quality of the service of such taxicab.
a. Citizenship. Every applicant for a permit required by this section shall
be a citizen of the United States of America, or a person who has
regularly declared his intention to become a citizen, and more than 21
years of age.
b. Investigation. The Traffic Authority shall investigate such applicant and
make a written report thereon to the Council.
c. Public Hearings. No permit (not including annual renewals of existing
permits) for the operation of any taxicab shall be granted until the
Council, after a public hearing, determines that the public convenience
and necessity require the operation of such vehicles.
Before granting any new permit after an application therefor has been
made, the Council shall pass a resolution declaring that an application
therefor has been made, which resolution shall state the name of the
applicant and the terms and conditions of such application. Such
resolution shall fix and set forth the day, hour, and place when and
where such persons having any interest therein, or any objection to the
granting thereof, may appear before the Council and be heard thereon.
§ 9-21 COMPTON § 9-21.2
AO:422
The Council shall direct the City Clerk to publish such resolution at
least once, within 10 days of the passage thereof, in the official
newspaper. Such notice shall be published at least 10 days prior to the
date of the hearing. The City Clerk shall also, at least 10 days prior to
the date of the hearing, mail a copy of such resolution to every person
then holding a permit for the operation of a taxicab business. The copy
of the resolution shall be mailed to the address of such permittees as
shown by the records of the City.
At the time set for the hearing, the Council shall proceed to hear
and pass upon all protests, and its decision thereon shall be final and
conclusive.
If the Council shall decree that the public convenience and necessity
require the operation of additional vehicles, and if there exists in the
City less than three taxicab companies operating under valid permits,
the Council shall then issue such applicant permittee a permit to
operate a number of taxicabs pertinent in amount to fulfill the needs of
the City, such number to be determined by the Council.
Upon the existence of three taxicab companies operating under valid
permits in the City, any subsequent applicant permittee shall follow the
application procedure described in this section. Upon the conclusion of
such procedure, if the Council shall decree that the public convenience
and necessity require the operation of additional vehicles, the Council
shall not issue such permits until each person holding a permit for the
operation of a taxicab shall have been notified by the Council of its
findings as to such additional taxicabs as are found to be necessary to
fill the expanding need.
Every person holding a permit for the operation of a taxicab shall have
the right to increase his service in the number proportionate to the
additional taxicabs found necessary as his total number of taxicabs
bears to the total number of taxicabs for which permits have been
issued, and, in the event any permittee fails, neglects, or refuses to
increase his service in the proportion as needed, such pertinent amount
shall be distributed proportionately to such other permittees. In the
event any established permittee refuses to increase his services in the
entire amount, the permittee applicant may obtain a permit for such
number of taxicabs as the established permittee will not take after
the expiration of his permit rights to the taxicabs which any permittee
refuses to take.
d. Public Convenience; Findings of Fact. The Council, in determining
whether or not the public convenience exists, may make written
findings of facts as it may deem pertinent, which findings shall include
specific findings of the following:
1. That the applicant is fully responsible; and
§ 9-21.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-21.2
AO:423
§ 9-21.3. Insurance Required. [Ord. #856, § 6462; Ord. #1293; Ord.
#1327; Ord. #1402]
§ 9-21.4. Contracts Between Owners and Employees. [Ord. #856,
§ 6463]
Taxicabs for which a permit has been issued shall be operated by the owner
or employee of the owner.
No owner and driver of such taxicab shall enter into any contract,
agreement, or understanding between themselves by the terms of which
2. That if the permit be granted the applicant will be under efficient
management with a reasonable probability of earning a fair and
reasonable return on his capital devoted thereto.
a. Before any permit is issued, the owner of any taxicab shall be required
to file with the Council, and thereafter keep in full force and effect, a
policy of insurance in such form as the Council may deem proper,
executed by an insurance company approved by the Council, insuring
the owner and the Council against liability for any loss and damage that
may result to any person or property from the operation of such taxicab,
in amounts not less than the following sums:
For the injury of any one person in any one accident, $250,000; and
For the injury of two or more persons or the death of two or more
persons in any one accident, $500,000; and
For property damage liability in any one accident, $100,000.
Such policy of insurance specified shall protect each taxicab, or, in the
event a group policy is carried, the amount of the policy shall be the
same as specified in this section multiplied by the number of taxicabs
operated.
b. In the event of the return unsatisfied of any execution issued on any
judgment from which an appeal may be taken without bond rendered
against any such person in any suit for damages on account of injury to
persons or property caused by such taxicab, such person shall, within
10 days after the return of such execution unsatisfied, increase the
amount of his insurance to the amount of such judgment, and failure to
do so shall forthwith cease the operation of such taxicab until such
insurance is filed or judgment is paid.
c. All insurance policies shall contain a provision for a continuing liability
thereunder to the full amount of the penalty thereof, notwithstanding
any recovery thereon.
d. No person shall operate any taxicab without having a policy of
insurance as required by the provisions of this section in full force and
effect at all times during the operation of such taxicab.
§ 9-21.2 COMPTON § 9-21.4
AO:424
such driver pays to or for the account of such owner a fixed or determinable
sum for the use of such vehicle.
§ 9-21.5. Taxicab Permits. [Ord. #856, § 6464]
§ 9-21.6. License Fee. [Ord. #856, § 6464.1]
Each permit issued hereunder shall entitle the holding owner to engage in
the taxicab business upon the payment of the license fee provided for in §
9-2.
§ 9-21.7. Stand Permits and Requirements. [Ord. #856, § 6464.2]
a. No taxicab permit shall be issued to any person until a standard design
and uniform color scheme has been adopted by the applicant and
approved by the Council which designates by color the owner of such
vehicle.
b. No permit shall be issued to any person having a color scheme, name,
monogram, or insignia which conflicts with or imitates any color
scheme, name, monogram, or insignia used by another in such a
manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public.
a. A permit may be issued to the owner of a taxicab by the Traffic
Authority allowing such taxicab while awaiting employment to stand at
certain designated places upon the street.
b. No such permit shall be granted by the Traffic Authority except upon
the regular application of such person desiring such stand.
c. The application shall contain the written consent of the occupant of the
first floor of that portion of the building or property in front of which it
is desired that such vehicle shall stand, or, if such building shall contain
more than 25 residents or be used for hotel purposes, the written
consent of the person operating such hotel.
d. If there is no building on the premises in front of which it is desired that
such vehicle may stand, or if there is a building and the first floor is not
occupied, such permit may be granted upon the written consent of the
owner of such building or premises.
e. In front of any building used for hotel purposes containing more than
100 guest residents, stand permits may be issued on the basis of one
vehicle for every 100 guest residents or a fraction thereof, but none of
such vehicles shall have permits to stand within a distance of 15 feet
inside of a line drawn from the center of the entrance of such building
at right angles to the street upon which such entrance is located.
f. In addition to the number of taxicabs that may be permitted to stand
upon a street within the limits of any one block as provided in this
section, the Traffic Authority may grant permission to a taxicab
operator to stand upon the street at the station of any interurban or bus
§ 9-21.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-21.7
AO:425
§ 9-21.8. Additional Regulations. [Ord. #856, § 6464.3; Ord. #1949,
§ 2]
§ 9-21.9. Stand Locations. [Ord. #856, § 6464.4]
§ 9-21.10. "For Hire" Signs. [Ord. #856, § 6464.5]
transportation system as may be necessary to meet the needs of the
traveling public; provided the consent of the owner of the interurban
or bus transportation system is first obtained by the operator for
additional taxicabs.
a. No more than three taxicabs shall have permits to stand on any street
within the limits of one block having a frontage of 500 feet or more, nor
shall more than two such taxicabs be permitted to stand on any one
street within such block having a frontage of less than 500 feet.
b. No permit shall be issued for any stand to be located within 50 feet of
another stand on the same side of any street.
c. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the Traffic Authority
shall have power and it shall be his duty to refuse the issuance of such
permit when it satisfactorily appears:
1. That such stand will interfere with, obstruct, endanger, or congest
traffic;
2. That such stand will increase traffic and pedestrian hazards to the
extent of endangering lives and property.
d. The Traffic Authority may, after such a reasonable discretion grant
renewal or extension of permits for such stands.
e. No taxicab shall be operated from any place except a stand designated
by the Traffic Authority.
f. That all taxicabs shall be properly maintained, i.e. mechanical
condition, the safety, the cleanliness and appearance.
g. No taxicab shall be more than five years old.
a. No owner or driver of any taxicab shall stand while awaiting
employment at any place not a stand designated by the Traffic
Authority, and assigned to the owner of such taxicab.
b. No owner or driver of any taxicab shall have such taxicab unattended at
a stand for a period of time longer than three minutes.
c. Stands may be operated for a period of 24 hours a day except where
standing, stopping and parking vehicles is otherwise prohibited by law.
§ 9-21.7 COMPTON § 9-21.10
AO:426
§ 9-21.11. Taxicab Signs and Cards. [Ord. #856, § 6464.6]
§ 9-21.12. Other Sign Permits Required. [Ord. #856, § 6464.7]
No person shall display any sign other than those provided in this section
without first obtaining a written permit of the Traffic Authority to do so.
§ 9-21.13. Taxi-Meter. [Ord. #856, § 6464.8]
a. While in a stand upon any street awaiting employment a taxicab may
display a sign with the words thereon "For Hire." Such signs shall be of
metal and uniform size of six inches by nine inches.
b. Such sign shall have a background of enameled dark color and the
letters or figures appearing thereon shall be white.
a. Every taxicab used for carrying passengers for hire shall display in the
rear of the driver's seat and in full view of passengers a card not less
than 2 1/2 inches by five inches, not more than three inches by six
inches which shall have lettered thereon the owner's name under which
he is operating and the business address and telephone number of such
owner together with the rates to be charged.
b. Every taxicab shall have painted upon the door of the taxicab the name
under which the owner operates together with the telephone number
and the taxicab number. The name of the cab, and the telephone
number shall be painted upon the rear of such taxicab. All of the letters
mentioned in this Paragraph shall be not less than 2 1/2 inches in height
and not less than a 5/16 in stroke.
c. Every taxicab may show an electrically lighted vacant sign attached to
the top of such taxicab. Every such sign shall be not more than 2 1/2
inches high by nine inches in length.
a. No owner operating any taxicab shall operate such vehicle unless it is
equipped with a taxi-meter of such type and design as may be approved
by the Traffic Authority. Every owner using such taxi-meter shall at all
times keep such taxi-meter accurate. Such meter shall be subject to
inspection from time to time.
b. The Traffic Authority or any police officer is authorized at his instance
and upon the complaint of any person to investigate such taxi-meter
and upon the discovery of any inaccuracy of the taxi-meter to remove
any such taxicab equipped with the taxi-meter from the streets until the
taxi-meter shall have been correctly adjusted.
c. All taxicabs shall base their charges upon taxi-meter and all taxi-meters
shall be placed so that the reading dial showing the amount to be
charged shall be well lighted as readily discernible by the passenger
riding in such taxicab.
§ 9-21.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-21.13
AO:427
§ 9-21.14. Passengers to Have Full Use of Car. [Ord. #856, § 6465]
When a taxicab is engaged, the occupant shall have the exclusive right to
the full and free use of the passenger compartment and no owner or driver
shall solicit or carry additional passengers therein, provided, however, that
the Traffic Authority may upon application of the permittee, authorize such
permittee during the period of the National War Emergency as proclaimed
by the President of the United States, to waive the provisions of this section
above set forth when in the judgment of the Traffic Authority it will be for
the best interests of the National War Effort to do so.
§ 9-21.15. Taxicab Compartments. [Ord. #856, § 6465.1]
The passenger compartment shall be the rear section of the taxicab and the
front seat shall be the driver's compartment. Each taxicab shall provide for
carrying of baggage in the front section to the right of the driver. No driver
shall permit any passenger or any other person except student drivers to
ride in the front seat of the driver's compartment when such taxicab is in
motion, provided however, that the Traffic Authority shall have authority
to require all taxicabs to provide a separate compartment for the driver
separate from the passenger compartment by a glass partition, provided,
however, that the Traffic Authority may, upon application of the permittee,
authorize such permittee during the period of National War Emergency as
proclaimed by the President of the United States, to waive the provisions of
this section above set forth when in the judgment of the Traffic Authority it
will be for the best interests of the National War Effort to do so.
§ 9-21.16. Circuitous Routes. [Ord. #856, § 6466]
Any driver employed to carry passengers to a designated point shall take
the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger safely and
expeditiously to his destination.
d. No driver of a taxicab while carrying passengers shall display the flag
attached to the taxi-meter in such a position as to denote that such
taxicab is not employed, or throw the flag of the taxi-meter in a
recording position when such vehicle is not actually employed or fail to
throw the flag of such taxi-meter in a non-recording position at the
termination of each and every service.
e. No operator of any taxicab upon receiving payment or fare as indicated
by the taxi-meter shall refuse to give a receipt upon the request of any
passenger giving the payment.
f. That notwithstanding anything in this section provided, the City Council
may authorize the owner or operator of any taxicab business to post a
schedule of fares in lieu of equipping any taxicab with a taxi-meter,
which schedule of rates shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each
taxicab, so that the same will be visible to any passenger therein. The
City Council, in fixing such schedule of fares, may do so upon a flat
mileage basis or by zoning the City into zones.
§ 9-21.13 COMPTON § 9-21.17
AO:428
§ 9-21.17. Excessive Charges. [Ord. #856, § 6467]
§ 9-21.18. Meter Taxicab Rates. [Ord. #856, § 6467.1]
The minimum and maximum rates of fare to be charged the public by
taxicabs operated over any street may be set from time to time by the
Council by Resolution.
No rate shall be placed in effect, charged, demanded or collected for taxicab
services other than such rates so provided by resolution of the City Council
pursuant hereto.
§ 9-21.19. Flat Rate Service. [Ord. #856, § 6467.2]
Irrespective of anything contained in the foregoing sections of this section,
the holder of a valid taxicab license issued under this section, provided
he maintains a taxicab service in the manner set forth in the foregoing
subsections of this section may in addition thereto operate another and
different type of taxicab service hereinafter designated "flat rate service"
under the following conditions, to wit:
a. No person shall charge, collect, demand, receive or arrange for any
compensation for the services of any taxicab for hire in the City in
amount, rate or compensation greater than the charges or the rates
regulated by the Council.
b. No operator of any taxicab upon receiving full payment for a fare as
indicated by the taxi-meter or schedule of fares, when such schedule is
permitted in lieu of taxi-meter, shall refuse to give a receipt upon the
request of any passenger making the payment.
a. Taxicabs operated under such flat rate service shall be painted a
different color as may be designated by the Traffic Authority and shall
be distinctively marked so as to differentiate the same from the taxicabs
used in regular type service.
b. Flat rate service shall be conducted by charging each passenger a flat
rate of fare for transportation anywhere within designated zones of the
City of Compton; no rate shall be placed in effect, charged, demanded
or collected for such service other than such rates so provided by
resolution of the City Council pursuant thereto.
c. The taxicabs used in such flat rate service shall not be required to have
a passenger compartment in the rear section separated from the
driver's compartment and passengers may be permitted to sit in any
seat in the cab.
d. Taxicabs used in such flat rate service shall not be required to be
equipped with taxi meters.
e. Occupants of taxicabs engaged in such flat rate service shall not have
the exclusive right to the full and free use of the taxicab and the owner
§ 9-21.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-21.19
AO:429
§ 9-21.20. Authority of Traffic Authority to Adopt Rules. [Ord. #856,
§ 6467.3]
The Traffic Authority shall have authority to adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the service and safety of the operation
of taxicabs.
§ 9-21.21. Ground for Revocation of Permits. [Ord. #856, § 6468]
§ 9-21.22. Termination and Renewal of Permits. [Ord. #856,
§ 6468.1]
All permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this section shall
be for a period not to exceed one year and all such permits and licenses
shall expire upon the last day of the current year. All permits issued for all
street stands upon the written consent of a person operating a hotel must
be renewed yearly. Other street stand permits shall remain in full force and
effect until same shall be cancelled either on the request of the permittee
or the person who gave such written consent to use such stand by notifying
the Traffic Authority that such permission has been withdrawn. If the Traffic
Authority has cancelled a permit for a stand after having been notified that
the consent to use the same has been withdrawn, it shall not grant a permit
for a stand so cancelled for a period of six months from date of cancellation.
and driver thereof shall have the right to solicit and carry additional
passengers therein.
No licensee shall operate an additional service as herein set forth unless
authorized so to do by resolution of the City Council.
a. The Chief of Police shall be the motor vehicle inspector of the Council
and in addition to the powers of the Council to suspend or revoke
permits or licenses under § 9-4, the Chief of Police may issue or suspend
permits required herein when the permittee or licensee has not
complied with the provisions of this section or shall have been arrested
or convicted for the commission of a felony, reckless driving, pandering
or the use, sale, possession, information or transportation of narcotics
or illicit intoxicating liquors, or for assault and battery, or shall have
charged rates greater than those which the permittee has on file with
the Council or shall have violated any of the rules and regulations of the
Council and Traffic Authority pertaining to the operation of and the
extent, character and quality of the service of taxicabs.
b. The action of the Chief Motor Vehicle Inspector in issuing or suspending
any of said permits shall be subject to the ratification and approval by
the Council without further action at any meeting held subsequent to
the action of the Chief Motor Vehicle Inspector but not later than 15
days thereafter.
§ 9-21.19 COMPTON § 9-21.23
AO:430
§ 9-21.23. Driver's Permit. [Ord. #856, § 6468.2]
Every driver of a taxicab must make written application to the Traffic
Authority setting forth his name, age, and residence and last previous
address and the length of his residence at each; whether he is married or
single; the name of the owner for whom he intends to drive; whether he has
ever been convicted of a felony or offenses referred to in this section, and
such other information as may be required by the Traffic Authority.
The Traffic Authority shall cause an investigation of such an application to
be made and cause the applicant to be examined as to his knowledge of
the laws and ordinances regulating the operation of motor vehicles and his
ability to operate a taxicab service on the streets of the City.
No driver's permit shall be granted to any person who is not of good moral
character, or who is under the age of 21 years or who cannot speak the
English language or who does not own a chauffeurs license issued by the
Motor Vehicle Department of the state.
§ 9-21.24. Permits, Sizes and Issuance of Badges. [Ord. #856,
§ 6468.3; Ord. #990]
Every driver's permit granted by the Traffic Authority shall be filed with the
City License Collector who shall charge or collect the sum of $2, and upon
receipt of the amount shall issue to the holder a "badge" of such design
and bearing the words and numbers as may be prescribed by the Traffic
Authority. The badge shall at all times be carried on the person of the driver
during the times he is driving such taxicab.
§ 9-21.25. Fingerprints. [Ord. #856, § 6468.4]
In addition to the requirements herein provided for obtaining a driver's
permit, every driver shall give and it shall be the duty of the Police
Department to take the fingerprints of such driver together with his picture
and such other information as will comprise a description of the driver.
§ 9-22. TOW TRUCK CODE.
§ 9-22.1. Title. [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6430]
The provisions of this section shall be known as the "Tow Truck Code" and
may be cited as such.
§ 9-22.2. City Referrals.57 [Ord. #2207, § 1]
Those tow truck operators chosen by the City Council to order or request
the towing of City vehicles or private vehicles desired to be removed by the
local authorized law enforcement agency(s) of the City or auto abatement
57.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 9-22.2, Definitions, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1584 and 1715, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2207.
§ 9-21.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-22.2
AO:431
personnel, pursuant to provisions of law, shall be limited to tow truck
businesses that are in compliance with the provisions of the Tow Truck
Code.
§ 9-22.3. Supplements Other Codes and Statutes. [Added by Ord.
#1584, § 2-6432]
This section is not the exclusive regulation of tow truck operations. It shall
be supplemental and in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and
ordinances heretofore enacted by the City and state or any other legal entity
or agency having jurisdiction.
§ 9-22.4. Administration of Code. [Ord. #2207, § 2]
Except as otherwise provided, the provisions of this section shall be
administered by the local authorized law enforcement agency(s) of the City
or other regularly employed and salaried employee designated by such
agency(s).
§ 9-22.5. Permit Required. [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6434]
In order to operate within the City, a towing business shall beforehand have
duly obtained a towing service permit and business license.
§ 9-22.6. Application Procedure. [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6435;
Ord. #2207, § 3]
a. Applications for permits to provide towing service within the City shall
be made on forms furnished by the local authorized law enforcement
agency(s) of the City containing spaces for such information with
reference to the applicant as the local authorized law enforcement
agency(s) of the City may reasonably require.
b. All information required shall be given under oath.
c. Each application shall be accompanied by a true photograph of each
applicant approximately 1 1/2 square inches and taken within 30 days
of the date of application and by the true fingerprints of the thumb and
fingers of each hand of each applicant. In the case of a corporation,
such photograph and fingerprints shall be furnished by the president
and vice-president, secretary and treasurer of the corporation; in the
case of a partnership or firm, of each member or partner of the
partnership or firm; and in the case of individuals, of each individual
applicant. A nonrefundable fee of $12 shall be remitted at the same
time application for a towing permit is sought. Such application shall be
made in person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any
Friday.
d. Failure to furnish the required truthful information, photograph and
fingerprints shall be sufficient grounds for denial of any application.
§ 9-22.2 COMPTON § 9-22.7
AO:432
§ 9-22.7. Tow Car Requirements. [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6436;
Ord. #2207, § 4]
All towing equipment used by towing service permit holders shall comply
with the following requirements:
§ 9-22.8. Storage Facilities. [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6437.1]
All vehicles taken into custody by the Police Department must be stored in
areas that are enclosed by a substantial wire fence or wall, and that have
facilities for locking all gates or doors. Such fence or wall enclosures shall
not be less than six feet in height, and shall be provided with not less than
one gate or door of adequate width and height. The bottom edge of the
enclosure structure shall not be more than two inches above the finished
parking surface of the enclosed area. All fence or wall enclosure structures
shall be maintained in first class order throughout the term of this contract.
Any damage to fence or wall structures shall be repaired within 24 hours
to ensure proper protection for the stored vehicles. The facilities shall have
a capacity to store 200 vehicles outside and a capacity to store 10 vehicles
under sheltering cover giving protection from the elements.
§ 9-22.9. Storage Hours. [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6437.2]
Storage lots and/or garages shall have an attendant on duty, on the
premises during normal working hours. Normal working hours are defined
as meaning from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and from
8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Saturday.
§ 9-22.10. Transfer of Location. [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6438]
Any person having a permit issued for the conduct of the business under the
provisions of this section, may file an application for a transfer of location
upon the payment of an application fee of $12 for so doing and it shall not be
necessary to pay any other permit fee herein required in connection with a
a. All applicable sections of tow car requirements listed in the California
Vehicle Code.
b. Adequate equipment to handle any passenger vehicle, motorcycles and/
or large and small trucks, trailers, tractors and other similar heavy
equipment. Standard tow truck or trucks shall be used, not converted
pickup trucks.
c. A cable winch of sufficient size and capacity to retrieve vehicles which
have gone over embankments or off traveled portions of roadways into
inundated areas or other inaccessible locations.
d. Tow car operators must be proficient in unlocking vehicles on law
enforcement order when required.
e. Tow trucks shall be radio-equipped with equipment approved by the
local authorized law enforcement agency(s) of the City.
§ 9-22.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-22.10
AO:433
change of location; however, the gross receipts tax mentioned in Subsection
9-2.1a19 shall entitle any person to operate only one tow service in the City,
and any person desiring an additional, separate and new location shall make
a new application in conformity with the procedure heretofore outlined in
this section, and shall pay an initial application fee of $12 for so doing.
§ 9-22.11. Expansion of Location. [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6439]
Any person holding a license or permit to conduct a tow truck service at a
given location who should desire to enlarge or extend the area of said place
of business by adding thereto adjoining or contiguous property shall not be
deemed to be operating more than one tow truck service; but in the event
such adjacent or contiguous property is desired to be used in connection
with the original business location, the holder of said permit, to include such
additional adjoining or contiguous property, shall pay therefor a fee of $12
for so doing. Permits are not assignable.
§ 9-22.12. Subsequent Modification. [Added by Ord. #1584,
§ 2-6440]
The above provision shall not be deemed to limit the duty of the Council to
impose other or further conditions to the granting or renewal of any such
permit reasonably deemed to protect and preserve the public peace, health
and safety, and general welfare.
§ 9-22.13. Insurance Requirements. [Added by Ord. #1584,
§ 2-6441]
Permittees shall be insured and provide certificates of insurance for the
following types of coverage:
§ 9-22.14. Public Hearing. [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6442; Ord.
#2207, § 5]
Upon the filing of an application for a permit to provide towing services,
the City Council shall fix the time and date for public hearing thereon.
The Council shall refer the matter to the local authorized law enforcement
agency(s) of the City, who shall cause an investigation to be made
respecting the necessity for the proposed service or addition of services
within the City.
a. Workers compensation insurance as required by the Workers
Compensation Law.
b. Comprehensive general liability insurance covering the permittee and
City as coinsured with not less than the following limits of liability:
1. Bodily injury or death: $300,000;
2. Property damage, each occurrence: $100,000.
§ 9-22.10 COMPTON § 9-22.14
AO:434
At least 10 days' written notice of the time and place set for the public
hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all persons then holding
permits. Notice shall also be given the general public by posting a notice
of such hearing on the bulletin board in the main lobby of the City Hall
at least 10 days prior to such hearing. Any interested person may file
with the City Clerk a memorandum in support of or in opposition to the
issuance of a permit and certificate. At the public hearing of the matter,
evidence may be received with reference thereto but shall not necessarily
be limited to the matters contained in the application. In conducting such
hearings, the City Council shall, among other matters as it may deem
pertinent, take into consideration the number of towing services already in
lawful operation in the City; the probable effect of increased service to the
City; the character, experience and personal financial responsibility of the
applicant; the capacity and ability of the applicant to satisfactorily perform
referred towing services; and other factors relevant to the application.
§ 9-22.15. Audit. [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6443]
Each permittee shall maintain separate accounting records of all charges
for impounded and stored vehicles. Such records shall be available to
representatives of the City Controller for audit purposes.
§ 9-22.16. Towing Fee Rates.58 [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6444; Ord.
#1823, § 1; Ord. #1838, § 1; Ord. #1853, § 1; Ord. #1905, § 1; Ord.
#2207, § 6]
The maximum rates to be charged for towing services shall be established
as follows:
a. Towing. Charge shall be based on an hourly rate for time actually
consumed. Automobile and motorcycle rates shall be $69.50 for the first
hour or fraction thereof, $34.75 for each additional half-hour or fraction
thereof over first hour.
b. Heavy-Duty Towing.
1. When the disabled truck is upright and does not require special
preparation for towing, rates shall be $136 for the first hour or
fraction thereof for a heavy-duty tow unit; $68 for each additional
half-hour or fraction thereof over first hour; $30 an hour or fraction
thereof for each extra man required.
2. When the truck has overturned, or is on another vehicle, or has
gone down an embankment, or requires special equipment and
preparation prior to towing, rates shall be $190.50 an hour or
fraction thereof for a heavy-duty unit; $190.50 per hour for each
58.Editor's Note: Section 2 of Ordinance 1838, and as amended by Ordinances 1853 and
1905, provides that all bills shall be itemized; and that all rates and charges, set forth by
this ordinance, shall be posted in the operator's office. Moreover, additional charges shall
not be made for special equipment or service necessary to prepare vehicles for towing
except as provided herein.
§ 9-22.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-22.16
AO:435
additional heavy-duty tow unit; $95.25 for each additional half-hour
or fraction thereof over the first hour; $30 an hour or fraction
thereof for each additional man required.
An additional 50% of the charge incurred may be included in the
total fee when the disabled truck carries a dangerous cargo of
inflammables, corrosives, explosives or liquid gas.
c. Storage. Charges shall be based on a daily rate which extends from
midnight to midnight the following day. A vehicle must be at the tow
service for over eight hours before a second day charge can be levied.
1. Motorcycles, including scooters: Rates shall be $4.25 the first day
and $4 each day thereafter.
2. Automobiles and trucks to and including one ton; Rates shall be
$13 for the first day and $13 each day thereafter.
3. Trucks over one ton and less than 20 feet: Rates shall be $14.50 for
the first day and $14.50 for each additional day thereafter.
4. Trucks over one ton and over 20 feet: Rates shall be $19.25 for the
first day and $19.25 for each additional day thereafter.
d. Exceptions. When a release request is made within the first hour of
storage, the storage fee shall be waived.
When a release request is made within the second hour of storage, the
storage fee shall be one-half of the regular fee.
When a release request is made within eight hours, only one day's
storage shall be charged, regardless of the calendar date.
When a release request is made between 7:00 p.m. and midnight, one
day's storage fee shall be waived providing such release occurs within
the mandatory release hours (6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.) of the following
day.
e. Long Term Storage. Vehicles impounded by the local authorized law
enforcement agency(s) of the City for periods in excess of 30 days will
revert to "long term," half-rate storage fee, i.e., automobiles at $6.50 a
day.
f. After-Hours Service. Contractor agrees to respond to release any
vehicle impounded or stored at his premises, and as compensation may
charge 1/2 the basic hourly rate for towing as a fee for his service. If
time consumed exceeds 1/2 hour, contractor may charge $24 for each
additional 1/2 hour or fraction thereof.
g. Hook-Up/Let Down Fees. Contractor shall not charge a fee for "hooking
up" or "letting down" a vehicle from its tow truck if said vehicle was not
actually towed to contractor's garage. Unless contractor has departed
§ 9-22.16 COMPTON § 9-22.16
AO:436
§ 9-22.17. Scene of the Accident. [Added by Ord. No. 1584,
§ 2-6445]
It shall be the duty of the tow truck operator to remove all debris, where
possible, from the accident scene before leaving the scene of the accident.
Repeated failure to adhere to this subsection may cause for revocation or
suspension of a permit.
§ 9-22.18. Rights of Vehicle Owner. [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6446]
The right of any vehicle owner involved in a traffic collision to call for
traffic service of his own choosing shall not be infringed upon so long as
the removal of his vehicle is made without undue delay. In those cases
where the owner of a damaged vehicle chooses to use the service of the
City's referral tow service and storage garage, such services and charges
related thereto shall be the responsibility of the contractor and owner of the
vehicle.
§ 9-22.19. Display of Signs. [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6447; Ord.
No. 2207, § 7]
Except as otherwise provided, a tow service and storage operator shall not
display any signs or advertising materials which indicate that his or her
operation is an official towing service or garage of the City without having
been so designated by the City Council.
§ 9-22.20. Inspection of Facilities. [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6448]
The City reserves the right to inspect the facilities, equipment and premises
of the permittees hereunder at any time during the life of this permit in
order to ensure that all terms and conditions of this Chapter are being
satisfactorily met and complied with.
§ 9-22.21. Effect of This Section on Existing Tow Truck Operations.
[Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6449]
A tow truck business lawfully existing on December 1978, is hereby granted
an automatic variance so as to permit the continuation of the use for
a period not exceeding three years from August 23, 1979, provided no
additions or enlargements of such use are made during the period of such
automatic variance except those required by law unless full compliance with
the provisions hereof are effected prior to such additions or enlargements,
and the same are otherwise approved as may be required by law.
the tow scene, he shall not tow a stored vehicle to his garage if the
owner or authorized agent thereof requests its possession.
§ 9-22.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-22.22
AO:437
§ 9-22.22. Power to Revoke or Suspend. [Added by Ord. #1584,
§ 2-6450; Ord. #2207, § 8]
Permits provided for this section may be granted, denied, revoked,
suspended or canceled whenever in the exercise of reasonable and sound
discretion the City Council determines that the provisions of this section
have not been complied with or that the permittee is not a fit or proper
person to operate within the City of Compton. The local authorized law
enforcement agency(s) of the City shall conduct an annual review of towing
service permits and report to the City Council thereon.
§ 9-22.23. Violation. [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6451]
§ 9-22.24. Fees. [Added by Ord. #1584, § 2-6452]
Each permittee who contracts with the City to provide towing services shall
pay to the City a sum of 5% of that portion of the permittee's gross receipts
exceeding $5,000 developed from or attributed to the City's referred tow
business (storage fees not included). Such payments shall be made on
or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar
quarter, after the $5,000 figure has been reached. This payment shall be
payable in addition to the permittee's general business tax. A permittee who
fails to remit the payment when due and imposed by this section shall pay a
penalty of 10% of the amount due in addition to the payment.
§ 9-22.25. Release of Impounded Vehicles. [Ord. #1683, § 1; Ord.
#2207, § 9]
Vehicles which are taken into police custody pursuant to this section shall
be released in accordance with the following provisions:
a. Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the
subsections or provisions of this section.
b. Violation a Misdemeanor. No person shall violate any provisions, or fail
to comply with any of the requirements of this section. Any person
violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the
mandatory requirements of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the
provisions of this section shall be liable to the penalty established in §
1-6.
a. Impounded Vehicles. Any vehicle or part which the local authorized law
enforcement agency(s) of the City has ordered held by the operator
because of involvement in any crime or infraction or the true owner of
the vehicle cannot be ascertained, shall be deemed an impounded
vehicle and shall not be released to any person without the prior written
approval of the local authorized law enforcement agency(s) of the City.
b. Stored Vehicles. Any vehicle or part which is kept for safekeeping and is
not otherwise an impounded vehicle or part as defined above shall be
§ 9-22.22 COMPTON § 9-22.25
AO:438
§ 9-23. BINGO GAMES FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES.59
§ 9-23.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
As used in this section, the words and phrases hereinafter set forth shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context clearly
requires to the contrary:
BINGO; BINGO GAMES — Shall mean games of chance in which prizes
are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card
which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random and shall include
cards having numbers or symbols which are concealed and preprinted in a
manner providing for distribution of prizes.
CITY — Shall mean the City of Compton.
COUNCIL — Shall mean the City Council of the City of Compton.
MOBILE HOME PARK ASSOCIATION — Shall mean any group or
organization of 10 or more members, each of whom owns or leases a
mobile home as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18008, which
organization was organized for some civil, recreational, charitable or
cultural purpose.
PROCEEDS — Shall mean the receipts from bingo games conducted by
organizations not exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax
under Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
PROFITS — Shall mean the excess of receipts over expenditures (including
expenditures for security personnel who are not members of the
organization) in connection with bingo games conducted by organizations
exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax under Section
23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
SENIOR CITIZENS' ORGANIZATION — Shall mean any group or
organization of 10 or more members, the age of each member being not
less than 60 years, which organization was organized for some civil,
recreational, charitable or cultural purpose.
§ 9-23.2. Organizations Eligible for City License to Conduct Bingo
Games. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
Organizations which maintain their principle office within the City limits
of the City of Compton and are exempt from the payment of the bank
and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f,
deemed a stored vehicle and may be released at the discretion of the
operator to any person presenting proper identification and evidence
of ownership and upon payment of all required charges. Operator shall
hold the City of Compton and its local authorized law enforcement
agency(s) harmless from any claims arising from the alleged improper
release of vehicles or parts.
59.Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance No. 1879.
§ 9-22.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-23.2
AO:439
23701g, and 23701(1) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, mobile home park
associations and senior citizens' organizations are eligible to apply to the
City for a license to conduct bingo games in the City under the provisions of
Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and the provisions of this section.
§ 9-23.3. Application for License. [Ord. #1891, § 1; Ord. #2193, §§ 1,
2]
Any eligible organization desiring to obtain a license to conduct bingo
games in the City shall file an application in writing therefor with the
Planning Department on a form to be provided by the Planning Department.
§ 9-23.4. Applicant Must Be Qualified. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
No license shall be issued unless the applicant is an eligible organization
under Subsection 9-23.2 and its application conforms to the requirements,
terms and conditions of this section.
§ 9-23.5. Contents of Application. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
a. Types of Licenses. The City will permit two types of bingo licenses:
1. Accessory Bingo License. Eligible organizations may apply to
conduct bingo games as an accessory to their existing program.
2. Special Bingo License. Eligible organizations may apply for a
"special" license to conduct bingo as a primary activity for the
organization. In order to prevent over concentration, there shall be
a maximum of one special license approved for each 100,000
residents located within the City.
b. Application and Licensing Fees. The following fees shall be paid by
eligible organizations applying for or holding bingo licenses:
1. All eligible organizations shall submit at time of application a
licensing fee of $50. If the application for a license is denied, the
City shall retain 1/2 of the license fee to pay the costs of the review
of the application. An additional fee for law enforcement and public
safety costs incurred by the City that are directly related to bingo
activities may be imposed and shall be collected monthly by the
City issuing the license; however, the fee shall not exceed the
actual costs incurred in providing the service. The City Council may
from time to time establish a schedule of fees for the costs incurred
by the City for law enforcement and public safety by Resolution.
2. All eligible organizations shall submit at time of application the fee
required by § 30-42 of the Zoning Ordinance for processing of a
Certificate of Occupancy application.
3. All bingo licensees shall pay, on the anniversary of the issuance of
the original license, an annual licensing fee of $50.
§ 9-23.2 COMPTON § 9-23.5
AO:440
a. All applications for a license shall be signed under penalty of perjury
and shall contain the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. A statement that the applicant is an eligible organization under
Subsection 9-23.2. The application shall include, as attachments,
certificates of the Franchise Tax Board and the U.S. Internal
Revenue Service establishing that the organization is currently
exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax under
the Revenue and Taxation Code and that a contribution or gift to
the organization would be a charitable contribution under the
Internal Revenue Code, deed, lease agreement, permit or other
documents that clearly demonstrate the applicant is eligible
pursuant to Section 326.5 of the Penal Code.
3. A statement that the applicant occupies a facility within the City
which has met the Zoning Ordinance and Municipal Code
requirements for public assembly and may legally be used for this
purpose for the conduct of bingo;
4. The names, addresses and signatures of at least two officers of the
applicant (should two or more officers exist);
5. The names, addresses and signatures of the members of the
applicant who will be primarily responsible for the operation,
conduct, promotion and supervision of bingo games and a list of
other members who will be involved;
6. The address of the property within the City used by the applicant
for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the
applicant was organized, together with the occupancy capacity of
such place at which the bingo games will be conducted;
7. Proposed days and time for the operation of bingo games;
8. A description of the system to be used to account for the receipts,
prizes and expenses of the bingo games;
9. The specific charitable purposes which the bingo receipts will
benefit;
10. The maximum number of players that will be permitted in the
facility at any time;
11. A copy of the Certificate of Occupancy for the premises at which
the bingo games will be conducted;
12. A site plan for the premises at which the bingo games will be
conducted, including parking;
13. A floor plan for the premises at which the bingo games will be
conducted, including rest rooms, entrances and exits;
§ 9-23.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-23.5
AO:441
§ 9-23.6. Processing of Application. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
Upon receipt of an application to operate any bingo game, the Planning
Department shall refer the application to interested departments of the
City, including, but not limited to, the Treasurer's Department, the Fire
Department and the Department of Building and Safety, for investigation as
to whether or not all the statements in the application are true and whether
or not the property of the applicant qualifies and the extent to which it
qualifies as to fire, occupancy and other applicable restrictions as property
on which bingo games may lawfully be conducted.
14. A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in
strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal
Code, this section and all other applicable statutes and regulations
as they may be amended from time to time, and an agreement that
the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked upon violation
of any of such provisions;
15. A Certificate of Occupancy application for the operation of bingo;
and
16. Such other information as the Planning Department shall
reasonably require.
b. An application for a special license shall contain the following
supplemental information:
1. A copy of the applicant's articles of incorporation;
2. The name and address of each partner, shareholder, officer and
director of the applicant;
3. A one year, detailed cash flow projection, a pro forma financial
statement, a statement of preopening cash, a financing plan and
copies of all loan agreements of the applicant;
4. A statement that the applicant understands and agrees that the
application shall be considered by the Council as set forth in this
section only after full investigations and reports have been made in
a timely manner by all applicable City staff;
5. A complete listing of all criminal arrests and convictions of the
applicant and each partner, shareholder, officer and director of the
applicant, if any, not including minor traffic offenses, with
explanations therefor; and
6. Such other information as City staff may deem necessary to
adequately process the application.
a. Accessory Bingo License. Upon being satisfied that an applicant for an
accessory license is fully qualified under the law to conduct bingo
games in the City, the Planning Department shall approve the
Certificate of Occupancy for the use and direct the City License
§ 9-23.5 COMPTON § 9-23.6
AO:442
§ 9-23.7. Grounds for Denial of Application. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
The City may, at its discretion, deny any application if it finds that the
applicant has not complied with any requirement of this section, or for any
of the following grounds or reasons:
Collector to issue a license to the organization (the "licensee") for a
term of one year from the date of issuance. The licensee may apply to
the Planning Department for issuance of a new license each year, upon
payment of the annual license fee.
b. Special Bingo License. Upon being satisfied that an applicant for a
special license is fully qualified under the law for consideration for a
special license, the Planning Department shall notify the Council that it
has received and investigated said application.
1. Within 30 days after receipt of the application notice, the Council
shall schedule a public hearing on the application.
2. Not less than 10 days prior to the hearing date, the Planning
Department shall mail notice of the hearing to the applicant and all
owners of property within a 300-foot radius of the exterior
boundaries of the proposed bingo site, using for that purpose the
last known name and address of such owners as shown upon the
Assessment Roll of the County of Los Angeles, and shall cause
notice of the hearing to be published once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City. Such notices shall contain a
description of the proposed bingo site, the nature of the license
applied for and the time and place of the public hearing. The failure
of any owner to receive any notice duly mailed shall not affect, in
any way, the validity of any of the proceedings undertaken by the
Council pursuant to this section.
a. Indictment or conviction of any crime of violence, any crime involving
fraud, gambling, thievery, bunco, moral turpitude or evasion of taxes, or
any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business
honesty, whether committed in the State of California or elsewhere,
whether denominated a felony or a misdemeanor, and notwithstanding
the passage of time since the conviction;
b. Failure to satisfy the City as to the applicant's good character, honesty
or integrity, either through the applicant's actions or through
association with others;
c. Failure to satisfy the City as to the source and adequacy of funds to be
invested in the proposed venture;
d. Prior unsuitable operation as a bingo licensee in another jurisdiction
without regard to whether disciplinary action was taken at that time or
whether the acts were sufficient to justify revocation of a license;
§ 9-23.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-23.7
AO:443
§ 9-23.8. Issuance, Termination and Renewal of License. [Ord.
#1891, § 1; Ord. #2266 § 1]
In approving an application for a special license, the Council may impose
conditions upon such license in addition to the requirements contained
herein. The Planning Department shall provide to the applicant a copy of
the City's acceptance form, which shall state that the applicant is aware
of and will abide by all conditions imposed by the Council. Upon receipt
of the acceptance form signed by the applicant, the City License Collector
shall thereupon issue the license, which shall be for a term of one year from
the date on which it was issued, unless revoked by the Council pursuant
to the provisions hereof or surrendered by the licensee. In the event of the
surrender, suspension, revocation or expiration of the license, no portion of
any license fee or deposit shall be refunded. Not less than two months prior
to the expiration of a license, the licensee shall file a request for renewal
with the City Clerk to extend the special license for another term of one
year. Such request shall be placed before the City Council for consideration
by resolution.
§ 9-23.9. Contents of License. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
e. Making or causing to be made any statement in an application or
document or orally in connection with an application, which statement
was at the time and in the light of the circumstances under which it was
made false or misleading;
f. Lack of a satisfactory record of business competence and business
ethics and integrity;
g. Failure of any person named in an application when summoned by the
Council to appear and testify before it or its agent at the designated
time and place;
h. Deficient security and law enforcement accommodations and facilities;
or
i. Failure to satisfy the City that approval of the license is in the best
interests of the City.
a. All bingo licenses shall contain the following information:
1. The name of the organization to which the license is issued;
2. The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted,
which must be a facility on the premises used by the applicant for
an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant
was organized;
3. The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be
conducted;
4. The date of expiration of such license; and
§ 9-23.7 COMPTON § 9-23.9
AO:444
§ 9-23.10. Summary Suspension of License Pending Opportunity for
Hearing; Misdemeanor to Continue After Suspension; Hearing;
Revocation. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
§ 9-23.11. Revocation of License; Alternative Procedure. [Ord.
#1891, § 1]
5. Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the
enforcement of the provisions of this section.
b. The licensee shall post the license in a conspicuous place upon the
premises at which the bingo games are conducted and shall
immediately produce such license for inspection upon demand of any
police officer or authorized City employee.
a. Whenever it appears to the Chief of Police that the licensee is
conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this
section, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to summarily
suspend the license and terminate the operation of any bingo game.
Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after such
suspension shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000
per day or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or
both.
b. The Chief of Police shall notify the licensee that it has 10 days from the
date of the suspension to request in writing a hearing before the
Council to determine whether the license should be revoked. Failure to
request a hearing or cure the violation within the ten-day period shall
result in a revocation of the license.
c. If the licensee requests a hearing, the Council shall conduct such
hearing within 30 days after receipt of the request for a hearing. The
City Manager shall give notice of the hearing to the licensee at least 10
days before the hearing by depositing in the United States mail a notice
to the licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall
set forth a summary of the basis for the suspension and proposed
revocation. The licensee may appear before the Council to present
evidence against the proposed revocation.
d. Any organization whose license is revoked shall not conduct any bingo
game in the City until such time as the license is reinstated. The
determination of the Council shall be final.
a. Whenever it appears to the City Manager that the licensee is
conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of this
section, or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representation,
the City Manager may ask the Council to revoke the license. The matter
shall be set for hearing, and the City Manager shall give notice of the
hearing to the licensee at least 10 days before the hearing by depositing
in the United States mail a notice to the licensee at the address given in
§ 9-23.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-23.11
AO:445
§ 9-23.12. Compliance with Law. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
The licensee shall at all times conduct the bingo games in strict accordance
with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, this section and
all other applicable statutes and regulations as they may be amended from
time to time. The license to conduct bingo games may be revoked upon
violation of any of such provisions.
§ 9-23.13. Prizes Awarded. [Ord. #1891, § 1; Ord. #2193, § 3]
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game
shall not exceed $500 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate bingo
game. The licensee shall require that each prize winner sign a receipt,
on a form approved by the City Controller, which shall contain the name,
address, telephone number and signature of the prize winner. Receipts shall
be consecutively numbered and shall be made available to the City Manager
for review upon request.
§ 9-23.14. Profits of Bingo Game Operated by 23701d Organization.
[Ord. #1891, § 1; Ord. #2266 § 2]
All profits derived from bingo games operated by an organization exempt
from payment of the bank and corporation tax under Section 23701d of the
Revenue and Taxation Code shall be deposited into and retained in a special
fund or account, which shall not be commingled with any other fund or
account of the licensee. Such profits shall be deposited into such account
within 24 hours after completion of the bingo game and shall be used only
for local charitable purposes within the City of Compton. The holder of any
special license shall provide the office of the City Manager with a list of all
charities and non-profit organizations receiving such bingo funds and shall
be notified of all charities no longer receiving such funds or of any changes.
The City Manager may designate or approve new charities or non-profit
organizations to receive bingo funds.
§ 9-23.15. Proceeds of Bingo Game Operated by Other Than 23701d
Organization. [Ord. #1891, § 1; Ord. #2266 § 3]
All proceeds derived from bingo games operated by an organization other
than one exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax under
Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall be deposited into
and retained in a special fund or account, which shall not be commingled
with any other fund or account of the licensee. Such proceeds shall be
the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the basis for
the proposed revocation. The licensee may appear before the Council
to present evidence against the proposed revocation.
b. Any organization whose license is revoked shall not conduct any bingo
game in the City until such time as the license is reinstated. The
determination of the Council shall be final.
§ 9-23.11 COMPTON § 9-23.15
AO:446
deposited into such account within 24 hours after completion of the bingo
games and shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:
§ 9-23.16. Records and Reports. [Ord. #1891, § 1; Ord. #2266 § 4]
a. Such proceeds may be used for prizes;
b. A portion of such proceeds may be used for rental of property,
overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative
expenses, security equipment and security personnel;
c. Such proceeds may be used for license fees; and
d. All net proceeds (minus prizes, rent, security, and bingo supplies) shall
remain in the City of Compton and shall be given to local charities or
non-profit organizations. The holder of any special license shall provide
the office of the City Manager with a list of all charities and non-profit
organizations receiving such bingo funds and shall be notified of all
charities no longer receiving such funds or of any changes. The City
Manager may designate or approve new charities or non-profit
organizations to receive bingo funds.
a. Each licensee shall keep full and accurate records of all receipts and
disbursements in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion,
and supervision of bingo games. The City shall have the right to
examine and audit such records at any reasonable time, and the
licensee shall fully cooperate with the City by making such records
available upon request.
b. At least two members of the licensed organization shall jointly count all
bingo proceeds. Such proceeds shall be deposited in a special bingo
bank account the next banking day.
c. All funds from bingo games shall be deposited into a special bingo bank
account identified on the licensee's application and shall not be
commingled with any other funds. Funds deposited in such special bank
account may, however, be transferred to another account or fund of the
licensee organization or to another account or fund of any other
organization or entity associated or affiliated therewith for purposes of
implementing charitable expenditures of bingo proceeds, provided: (1)
no monies from any source other than bingo proceeds are placed in
such fund; (2) the purpose of such fund is clearly designated as part of
the title or subtitle of the fund and in the books and records of the
organization; and (3) expenditures therefrom for such purpose are
permitted under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code.
d. All disbursements from the special bingo bank account shall be by
consecutively numbered checks signed by two authorized officers of the
licensee and shall be payable to a specific individual or organization.
There shall be written on each check the nature of the expenditure for
which the check is drawn. No check shall be drawn to "cash" other than
for the purpose of depositing such cash in a petty cash fund established
§ 9-23.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-23.16
AO:447
§ 9-23.17. Financial Interest in Licensee Only. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the
licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of any bingo game.
§ 9-23.18. Exclusive Operation by Licensee. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
With the exception of security personnel, only the members of the licensee
shall operate bingo games or participate in the operation, conduct,
promotion and supervision of bingo games. Each such member shall wear
an identification badge containing his or her name and title. Such members
shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game; however,
security personnel who are not members of the licensee organization may
be paid from the receipts of a bingo game.
and maintained for the payment of incidental bingo expenses. Such
checks shall in that event be marked "for deposit to the petty cash
fund." Such petty cash fund shall not at any time contain more than
$25 and a receipt shall be obtained for each disbursement, indicating
the amount of cash disbursed, the individual or organization receiving
the cash disbursement and the purpose for which the disbursement is
made.
e. The City Manager may at any time require any licensee to prepare and
file with the City a copy of an audit prepared by a certified public
accountant, showing the gross revenue received from the bingo games,
the costs incurred and disbursements made, the deposits into the
special fund or account and all withdrawals therefrom. Special
licensees shall, in any case, submit such an audit every six months from
the date of issuance of the license.
f. All licensees shall file with the City Controller a financial report,
showing the gross revenue received from the bingo games, the costs
incurred and disbursements made, the deposits into the special fund or
account and all withdrawals therefrom. Accessory bingo licensees shall
file the report six months after the date of issuance of the license and
annually thereafter. Special bingo licensees shall file said report on or
before the first of each month for the life of the license. A copy of said
report shall be submitted to the City Treasurer in conjunction with the
monthly licensing fee. Failure to file such report within 10 days after
the date due shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the
license or, if applicable, for denial of a new license.
g. All bingo sales resulting from operation of a special license shall be
recorded on a cash register that features a nonresettable grand total.
The cash register tape shall be kept for not less than three years.
h. Bingo financial records, including all books and records of the licensee
or any other organization or entity associated or affiliated with the
licensee for purposes of disbursing charitable expenditures of bingo
proceeds, shall at all times be available for inspection by the City.
§ 9-23.16 COMPTON § 9-23.19
AO:448
§ 9-23.19. Bingo Games Open to Public. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
All bingo games shall be open to all members of the public, whether or not
members of the licensee organization. No admission fee shall be charged
for entry onto the premises where the bingo games are conducted.
§ 9-23.20. Hours of Operation. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
§ 9-23.21. Security Personnel. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
At least one security guard from a licensed security company must be
present on the premises on which the bingo games are conducted beginning
no less than 30 minutes prior to the commencement of the bingo games and
continuing until no less than 30 minutes after the conclusion of the bingo
games. If there are more than 100 customers at an accessory bingo game,
two security guards from a licensed security company must be present on
the premises at such times. The security and staffing plan for special bingo
games must be submitted to and approved by the Police Department prior to
issuance of the special license and shall be revised and amended thereafter
as required by the Department.
§ 9-23.22. Bingo Cards. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
The winning card(s) used in a bingo game shall not be known prior to the
bingo game by any person participating in the playing or operation of the
bingo game. All preprinted cards used in bingo games shall bear the legend
"for sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California law and
pursuant to local ordinance."
§ 9-23.23. Attendance. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
Bingo games shall be conducted only within structures approved for public
assembly as evidenced by a valid Certificate of Occupancy issued by the
City. Attendance shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in
which bingo games are conducted, but in no event shall attendance exceed
for accessory bingo games the lesser of 200 persons or three persons for
each available parking space on the premises. Attendance limits for special
bingo games shall be determined by the Council in accordance with the
physical occupancy capacity of the room in which the bingo games are
a. Accessory Bingo License. Each license shall authorize the licensee to
operate a bingo game for only one day in each week and for no more
than six hours on any day. No bingo game shall be conducted before
noon nor after midnight on any day. No more than two licensees shall
use the same premises for bingo games during any week.
b. Special Bingo License. A special license shall authorize the licensee to
conduct bingo games daily on the licensee's premises between the
hours of noon and midnight on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays and for
up to six hours between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and midnight on
Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays.
§ 9-23.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-23.23
AO:449
conducted. Rooms with a capacity of less than 300 persons shall not be
eligible for a special license. Bingo games shall be permitted only in the
interior of such structures, and the licensee shall not reserve seats or space
for any person.
§ 9-23.24. Bingo Games Conducted Only on Licensee's Property.
[Ord. #1891, § 1]
A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by
it, or property whose use has been donated to the organization, prior to the
date of the application and which property is used by such organization for
an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization was
organized. The license shall state the address of such property and shall
authorize the licensee to conduct bingo games only on such property. In
the event the described property ceases to be used as an office or a place
for performance of the purposes for which the licensee was organized, the
license shall terminate immediately and shall have no further force or effect.
The organization may apply for a new license when it again owns or leases
property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for
which the organization was organized.
§ 9-23.25. Conduct of Games. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
a. The bingo license, the City's rules and regulations and the licensee's
rules of bingo operation shall at all times be posted conspicuously at the
public entrance to the room in which bingo is played. The posted rules
shall be readable, legible and accessible to all participants.
b. A member of the licensee organization shall be designated as "Bingo
Manager." A second member of the organization may be designated
"Assistant Bingo Manager." The Bingo Manager shall be ultimately
responsible for the conduct and operation of the bingo games and for
the compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder. The Bingo Manager or the Assistant Bingo
Manager shall be present at all times during the playing of any bingo
game.
c. All staff members of a licensee shall wear on their outside clothing an
identification insignia or badge, no less than 2 1/2 inches by 3 1/2
inches in dimension, indicating the name of the organization and the
name and title of the staff member.
d. Prior to commencing each bingo game the prize shall be announced and
a facsimile of the type of bingo games to be played shall be clearly
displayed to all participants.
e. All prizes shall be awarded immediately following each bingo game.
f. All bingo games shall be completed during each session.
§ 9-23.23 COMPTON § 9-23.25
AO:450
§ 9-23.26. List of Members Operating Games. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
At all times during the conduct of bingo games, the licensee shall have
available on the premises a list of the members operating the bingo games.
§ 9-23.27. Use of Credit Prohibited. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
No licensee shall issue chips or money to any person on credit nor allow any
person to play on credit.
§ 9-23.28. Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. [Ord.
#1891, § 1]
The serving and consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in any
room where bingo games are being conducted.
§ 9-23.29. Minors Not to Participate. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
No person under 18 years of age shall be allowed to participate in or
operate any bingo game.
§ 9-23.30. Intoxicated Persons Not to Participate. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in any
bingo game.
§ 9-23.31. Participant Must Be Present. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person
is physically present at the time and place at which the bingo game is being
conducted.
§ 9-23.32. Inspection of Premises. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
No person shall interfere with, prevent or refuse to permit a police officer to
make an inspection or examination of any premises where bingo games are
conducted for the purpose of determining whether the licensee is complying
with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this section.
§ 9-23.33. Receipt of Profit by a Person a Misdemeanor Under State
Law. [Ord. #1891, § 1]
It is a misdemeanor under Section 326.5(b) of the Penal Code for any person
to receive or pay a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized
under this section. Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine
g. Bingo numbers selected in each bingo game shall be announced to all
players and be displayed in full view of all players. An adequate public
address system shall be utilized.
h. Equipment used and the method of playing bingo shall be such that
each card shall have an equal opportunity to win each game.
§ 9-23.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-23.33
AO:451
not to exceed $10,000, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of
the City.
§ 9-24. MARIJUANA.
§ 9-24.1. Purpose and Findings. [Ord. #2282]
§ 9-24.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2282]
The following terms and phrases, whenever used in this § 9-24, shall be
construed as defined in this section:
AUMA — Shall mean the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana
Act approved by the voters on November 8, 2016, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
a. The purpose of this section is to expressly prohibit commercial
marijuana activity in the City. Nothing in this section shall preempt or
make inapplicable any provision of state or federal law.
b. Business and Professions Code section 19320(a) provides that a person
must hold both a state and local license to engage in commercial
medical marijuana activity. Business and Professions Code section
26055(e) provides that a state licensing authority shall not approve an
application for a state license for a non-medical marijuana business if
approval of the state license will violate the provisions of any local
ordinance. Business and Professions Code section 19340(a) provides
that deliveries of marijuana can only be made in a city that does not
explicitly prohibit it by local ordinance.
c. Health and Safety Code section 11362.2(b) provides that a city may
enact and enforce reasonable regulations on marijuana cultivation
activities. Health and Safety Code section 11362.2(b) also authorizes a
city to completely prohibit persons from cultivating marijuana outdoors
upon the grounds of a private residence.
d. The City Council finds that a prohibition on all commercial marijuana
activity and marijuana deliveries is necessary for the preservation and
protection of the public health, safety, and welfare for the City and its
community. The City Council's prohibition of such activity is within the
authority conferred upon the City Council by state law and is an
exercise of its police powers to enact and enforce regulations for the
public benefit, safety, and welfare of the City and its community.
e. The City Council finds that a prohibition on all outdoor residential
cultivation and the application of reasonable regulations on indoor
residential cultivation is necessary for the preservation and protection
of the public health, safety, and welfare for the City and its community.
The City Council's regulation of such activity is within the authority
conferred upon the City Council by state law and is an exercise of its
police powers to enact and enforce regulations for the public benefit,
safety, and welfare of the City and its community.
§ 9-23.33 COMPTON § 9-24.2
AO:452
COMMERCIAL MARIJUANA ACTIVITY — Shall include the cultivation,
possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory
testing, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of marijuana and
marijuana products, whether or not for profit. Commercial marijuana
activity also includes the activities of any business licensed by the state or
other government entity under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 or Division 10 of
the Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended from time to
time.
CONCENTRATED CANNABIS — Shall have the same meaning as "cannabis
concentrate" as defined in Business and Professions Code section 19300.5,
as the same may be amended from time to time.
CULTIVATION — Shall mean any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana.
DELIVERY — Shall mean the commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana
products to a customer. Delivery also includes the use by a retailer of any
technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently
licensed under California law, which enables customers to arrange for or
facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of marijuana or
marijuana products.
DISTRIBUTION — Shall mean the procurement, sale, and transport of
marijuana and marijuana products between entities licensed under Chapter
3.5 of Division 8 or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, as
they may be amended from time to time.
FULLY ENCLOSED AND SECURE STRUCTURE — Shall mean a building,
greenhouse or other structure which has a complete roof enclosure
supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, which
is secure against unauthorized entry, provides complete visual screening,
and which is accessible only through one or more lockable doors and
inaccessible to minors.
INDOORS — Shall mean within a fully enclosed and secure structure.
LICENSEE — Shall mean the holder of any state-issued license related
to marijuana activities, including but not limited to licenses issued under
Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 and Division 10 of the Business and Professions
Code.
MANUFACTURE — Shall mean to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or
otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product.
MARIJUANA — Shall mean all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of
the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include:
Industrial hemp, as defined in Section 11018.5 of the California Health
and Safety Code; or
a.
The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare
topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product.
b.
§ 9-24.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-24.2
AO:453
MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES — Shall mean any equipment, products or
materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use
in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or
containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
marijuana or marijuana products into the human body.
MARIJUANA PRODUCT — Shall mean marijuana that has undergone a
process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a
concentrate, including, but not, limited to concentrated cannabis, or an
edible or topical product containing marijuana or concentrated cannabis
and other ingredients.
MCRSA — Shall collectively mean the Medical Cannabis Regulation and
Safety Act as contained, codified, enacted, and signed into law on October
9, 2015, as Assembly Bill No. 243, Assembly Bill No. 266, and Senate Bill
643, and as amended by Assembly Bill 21 in 2016, as the same may be
amended from time to time. The MCRSA was formerly known as the Medical
Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act.
OUTDOORS — Shall mean any location that is not within a fully enclosed
and secure structure.
PERSON — Shall include any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business
trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a
unit, and the plural as well as the singular.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE — Shall mean a house, an apartment unit, a mobile
home, or other similar dwelling, whether legal and conforming to the
underlying zoning, or legal and non-conforming to the underlying zoning,
that is currently in use as a residence.
SALE — Shall include any transaction whereby, for any consideration, title
to marijuana is transferred from one person to another, and includes the
delivery of marijuana or marijuana products pursuant to an order placed for
the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same,
but does not include the return of marijuana or marijuana products by a
licensee to the licensee from whom such marijuana or marijuana product
was purchased.
§ 9-24.3. Prohibited Activities. [Ord. #2282]
Marijuana also includes "cannabis" as defined in Business and
Professions Code § 19300.5(f), as the same may be amended from time
to time.
a. Commercial marijuana activity is expressly prohibited everywhere in
the City. No person shall establish, operate, maintain, conduct, allow or
engage in commercial marijuana activity anywhere within the City. The
City shall not approve any application for a business license or any
other permit or entitlement authorizing the establishment, operation,
§ 9-24.2 COMPTON § 9-24.3
AO:454
§ 9-24.4. Exceptions. [Ord. #2282]
maintenance, development, or construction of any business that
engages in commercial marijuana activity.
b. A property owner shall not rent, lease or otherwise permit any business
that engages in commercial marijuana activity to occupy real property
in the City. A property owner shall not allow any person or business to
establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in commercial
marijuana activity on any real property owned or controlled by that
property owner that is located in the City.
c. Paragraph a above is meant to prohibit all activities for which a state
license is required pursuant to the MCRSA or the AUMA. Accordingly,
the City shall not issue any permit, license or other entitlement for any
activity for which a state license is required under the MCRSA or the
AUMA. The City shall also not issue any local license to a non-profit
entity pursuant to Business and Professions Code § 26070.5.
d. To the extent not already prohibited by Paragraph a above, all deliveries
of marijuana or marijuana products to or from any location in the City
are expressly prohibited. No person shall conduct or perform any
delivery of any marijuana or marijuana products, which delivery either
originates or terminates within the City.
a. The prohibition in Subsection 9-24.3a above shall not prohibit the
indoor cultivation of six or fewer live marijuana plants within a single
private residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the
grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured, to the
extent such cultivation is authorized by Health and Safety Code
Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2, to the extent the cultivation complies
with Paragraph c below.
b. The prohibition in Subsection 9-24.3a above shall not prohibit a person
21 years of age or older from (1) possessing, processing, purchasing,
transporting, obtaining or giving away to persons 21 years of age or
older, without compensation whatsoever, not more than 28.5 grams of
marijuana not in the form of concentrated cannabis or up to eight
grams in the form of concentrated cannabis, (2) smoking or ingesting
marijuana or marijuana products, or (3) possessing, transporting,
purchasing, obtaining, using, manufacturing, or giving away marijuana
accessories to persons 21 years of age or older without compensation
whatsoever, to the extent that such activities are authorized by Health
and Safety Code Section 11362.1.
c. Residential Marijuana Cultivation.
1. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person owning,
leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any real
property in the City to cause or allow such real property to be used
for the cultivation of marijuana except in strict compliance with the
§ 9-24.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-24.4
AO:455
requirements set forth below. Marijuana cultivation shall only
occur indoors at a private residence, garage, and accessory
structure in conformance with the standards set forth below.
(a) Only a person who is at least 21 years old may cultivate
marijuana.
(b) Marijuana cultivation is permitted only within fully enclosed
and secure structures.
(c) Marijuana cultivation areas shall not be accessible to persons
under 21 years of age. Cultivation areas shall be secured by
lock and key or other security device which prevents
unauthorized entry.
(d) Marijuana cultivation shall be limited to six plants total,
whether immature or mature, regardless of how many persons
over the age of 21 reside at the residence.
(e) Marijuana cultivation shall only take place on impervious
surfaces.
(f) The use of gas products (CO2, butane, etc.) or CO2 and Ozone
generators for marijuana cultivation or processing is
prohibited.
(g) The use of marijuana extraction and concentration techniques,
including but not limited to butane, CO2 or ethanol, to
manufacture concentrated cannabis is strictly prohibited.
(h) Marijuana cultivation shall not be visible from the public rightof-
way or any privately owned place open to the public.
(i) The residential structure shall remain at all times a residence,
with legal and functioning cooking, sleeping and sanitation
facilities with proper ingress and egress. The foregoing rooms
and areas shall not be used for marijuana cultivation where
such cultivation will prevent their primary use for cooking of
meals, sleeping and bathing, or any other residential purpose
for which the rooms, space or area was intended.
(j) Any structure used for the cultivation of marijuana shall not
become a public nuisance to surrounding properties or the
public. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if the
cultivation produces odors which are detectable to people of
normal sensitivity residing or present on adjacent or nearby
property or on a public right of way.
(k) No person shall cultivate marijuana in any manner that causes
any of the following conditions: light, glare, heat, odor, noise,
mold, or vibration that is or whose effect is either detrimental
to public health, safety, or welfare, or that interferes with the
reasonable enjoyment of life or property.
§ 9-24.4 COMPTON § 9-24.4
AO:456
§ 9-24.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2282]
In addition to any other enforcement permitted by § 1-6 of the Compton
Municipal Code, the City Attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive
relief and civil penalties against any person or entity that violates this
section. In any civil action brought pursuant to this section, a court of
competent jurisdiction may award reasonable attorneys fees and costs to
the prevailing party. No provision of § 1-6 or this § 9-24 shall authorize
a criminal prosecution, arrest, or penalty prohibited by Health and Safety
Code Section 11362.71, et seq. or section 11362.1 et seq., as the same
may be amended from time to time. In the event of any conflict between
the penalties enumerated under § 1-6 or this § 9-24 and any penalties set
forth in state law, the maximum penalties allowable under state law shall
govern. The remedies set forth in this section are not exclusive of any other
remedies available by state or federal laws, including but not limited to
property and asset forfeiture.
§ 9-25. VENDING FROM COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
§ 9-25.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
The City Council finds that vending from vehicles and other street
mechanisms pose inherent safety concerns to the general public when
vendors operate in violation of state, federal, or local laws. In order to
protect the public and promote public safety, the declared purpose of this
section is to adopt additional requirements, consistent with existing state
law, for persons who vend food and non-food products from vending vehicles
on public streets and to regulate vending from other devices which pose
additional safety hazards on City streets and sidewalks.
§ 9-25.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following
meanings:
ICE CREAM TRUCK — Shall mean any vehicle, as that term is defined in the
California Vehicle Code, which is engaged in the curbside vending or sale
or offering to sell frozen or refrigerated desserts, confections, or novelties
commonly known as ice cream, or prepackaged candies, prepackaged snack
foods, or soft drinks, primarily intended for the sale to children under 12
(l) A portable, fully charged fire extinguisher, that complies with
the regulations and standards adopted by the state fire
marshal and applicable law, shall be kept in every room or area
where marijuana cultivation occurs.
(m) Prior to performing any work on electrical wiring in or upon
the residence, including any modifications, repair, or rewiring,
the property owner shall first obtain a building, mechanical
and/or electrical permit, as required, from the building
division.
§ 9-24.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-25.2
AO:457
years of age. The inventory of these vehicles is not necessarily limited to ice
cream, confections or frozen dessert product.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle that is self-propelled as defined
in California Vehicle Code § 415.
OPERATE A FOOD VENDING VEHICLE — Shall mean to drive, occupy or
otherwise use a vehicle to sell, offer to sell, or display for sale any type of
food, beverage or non-food product.
PERSON — Shall mean any natural person, business, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, stockholder, nonprofit entity, personal
representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, franchisee, or any other legal
entity, including but not limited to owners, operators, drivers, lessors and
lessees of food vending vehicles and ice cream trucks.
VEHICLE — As defined in California Vehicle Code § 670, is a device by
which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a
highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
VEND OR VENDING — Shall mean selling, or offering to sell, any food,
beverage or non-food products of any kind from any vehicle, motor vehicle,
transporting mechanism (motorized or non-motorized), stationary
mechanism (e.g., stand or booth), portable box, bag or similar container.
VENDING VEHICLE — Shall mean any vehicle, as that term is defined in
the California Vehicle Code, which is equipped or primarily used for the
selling or offering to sell any type of food, beverage or non-food products
directly to any consumer. Vending vehicle includes, but is not limited to,
catering trucks, ice cream trucks, and mobile vendors of stationary dining
establishments, but shall not include a vehicle that only delivers food,
beverage or non-food products ordered by home delivery customers.
§ 9-25.3. Food Vending Vehicles — Health Certificate Required.
[Ord. #2243, § 6]
Notwithstanding the provisions provided for in Subsection 9-25.4, it shall
be unlawful for any person to vend, assist, or engage in the act of vending
food products of any kind from a vending vehicle without first obtaining a
health certificate and/or other food handling permit as required by law, from
the Los Angeles County Department of Health. Such health certificate shall
be openly displayed at all times while conducting business and presented
upon demand to any peace officer or City employee authorized to enforce
this Code.
§ 9-25.4. Business License Required. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
It shall be unlawful for any person to vend, assist, or engage in the act
of vending from a vending vehicle without first obtaining a City business
license from the City of Compton, in accordance with the provisions
provided for in § 9-1 of the Compton Municipal Code. The business license
§ 9-25.2 COMPTON § 9-25.4
AO:458
must be carried at all times and shall be presented upon demand to any
peace officer or City employee authorized to enforce this Code.
§ 9-25.5. Permits Required. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
§ 9-25.6. Application for Vendor's and/or Operator's Permit;
Contents; Required Fee. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
a. Vendor's Permit. No person shall own, control, manage, lease or
contract with other persons for the operation of a food vending vehicle
or ice cream truck in the City without a valid vendor's permit for each
and every food vending vehicle, including ice cream trucks, issued
pursuant to the provisions of this section, in addition to any other
license or permit required under any other chapter of this Code.
b. Operator's Permit. No person shall drive, operate, vend and/or prepare
food from or on any vehicle defined as a food vending vehicle or ice
cream truck in the City without a valid operator's permit issued
pursuant to the provisions of this section. Such operator's permit shall
be presented upon demand to any peace officer or City employee
authorized to enforce this Code.
a. Any person desiring to obtain a vendor's and/or an operator's permit
shall submit an application to the City's Business License Division.
Applications for either a vendor's or an operator's permit shall be
submitted in the form prescribed by the Business License Division.
Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, as
established by resolution or ordinance of the City Council, shall be paid
to the Business License Division to defray, in part, the cost of the
investigation and report required by this section. The Business License
Division shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been
paid. Permit issuance fees required under this section shall be in
addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter
of this Code. No permit application shall be processed unless and until
the applicant has provided all the information requested on the
application and has submitted the appropriate fee(s). If an applicant for
a vendor's permit also requires an operator's permit then it is not
necessary for said applicant to pay a separate fee for the operator's
permit application.
b. Neither the filing of any application for a permit, nor the payment of an
application fee, shall authorize the vending from or the operation or
management of a food vending vehicle until such permit has been
granted or renewed.
c. Each applicant for a permit to conduct business within the City of
Compton as a mobile food vendor or an ice cream vendor shall furnish
the following information:
1. The present or proposed address from which the business is to be
conducted;
§ 9-25.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-25.6
AO:459
2. The full true name under which the business will be conducted;
3. The full true name and any other names used by the applicant;
4. The present residence and business addresses and telephone
numbers of the applicant;
5. A description of the merchandise or product which the vending
vehicle or ice cream trucks will vend;
6. The number of vehicles to be operated within the City of Compton
that are owned, operated or controlled by the applicant and the
make, model, year, serial and engine number, state license plate
number, vehicle identification number for each vehicle, as well as
the name and address of the registered and/or legal owner(s) of
each vehicle;
7. A description of the logo, color scheme, insignia, and any other
distinguishing characteristics of applicant's vehicles;
8. A policy of insurance in the manner and form required by this
section from a responsible, solvent insurance carrier authorized to
issue public liability and property damage insurance in the State of
California;
9. The full true names and residence addresses of all persons
employed or intended to be employed or with whom the applicant
has contracted or intends to contract as drivers, operators or
attendants operating within the City;
10. Certification, from the Business License Division, evidencing that
the vending vehicle or ice cream truck to be owned, operated or
controlled by the applicant within the City has been physically
inspected to ensure compliance with this section and the Vehicle
Code equipment requirements;
11. The applicant, if an individual, shall also furnish the following
information:
(i) California driver's license or identification number of the
above-described natural persons;
(ii) Date of birth of the above-described natural persons;
(iii) The permit history of the above-described natural persons for
the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the
filing of the application, including whether such person, in
previously operating in this City or any other city, county, state
or territory, has ever had any similar license or permit, or
franchise revoked or suspended, and if so, the circumstances
of such suspension or revocation; and
§ 9-25.6 COMPTON § 9-25.6
AO:460
§ 9-25.7. Investigation of Applications. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
The Business License Division shall have a reasonable period of time in
which to investigate the application and background of the applicant for a
vendor's permit and/or an operator's permit.
§ 9-25.8. Issuance of Permit. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
The Business License Division, within 10 days after concluding its
investigation of the application and background of the applicant for a
vendor's permit or an operator's permit, shall issue the vendor's permit and/
(iv) All criminal convictions suffered by the above-described
natural persons, including ordinance violations, but excepting
minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as a felony
shall not be construed as a minor traffic offense), stating the
date, place, nature and sentence of each such conviction.
12. The applicant, if other than an individual (i.e., corporation, firm,
partnership, etc.), shall also furnish the following information:
(i) Each business address of the applicant for the three-year
period immediately preceding the date of the application and
the inclusive dates of each such business;
(ii) The nature of the business or firm for the three-year period
immediately preceding the date of the application; and
(iii) The permit history of the applicant for the three-year period
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application,
including whether such applicant, in previously operating in
this City or any other city, county, state or territory, has ever
had any similar license or permit, or franchise revoked or
suspended, and if so, the circumstances of such suspension or
revocation.
13. Such other identification and/or information that the Business
License Division may need to determine the truth of the matters
required in the application.
d. The applicant, if a natural person, or if the applicant is a partnership or
corporation, the designated responsible managing officer, shall
personally appear at the office of the City's Business License Division
and produce proof that the required application fee has been paid and
shall present the application containing the information and supporting
documentation required by Paragraph c of this subsection.
e. When any change occurs regarding the written information required by
Paragraph c of this section prior to or after issuance of a permit, the
applicant shall give written notification of such change to the Business
License Division within two weeks after such change first occurred.
§ 9-25.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-25.8
AO:461
or operator's permit only if it finds that all of the following requirements
have been met:
§ 9-25.9. Permit Term and Renewal. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
The term of vendor and operator permits, unless sooner suspended or
revoked, shall be for a period of one year. Upon the expiration of such
a. The required fees have been paid;
b. The application conforms in all respect to the provisions of this
Chapter;
c. The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation of
fact in this application;
d. The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the applicant;
and
e. The applicant, if an individual, or any of the directors, officers or
stockholders holding more than 5% of the stock of the corporation, or
any of the partners, including limited partners, or profit interest holder,
manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
existing or proposed business of vending from a vending vehicle, or a
natural person employed or contracted with to be a driver, has not been
convicted or pleaded nolo contendere or guilty within five years prior to
his application for a permit to a misdemeanor or felony crime of moral
turpitude or drug-related misdemeanor or felony crime, including but
not limited to:
(i) The sale of a controlled substance specified in Sections 11054
through 11058 of the California Health Safety Code;
(ii) The sale, distribution or display of harmful or obscene matter;
(iii) Indecent exposure;
(iv) Selling or disposing of lottery tickets;
(v) Permitting gambling, pool selling or bookmaking; or
(vi) In the case of applications for an operator's permit, alcohol or drugrelated
traffic offenses.
The investigating City employee is specifically authorized to obtain state
summary criminal history record information as provided for in Section
11105 of the California Penal Code. Any complaint for the above-listed
charges pending before a court of law shall cause the application to be
considered pending until the adjudication of the complaint.
Food vending permits are the property of the City and each shall authorize
the operation of a single specific food vending vehicle. It is unlawful for any
person to sell or transfer, or attempt to sell or transfer any food vending
permit.
§ 9-25.8 COMPTON § 9-25.9
AO:462
term, the permittee may renew the permit for additional one-year terms by
submitting new applications in conformance with Subsection 9-25.6 herein
together with such permit renewal fees as may be established by resolution
or ordinance of the City Council.
§ 9-25.10. Denial of Permit. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
If the Business License Division finds that all of the requirements set forth
in Subsection 9-25.6 have not been met and a permit cannot be issued
pursuant to Subsection 9-25.8, the City shall deny the application for a
vendor's and/or operator's permit. In the event the application for either
permit is denied by the Business License Division, written notice of such
denial shall be given to the applicant specifying the ground or grounds
of such denial. Notice of denial of the application for the permit shall be
deemed to have been served if it in fact is personally served on the applicant
or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and
addressed to the applicant at his or her residence address as set forth in the
application for either permit.
§ 9-25.11. Suspension or Revocation of Permit. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
a. Any vendor's and/or operator's permit may be suspended or revoked by
the Business License Division or the City Manager or his or her
designated representative for any of the following reasons:
1. Falsehood of any information supplied by the permittee upon which
issuance of the permit was based;
2. Failure of the permittee to notify the Business License Division
within two weeks of any change occurring subsequent to the
issuance of the permit in the information supplied by the permittee
upon which issuance of the permit was based;
3. Failure of the permittee, or of any employees or subcontractors of
the permittee, to comply with the standards set forth in subsections
9-25.12 through 9-25.19 inclusive; or
4. Violation by the permittee or any employee, subcontractor or
independent contractor of the permittee, of any state law or
municipal ordinance while in the course of conducting vending
operations from a food vending vehicle or ice cream truck pursuant
to the permit.
b. No such suspension or revocation shall become effective until the
permit holder has been notified in writing of the right of such permit
holder to appeal the suspension or revocation pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 9 of this Code. Notification to the permit holder
shall be made either by personal delivery or by certified or registered
mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the permit holder at such
permit holder's residence address as set forth on the application for a
permit. If a timely appeal is filed the suspension or revocation shall be
§ 9-25.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-25.11
AO:463
§ 9-25.12. Vending Vehicle and Ice Cream Truck Standards. [Ord.
#2243, § 6]
§ 9-25.13. Inspection of Vending Vehicle or Ice Cream Truck. [Ord.
#2243, § 6]
stayed and shall become effective only upon decision of the City
Council. Otherwise the suspension or revocation shall become effective
after the timely appeal period has expired.
c. No person whose permit is revoked shall be eligible to apply for a new
permit for a period of one year following such revocation.
a. Each vending vehicle shall have a current, valid City of Compton
Business License Division inspection sticker affixed to the left side of
the rear of the vending vehicle.
b. Each operator shall be issued an identification card which will also
serve as the operator's permit. The operator shall wear or carry such
card in a visible position upon his or her person at all times while
engaged in the operation of and/or the actual vending from a vending
vehicle, and shall produce the same for inspection upon request. Each
operator permit holder shall immediately surrender to the Business
License Division any operator's permit issued by the City upon the
suspension, revocation or expiration of such permit or upon leaving
employment as an operator.
c. In addition to the operator's permit required in Paragraph b above,
each person who drives a vending vehicle shall have on his/her person a
current, valid state driver's license, which he/she shall make available
for inspection upon demand by any peace officer or City employee
authorized to enforce this Code.
a. Each vending vehicle or ice cream truck for which a permit or renewal
is sought shall be inspected by the Business License Division to insure
compliance with this section and the Vehicle Code equipment
requirements.
b. Unless otherwise waived by the City Manager and, in addition to other
equipment required by law, each vending vehicle or ice cream truck
shall be equipped with the following:
1. A convex mirror mounted so that the occupant of the driver's seat
can see the area in front of the truck which is obscured by the
vehicle's hood;
2. A back-up alarm audible for a distance of at least 100 feet;
3. Advertising decals and price lists shall be placed only on the
vending side of the vending vehicle or ice cream truck; and
§ 9-25.11 COMPTON § 9-25.13
AO:464
§ 9-25.14. Ice Cream Trucks — Required Signs and Lettering;
Operation on Public Right-of-Way. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
4. Safety signs or safety decals must be placed on both sides of the
vending vehicle or ice cream truck.
c. The exterior of any vending vehicle or ice cream truck shall be clean, in
good repair and not contain any excessive peeling, dents, rust,
scratches or missing vehicular components which are discernible at a
distance of 10 feet or more from the vehicle.
a. There shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on both the front and
back of the ice cream truck, clearly legible from a distance of at least
100 feet under daylight conditions, appropriate warning signs or
lettering incorporating the words "WARNING" and "CHILDREN
CROSSING." Each sign shall be at least 12 inches high by 48 inches
wide, with letters of a dark color and at least four inches in height, oneinch
wide solid border, and sharply contrasting background.
b. There shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on both the right and
left side of the ice cream truck lettering permanently affixed showing
the name of the company or operator of the ice cream truck and the
business address and telephone number of the owner or operator. The
lettering shall not be less than four inches in height, and shall be in
contrast to the color of the background upon which they are placed.
c. No other lettering, numbering, price lists, signs or insignia shall be
displayed on the right and left side of the ice cream truck so as to
interfere with the visibility of the lettering required in Paragraph b.
d. Vending from an ice cream truck, whether of a frozen dessert product
or of any other good or product, shall only occur between 9:00 a.m. to
sunset during the months of April, May, June, July, August, September
and October and between 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily during the
months of November, December, January, February and March.
e. A person may not vend from an ice cream truck that is stopped, parked
or standing on any public street, alley or highway under any of the
following conditions:
1. On a street, alley or highway with a posted speed limit greater than
25 miles per hour.
2. If the street, alley or highway is within 100 feet of an intersection
with an opposing highway that has a posted speed limit greater
than 25 miles per hour.
3. If the vendor does not have an unobstructed view for 200 feet in
both directions along the highway and of any traffic on the highway.
4. At one location for longer than 15 minutes and must move a
minimum of 500 feet before vending again.
§ 9-25.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-25.15
AO:465
§ 9-25.15. Prohibited Conduct — Operation on Public Right-of-Way.
[Ord. #2243, § 6]
a. No person shall vend from a vending vehicle while stopped, parked or
standing on any public street, alley or highway:
1. Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. of one day and 5:00 a.m. of the
following day during the months of April, May, June, July, August,
September and October in residential areas;
2. Between the hours of 6:00 p.m. of one day and 5:00 a.m. of the
following day during the months of November, December, January,
February and March in residential areas;
3. Within 300 feet of the nearest property line of any property on
which a school building is located between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m. of any school day. This prohibition will not apply if
the school principal gives the vending vehicle vendor written
authorization to park on school property. The vendor shall provide a
copy of the authorization upon demand by any peace officer or City
employee authorized to enforce this Code;
4. Within 50 feet of any other vending vehicle which is engaged in the
operation of vending;
5. Within 25 feet of an intersection controlled by a traffic light;
6. Within 50 feet of an intersection controlled by a stop sign or a
marked cross-walk;
7. When the speed limit on a public street or highway, posted or
otherwise, is greater than 40 miles per hour;
8. When the speed limit on an alley, posted or otherwise, is greater
than 15 miles per hour;
9. When the vending vehicle is parked in violation of any other
provision of this Code or the California Vehicle Code;
10. When any part of the vending vehicle is open to prospective
customers other than on the side of the vehicle next to the right
side of the street, alley or highway;
11. When the vending vehicle is not stopped, parked or standing on the
right side of the street, alley or highway;
12. When the prospective customer is standing or sitting in another
vehicle; or
13. When the prospective customer is located in that portion of the
street, alley or highway which is open to vehicular traffic.
b. No person shall back-up a vending vehicle to make or attempt to make a
sale.
§ 9-25.15 COMPTON § 9-25.15
AO:466
§ 9-25.16. Noise Level. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
§ 9-25.17. Operations on Private Property. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
c. No vending vehicle shall be operated in any one location for longer than
the parking time limit posted or indicated by the markings on the
adjacent curb.
d. No minor under the age of 16 shall ride in or on a vending vehicle or ice
cream truck while such vending vehicle or ice cream truck is engaged
or about to be engaged in the operation of vending.
e. No additional lighting other than that required by the California Vehicle
Code may be installed or operated on a vending vehicle or ice cream
truck.
f. No person may place any freestanding signs, tables, chairs, fences,
shade structures, or other furniture on or near the site of the operation
of the vending vehicle or ice cream truck.
g. No person shall engage in vending from a vending vehicle or ice cream
truck unless he or she maintains a clearly designated litter receptacle
in the immediate vicinity of the vending vehicle or ice cream truck,
marked with a sign requesting use by patrons. Prior to leaving the
location, the vendor shall pick up, remove and lawfully dispose of all
trash generated by the vendor's operation located within a twenty-fivefoot
radius of the vendor's location.
a. Horns shall be permitted to be used only when reasonably necessary to
insure the safe operation of the vending vehicle while being operated
on any public or private street, alley or highway or on public property.
b. Music, noise or bells used in any vending vehicle or ice cream truck
shall not exceed five decibels above the ambient noise level when
measured from the property line of any property located on the street
on which the vendor is located. All such music, noise or bells shall be
turned off when the vehicle stops to sell merchandise or product or is
passing in front of either a public or private school.
a. In General. All vending vehicles, including ice cream trucks, are
prohibited from operating on private property under any of the
following circumstances:
1. The property is a vacant lot, which for the purpose of § 9-25, means
a piece of unimproved and/or unpaved real property; or
2. Where the primary use of the private property is being used for the
operation of the vending vehicle or ice cream truck. The operation
of a vending vehicle or ice cream truck must be incidental to the
primary use that complies with the City's Zoning Code; or
§ 9-25.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-25.17
AO:467
§ 9-25.18. Vending of Produce.
All produce regulated by the California Department of Food and Agriculture
shall be handled, transported, displayed or disposed of in accordance with
all California Department of Food and Agriculture regulations as they now
exist or as amended from time to time, including, but not limited to the
following:
§ 9-25.19. Insurance Provisions. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
3. When the vending vehicle or ice cream truck is stopped, standing
or parked in a manner that interferes with access, driveways, aisles
or movements of vehicles or pedestrians.
b. Owner's Consent. Notwithstanding Paragraph a above, all vending
vehicles and ice cream trucks are prohibited from operating on private
property without the express written consent of the property owner. No
person may vend on private property unless the following requirements
have been met:
1. The written consent of the property owner must be obtained and
shall be provided to the Business License Division in a form
prescribed by the Business License Division;
2. A copy of the written consent of the property owner shall be
maintained with the vending vehicle or ice cream truck at all times
during operation on private property; and
3. Upon demand of any peace officer or City employee authorized to
enforce this section, a vendor or operator of a vending vehicle or
ice cream truck shall present a copy of the written consent of the
property owner.
a. All produce or commodities under quarantine by the California
Department of Food and Agriculture will be protected or safeguarded in
an approved manner by being bagged, covered or screened to prevent
infestation; any open display is prohibited.
b. All produce, commodities, or their husks, cores, rinds, or pits shall be
sealed in plastic bags before disposing of same.
c. Every food vending vehicle or ice cream truck shall have a receipt,
invoice, bill of laden or other acceptable proof of origin of all produce or
commodities under quarantine.
d. All produce or commodities under quarantine that are sold, offered for
sale, or transported within the quarantine area must be of commercial
origin.
e. Any violation of this section may result in the seizure of the produce or
commodities in violation; all seized items will be destroyed.
§ 9-25.17 COMPTON § 9-25.19
AO:468
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, lease, drive, operate or cause
or permit to be driven or operated any vending vehicle or ice cream
truck in the City for vending purposes unless such person has
submitted with his application for permit, a motor vehicle liability
insurance policy, covering each vending vehicle or ice cream truck,
issued by a solvent corporation holding a certificate of authority to do
insurance business in the state, which policy shall conform in all
respects to the requirements of this Chapter.
b. The required motor vehicle liability policy shall insure the owner, driver,
the City of Compton (as an additional insured) and any other person
using or responsible for the use of any vending vehicle or ice cream
truck with the consent, expressed or implied, of such owner, driver or
person, against loss from the liability imposed upon such owner, driver
or person by law for injury to, or death of, any person, or damage to
property arising out of the maintenance, operation or ownership of any
vending vehicle or ice cream truck, with the types and amounts of
coverage as follows:
1. Bodily Injury and Property Damage Liability Insurance: $1,000,000
per occurrence;
2. Personal Injury Liability: $1,000,000 per occurrence; Workers'
Compensation and Employer's Liability: $1,000,000 each accident.
c. Every insurance policy and every certificate of motor vehicle liability
insurance filed within the City pursuant to the provisions of this section
shall contain the following endorsements:
1. It is hereby understood and agreed that, notwithstanding
expressions consistent with or contrary thereto in this policy
contained, the policy is expressly issued to cover a motor vehicle
regulated by the provisions of Chapter 9 of this Code. This policy
shall insure to, and be for the benefit and protection of, anyone who
shall sustain any damages or injury, or to the heirs, personal
representatives, administrators, executors or assigns of any such
person who may be so damaged or injured or suffer death, by
reason of the operation of the motor vehicle or from the defective
condition thereof. Liability under this policy shall in no manner be
abrogated or abated by the death or dissolution of the tortfeasor or
the insured.
2. There is continuing liability up to the full amount of the policy,
notwithstanding any action or recovery thereon.
3. No cancellation, termination or reduction in coverage of this policy
for any reason whatsoever shall become effective until the
expiration of 30 days after written notice of such cancellation or
reduction in coverage shall have been given to the City of Compton.
Said period of 30 days to commence running from the date said
notice is actually received in the Risk Management Division of the
City Attorney's Office.
§ 9-25.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-25.20
AO:469
§ 9-25.20. Applicability of Regulations to Existing Business.60 [Ord.
#2243, § 6]
The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all persons and
businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were
established before or after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this
section into law. All such persons and businesses shall have 30 days from
said effective date to file a completed application for a vendor's and/or
operator's permit with the City's Business License Division.
§ 9-25.21. Conducting as a Nuisance. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
Any vending vehicle or ice cream truck operated contrary to the provisions
of this section shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and
a public nuisance and the City Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of
prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions,
proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal or enjoinment
thereof, in the manner provided in this Code, and may take such other steps
and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant
such relief as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and
enjoin any person from operating a food vending vehicle or ice cream truck
contrary to the provisions of this section.
§ 9-25.22. Exemptions. [Ord. #2243, § 6]
The provisions of § 9-25 et seq. shall not apply to:
§ 9-25.23. Penalties - Misdemeanor, Fines, Confiscation. [Ord.
#2243, § 6]
a. Any person delivering any goods or merchandise by motor vehicle
where such goods or merchandise have been ordered in advance for
such delivery from any business located at a permanent location and
which goods or merchandise are being delivered from such location to
the customer.
b. Any person engaged in the vending of goods or merchandise on public
property where such person has been authorized by the City to engage
in such activity by permit, lease, license, agreement, or other
entitlements issued by the City for such purpose.
a. Any person who violates the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine and
imprisonment. In addition, the City may also impose administrative
penalties pursuant to § 1-7 of the Compton Municipal Code and seek
injunctive relief and civil penalties in the Superior Court for violations
of this Chapter. The remedies provided to the City in this Chapter shall
60.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2243, codified herein was adopted October 8, 2013.
§ 9-25.20 COMPTON § 9-25.23
AO:470
§ 9-26. PUSHCART VENDORS.
§ 9-26.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. #2243, § 4]
The City Council expressly finds that pushcarts in which produce, ice cream,
confections, frozen dessert products, hot and/or cold prepared and/or prepackaged
foods and non-food products are carried for purposes of retail sale
on the public and private streets are sold or offered for sale, pose traffic
hazards and special dangers to the public safety and welfare of children
and residents in the City. It is the purpose and intent of the City Council,
in enacting this section, to provide responsible companies and persons who
engage in the operation of vending from pushcarts with clear and concise
regulations to prevent safety and traffic hazards, as well as to preserve the
peace, safety and welfare of the community.
§ 9-26.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2243, § 4]
For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following
meanings:
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person who operates a pushcart for the
purpose of vending food, beverage or non-food products therefrom.
OPERATOR'S PERMIT — Shall mean the permit issued to any person who
operates a pushcart for the purpose of soliciting, vending or offering for sale
any food, beverage or non-food products from a pushcart on any sidewalk,
street, alley, highway or public place within the City of Compton.
OWNER — Shall mean any person who owns or controls one or more
pushcarts and:
be cumulative and not exclusive of any other remedies available under
any other federal, state or local laws.
b. Any person or vendor who violates the provisions of this Chapter may
have his or her goods or merchandise confiscated by the enforcement
agency. Perishable items such as food and beverage items that are
confiscated shall be disposed of immediately. Nonperishable items that
are confiscated shall be inventoried and stored pending the outcome of
any court proceedings.
c. Each day any violation of any said provision of this section shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Conducts or permits or causes the operation of such pushcart(s)
vending food, beverage or non-food products;
a.
b. Owns, operates, controls or manages such pushcart(s); or
Contracts with persons to vend food, beverage or non-food products
from such pushcart(s).
c.
§ 9-25.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-26.2
AO:471
PERSON — Shall mean any natural person, business, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, stockholder, nonprofit entity, personal
representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, franchisee, or any other legal
entity, including, but not limited to, owners, operators, drivers, lessors and
lessees of the pushcart.
PUSHCART — Shall mean any wagon, cart, or similar wheeled container,
which is not a "vehicle" as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of
California, from which food, beverage or non-food products are offered for
sale to the public.
VEHICLE — As defined in California Vehicle Code § 670, shall mean a device
by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon
a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
VEND OR VENDING — Shall mean selling, or offering to sell, any food,
beverage or non-food products of any kind from a pushcart on any sidewalk,
street, alley, highway or unenclosed place open to the public, whether
publicly or privately owned, including the movement or standing of a
pushcart for the purpose of searching for, obtaining or soliciting retail sales
of products.
§ 9-26.3. General Prohibitions. [Ord. #2243, § 4]
§ 9-26.4. Permits Required. [Ord. #2243, § 4]
a. No person shall sell or offer for sale any food, beverage or non-food
products from any portable box, stand, bag or similar container other
than a pushcart, on any street, parkway or sidewalk, or in any
unenclosed area open to the public.
b. No person shall employ, direct or otherwise cause any other person to
vend or offer to vend any food, beverage or non-food products in
violation of any provision of this Chapter.
a. Health Permit. No person shall vend and/or operate any pushcart in the
City without first obtaining a health certificate and/or other food
handling permit as required by law, from the Los Angeles County
Department of Health as a condition precedent to the City issuing a
business license and/or permit for vending within the City. Such health
certificate shall be openly displayed at all times while conducting
business and presented upon demand to any peace officer or City
employee authorized to enforce this Code.
b. Operator's Permit. No person shall vend and/or operate any pushcart in
the City without obtaining for each and every pushcart said person is
operating or causing to be operated in the City: (1) an operator's permit
issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and (2) any other
business tax, license or permit required under any other chapter of this
Code. The operator's permit shall be openly displayed at all times while
§ 9-26.2 COMPTON § 9-26.4
AO:472
§ 9-26.5. Application for Operator's Permit; Contents; Required Fee.
[Ord. #2243]
conducting business and presented upon demand to any peace officer
or City employee authorized to enforce this Code.
a. Any person desiring to obtain an operator's permit shall submit an
application to the City's Business License Division. Applications for the
operator's permit shall be submitted in the form prescribed by the
Business License Division. Prior to submitting such application, a
nonrefundable fee, as established by resolution or ordinance of the City
Council shall be paid to the Business License Division to defray, in part,
the cost of the investigation and report required by this section. The
Business License Division shall issue a receipt showing that the
application fee has been paid. Fees required under this section shall be
in addition to any other license, permit or fee required under this
Chapter or any other chapter of this Code.
b. Neither the filing of an application for a permit, nor the payment of an
application fee, shall authorize the vending from, operation or
management of a pushcart.
c. Each applicant for an operator's permit to operate within the City shall
furnish the following:
1. The full and true name under which the business will be conducted;
2. The full and true name and any other name used by the applicant;
3. The present residence and business address of the applicant and
telephone numbers of the applicant;
4. A description of the merchandise or product that pushcart operator
will vend;
5. The maximum number of pushcarts owned, operated, leased,
controlled or contracted by the applicant to be used in the City;
6. The full and true names and residences of all persons employed,
contracted, leased or otherwise given control of the applicant's
pushcarts; and
7. The applicant shall also furnish the following information:
(a) California driver's license or identification number of the
above-described natural persons;
(b) Date of birth of the above-described natural persons;
(c) The permit history of the above-described natural persons for
the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the
filing of the application, including whether such person, in
previously operating in this or any other city, county, state or
§ 9-26.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-26.5
AO:473
§ 9-26.6. Investigation of Applications. [Ord. #2243]
The Business License Division shall have a reasonable period of time in
which to investigate the application and background of the applicant for an
operator's permit.
§ 9-26.7. ISSUANCE OF PERMIT. [Ord. #2243, § 4]
The Business License Division, within 10 days after concluding its
investigation of the application and background of the applicant for an
operator's permit, shall issue the permit only if it finds that all of the
following requirements have been met:
territory, has ever had any similar license or permit or
franchise revoked or suspended and, if so, the circumstances
of such suspension or revocation; and
(d) All criminal convictions suffered by the above-described
natural persons, including ordinance violations, but excepting
minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as a minor
traffic offense), stating the date, place, nature and sentence of
each such conviction.
1. The required fees have been paid;
2. The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this
Chapter;
3. The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation of
fact in the application;
4. The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the
application; and
5. The applicant, if an individual, or any of the directors, officers or
stockholders holding more than 5% of the stock of the corporation, or
any of the partners, including limited partners, or profit interest holder,
manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
existing or proposed business of vending from a pushcart, or a natural
person employed or contracted with to be a driver, has not been
convicted or pleaded nolo contendere or guilty within five years prior to
his application for a permit to a misdemeanor or felony crime of moral
turpitude or drug-related misdemeanor or felony crime, including but
not limited to:
(a) The sale of a controlled substance specified in Sections 11054
through 11058 of the California Health Safety Code;
(b) The sale, distribution or display of harmful or obscene matter;
(c) Indecent exposure;
(d) Selling or disposing of lottery tickets;
§ 9-26.5 COMPTON § 9-26.7
AO:474
§ 9-26.8. Permit Term and Renewal. [Ord. #2243, § 4]
The term of vendor and operator permits, unless sooner suspended or
revoked, shall be for a period of one year. Upon the expiration of such
term, the permittee may renew the permit for additional one-year terms by
submitting new applications in conformance with Subsection 9-26.5 herein
together with such permit renewal fees as may be established by resolution
or ordinance of the City Council.
§ 9-26.9. Denial of Permit. [Ord. #2243, § 4]
If the Business License Division finds that all of the requirements set forth
in Subsection 9-26.5 have not been met and a permit cannot be issued
pursuant to Subsection 9-26.7, the City shall deny the application for the
operator's permit. In the event the application for the permit is denied
by the Business License Division, written notice of such denial shall be
given to the applicant specifying the ground or grounds of such denial.
Notice of denial of the application for the permit shall be deemed to have
been served if it, in fact, is personally served on the applicant or when
deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to
the applicant at his or her residence address as set forth in the application
for the certificate.
§ 9-26.10. Suspension or Revocation of Permit. [Ord. #2243, § 4]
(e) Permitting gambling, pool selling or bookmaking; or
(f) In the case of applications for an operator's permit, alcohol or drugrelated
traffic offenses.
The investigating City employee is specifically authorized to obtain state
summary criminal history record information as provided for in Section
11105 of the California Penal Code. Any complaint for the above-listed
charges pending before a court of law shall cause the application to be
considered pending until adjudication of the complaint.
a. Any owner's permit issued under this section may be suspended or
revoked by the Business License Division for any of the following
reasons:
1. Falsehood of any information supplied by the applicant upon which
issuance of the permit was based;
2. Failure of the applicant to promptly notify the Business License
Division of any change occurring subsequent to the issuance of the
permit in the information supplied by the applicant upon which the
issuance of the permit was based; or
3. Conviction of, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere by the applicant
of any offense set forth in Subsection 9-25.8e1-6.
§ 9-26.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-26.10
AO:475
§ 9-26.11. Pushcart Standards. [Ord. #2243, § 4]
§ 9-26.12. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #2243, § 4]
b. No such suspension or revocation shall become effective until the
permit holder has been notified in writing of the right of such permit
holder to appeal the suspension or revocation pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 9 of this Code. Notification to the permit holder
shall be made either by personal delivery or by certified or registered
mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the permit holder at such
permit holder's residence address as set forth on the application for a
permit. If a timely appeal is filed the suspension or revocation shall be
stayed and shall become effective only upon decision of the City
Council. Otherwise the suspension or revocation shall become effective
after the timely appeal period has expired.
c. No person whose permit is revoked shall be eligible to apply for a new
permit for a period of one year following such revocation.
a. Each pushcart shall have affixed to it in plain view the operator's
permit.
b. The maximum dimensions of any pushcart shall be six feet in length and
four feet in width.
c. The only signs used in conjunction with a pushcart shall be signs affixed
to or painted on the pushcart or its canopy.
d. No artificial lighting of any pushcart is permitted.
e. A refuse bin of at least one cubic foot shall be provided in or on the
pushcart.
f. No noise-making devices shall be used in conjunction with pushcart
vending except one bell with a maximum diameter of two inches.
a. No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart which is located within
50 feet of any other pushcart.
b. No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart within 300 feet of the
nearest property line of any property on which a school building is
located between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any school day.
This prohibition will not apply if the school principal gives the pushcart
vendor written authorization to park on school property. The vendor
shall provide a copy of the authorization upon demand by any peace
officer or City employee authorized to enforce this Code.
c. No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart within 200 feet of the
nearest property line of any property which is used as a church, temple
or mosque between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. of any day
during which religious services are held. This prohibition will not apply
if the pushcart vendor has written authorization from the recognized
§ 9-26.10 COMPTON § 9-26.12
AO:476
§ 9-26.13. Relation to Zoning Laws. [Ord. #2243, § 4]
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to authorize the grantee of any
operator's permit to vend from a pushcart in a manner which violates the
zoning regulations set forth in Chapter 30 of this Code.
§ 9-26.14. Conducting as a Nuisance. [Ord. #2243, § 4]
Any pushcart operated contrary to the provisions of this section shall be and
the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the
City Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action
hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for
the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by
law, and may take such other steps and may apply to such court or courts
as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such
establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating a pushcart
contrary to the provisions of this section.
§ 9-26.15. Penalties — Misdemeanor, Fines. [Ord. #2243, § 4]
leader of the church, temple or mosque. The vendor shall provide a
copy of the authorization upon demand by any peace officer or City
employee authorized to enforce this Code.
d. No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart within 10 feet of any
intersection, driveway, building entrance, or in any space designated
for vehicular parking.
e. Pushcarts shall not remain stationary except for the purpose of
conducting a sales transaction.
f. During periods of standard time, no person shall operate or vend from a
pushcart before 8:00 a.m. or later than 6:00 p.m. in residential areas.
During periods of daylight savings time, no person shall operate or vend
from a pushcart before 8:00 a.m. or later than 8:00 p.m. in residential
areas.
a. Any person who violates the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine and
imprisonment. In addition, the City may also impose administrative
penalties pursuant to § 1-7 of the Compton Municipal Code and seek
injunctive relief and civil penalties in the Superior Court for violations
of this Chapter. The remedies provided to the City in this Chapter shall
be cumulative and not exclusive of any other remedies available under
any other federal, state or local laws.
b. Each day any violation of any said provision of this section shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 9-26.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-26.16
AO:477
§ 9-26.16. Impounding Pushcarts and Confiscation. [Ord. #2243,
§ 4]
A pushcart may be impounded by any peace officer or City employee
authorized to enforce this section, in the course of an arrest of the operator
for a violation of this Code when the pushcart is to be used as evidence of
the violation. In addition, any person or vendor who violates the provisions
of this Chapter may have his or her goods or merchandise confiscated by the
enforcement agency. Perishable items such as food and beverages that are
confiscated shall be disposed of immediately. Pushcarts and nonperishable
items that are confiscated shall be inventoried and stored pending the
outcome of any court proceedings or other resolution of the matter. Unless
ordered or stipulated that a confiscated pushcart(s) and/or nonperishable
items shall be forfeited, such confiscated item(s) shall be made available
for release to the owner or other authorized person within three business
days after resolution of the matter. Upon the failure of the owner or other
authorized person to claim the confiscated property and pay the fees, if
any due, within 30 continuous calendar days after such confiscated items
are made available for release as indicated above, the confiscated property
shall be deemed abandoned property in possession of the City and may be
disposed of pursuant to law.
The City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, establish a schedule of
fees, to recover all reasonable costs to the City, for the impoundment and
storage of confiscated pushcarts and/or nonperishable items.
§ 9-27. MOTION PICTURES, TELEVISION AND PHOTOGRAPHIC
PRODUCTION. [Added 7-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2312]
§ 9-27.1. Title.
This section shall be known as the "Motion Pictures, Television and
Photographic Production Ordinance" of the City of Compton.
§ 9-27.2. Purpose and Intent.
This section is to establish administrative rules and regulations for the
review and issuance of filming permits for motion picture, television and
photographic production in the City of Compton. The intent of this section is
to facilitate and regulate the time, place and manner of such filming activity
and to mitigate the potential impact filming activities may have on residents
and business owners.
§ 9-27.3. Definitions.
For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
CHARITABLE FILMS — Commercials, motion pictures, television (digital,
film or tape) or still photography produced by a nonprofit organization,
which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as
a charitable organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a
§ 9-26.16 COMPTON § 9-27.3
AO:478
profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the
films, tapes or photos.
CITY PERMIT COORDINATOR — The City employee or body designated
by the City Manager as responsible for issuing permits pursuant to this
section.
FAMILY VIDEOS — The filming, videotaping of motion pictures or taking of
photographs solely for private and/or family use.
FILM — Includes, but not be limited to feature motion pictures, video
recordings, television motion pictures, commercials, digital media and still
photography.
FILMING ACTIVITY — All activity attendant to staging or shooting
commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, web-based
media, commercials and the taking of single or multiple photographs for
sale or commercial use where the photographer sets up stationary
equipment in any one location for longer than five consecutive minutes.
"Filming activity" also includes filming of commercial radio station
promotional events.
FILMING LOCATION — Actual property or properties at which any filming
activity is performed.
NEWS MEDIA — An individual or individuals or organizations filming or
videotaping for the purpose of breaking, spontaneous, unplanned reporting
of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences which
are in the news and of general public interest by reporters, photographers
or camera persons in the employ of a newspaper, television station, news
service or similar entity.
PREPARATION (PREP) — The work day or days preceding filming activities.
These activities may include, but are not limited to, set construction,
dressing, painting, landscaping and/or rigging for stunts and special effects.
PRODUCTION — The activity of making a film for commercial or
noncommercial purposes on property owned by the City of Compton or on
private property within the jurisdiction of the City of Compton.
STRIKE — The work at a filming location that includes the removal of
equipment at the end of filming activities. These activities may include,
but are not limited to, set removal, re-painting, re-landscaping and/or unrigging
from stunts and special effects.
STUDENT FILMS — The motion pictures, television programs or
commercials or still photography produced to satisfy a course or curriculum
requirement at an educational institution. The student filmmaker must
supply proof that he/she is currently enrolled.
STUDIO — A legally established commercial motion picture/television/still
photography place of business where filming activities (motion or still
photography) are regularly conducted inside a studio/stage on the premises.
§ 9-27.4. Permit Required; Exemptions.
§ 9-27.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-27.4
AO:479
§ 9-27.5. Permit Applications and Issuance.
a. No person shall use any public or private property, building, facility or
residence for the purpose of filming activity, including but not limited to
producing, making or taking commercial motion pictures or television
pictures (digital, film or tape) or commercial still photography, without
first applying for and receiving a permit from the City.
b. Except where otherwise indicated herein, the provisions of this section
shall not apply to the following:
1. Noncommercial filming, videotaping or photography activities
conducted solely for private or family use;
2. Filming, videotaping or photography activities conducted for
spontaneous, unplanned or breaking news purposes, as defined
herein;
3. Filming activities conducted for use in a criminal investigation or
civil or criminal court proceeding;
4. Filming activities conducted for education, government, public
access and local origination programs for cable television systems
franchised within the City;
5. Any activity deemed to be in the public interest by the City
Manager of his/her designee; or
6. Studio filming.
c. Nothing in this section shall limit the right of the City to suspend filming
or videotaping activities exempted herein when found necessary for the
protection of the public health, safety or general welfare, and when
such filming activity poses an immediate hazard to persons and/or
property.
a. Permit Applications. Any person desiring a permit under the provisions
of this section shall submit the following to the City Permit Coordinator:
1. A completed application for a permit on a form provided by the City.
The form must be signed and accompanied by a nonrefundable
permit application fee and security deposit (unless exempted
pursuant to § 9-27.6), and if applicable, written permission of
private property owner(s), as required by this section and the City's
administrative rules and regulations before the permit will be
processed. Each application must include:
(a) The name, address, telephone number and email address of the
applicant or duly authorized representative, the location
manager and, if available, of the director, first assistant
director and/or the unit production manager;
§ 9-27.4 COMPTON § 9-27.5
AO:480
(b) The name, address, telephone number and email address of the
individual or production company to whom the permit is to be
issued;
(c) The name, address, telephone number and email address of the
owner or representative of the property at which the activity is
to be conducted;
(d) The specific location at such address or place;
(e) The inclusive hours and dates such activity will occur,
including but not limited to the preparation and cleanup of the
location;
(f) A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed
filming activities, including any other activity which would
affect the use of public facilities in the area;
(g) The estimated number of personnel to be involved;
(h) If applicable, a statement indicating that the applicant intends
to use either animals, chemicals, explosives, fire or
pyrotechnics or intends to engage in any other hazardous
activities such as stunts;
(i) The exact amount/type of vehicles/equipment to be involved;
(j) The location of a base camp for the production, if any; and
(k) Such additional information as the City may deem necessary.
2. Permit fee as established by City Council ordinance or resolution
and other applicable deposits as described in Subsection 9-27.6.
3. If determined to be necessary by the City Permit Coordinator,
written evidence of permits and/or conditions with other public
agencies as may be required upon submission of an application for
a permit. Requirements of these responsible agencies shall be
requirements of this permit. Examples of such agencies include,
but are not limited to, the California Highway Patrol, the Los
Angeles County Sheriff's Department, Federal Aviation
Administration, the Compton Fire and Public Works Departments.
4. Any other information as required by the City's administrative rules
and regulations.
b. Permit Issuance.
1. The City Permit Coordinator shall be responsible for the issuance of
permits under this section, when, from a consideration of the
application and from such other information as may be otherwise
obtained, he/she finds that:
§ 9-27.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-27.5
AO:481
(a) The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with
traffic or pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and
that no streets will be completely closed to traffic for an
unreasonable period of time;
(b) The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with
normal governmental or City operations, threaten to result in
damage or detriment to public property, or result in the City
incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel
not reimbursed in advance by the applicant; and
(c) At the determination of the City's Public Works Department, as
well as the City's authorized law enforcement agency, City Fire
Department and the City Engineer, as required, that the
condition of such activity will not constitute a fire hazard or
any other type of hazard and all proper safety precautions will
be taken as determined by the Department Director(s) or their
designee(s).
2. The City Permit Coordinator may impose any conditions found
necessary to protect the public's health, safety and welfare. The
permittee shall comply with any conditions or restrictions the City
may impose as a condition to issuing a permit. No changes to such
conditions shall be made without first obtaining the City Permit
Coordinator's prior written approval. Failure to comply with the
terms and conditions of a permit shall be grounds for permit
revocation by the City.
3. Following issuance of a permit under this section, the permittee
shall notify residents and businesses within a 500-foot radius of the
location of the proposed filming activity by distributing a fully
completed "Filming Location Notification Form," including the
production company's contact telephone numbers, at least 24
hours prior to the first day of filming activity. Notification is not
required for still photographic productions with cast and crew of
less than 10 people.
4. The decision of the City Permit Coordinator to issue, conditionally
issue or not issue a permit shall be final unless appealed pursuant
to Subsection 9-27.9.
c. Permit Processing. Review and processing of a completed application
shall be completed, when reasonably possible, within four to eight City
business days of submission, unless an extension of time is agreed to in
writing by an applicant. The processing of a film permit application
submitted for a small or routine request should generally be conducted
within four City business days, but may be extended beyond that time
based on a reasonable determination made by the City Permit
Coordinator. The processing of more complex or multi-faceted permit
applications may extend beyond the four to eight City business days,
but within a reasonable period of time. When an applicant does not
§ 9-27.5 COMPTON § 9-27.5
AO:482
agree to extend the permit application review process beyond the four
to eight City business days, the City Permit Coordinator is authorized
to deny the application and to refund all monies paid by the applicant
with a letter describing the reasons for denial.
d. General Permit Conditions. Any applicant granted a permit pursuant to
this section shall comply with all of the following conditions:
1. The applicant shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with
continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use and the
cleanup of trash and debris. The area used shall be cleaned of trash
and debris upon completion of shooting at the scene and restored
to the original condition before leaving the site.
2. An applicant is required to obtain the property owner's written
permission, consent and/or lease for use of property not owned or
controlled by the City.
3. If the applicant must park equipment, trucks and/or cars in zones
that will not permit it, temporary "No Parking" signs shall be
posted by the applicant, if required by the City. The applicant must
also obtain permission to string cable across sidewalks or from a
generator to a service point.
4. For filming that would impair traffic flow, an applicant must use the
City's authorized law enforcement agency personnel and comply
with all traffic control requirements deemed necessary.
(a) An applicant shall furnish and install advance warning signs
and any other traffic control devices in conformance with the
manual of traffic controls, State of California, Department of
Transportation. All appropriate safety precautions must be
taken.
(b) Traffic may be restricted by lane closure(s) and/or stopped
intermittently. The period of time that traffic may be restricted
will be determined by the City, based on location.
(c) Traffic shall not be detoured across a double line without prior
approval of the appropriate City department representative.
(d) Unless authorized by the City, camera cars must be driven in
the direction of traffic and must observe all traffic laws.
(e) Emergency road work or construction by City crews, other
governmental entities, public utilities and/or private
contractors, under permit or contract to the appropriate
department shall have priority over filming activities. However,
at the City's discretion, the City shall attempt to work with the
permittee to find an equitable solution, if possible.
(f) No relocation, alteration or moving of City-owned structures or
property will be permitted without prior approval.
§ 9-27.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-27.5
AO:483
§ 9-27.6. Permit Fees; Costs.
Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by:
§ 9-27.7. Insurance and Hold Harmless.
If the permit application is approved, before the permit shall be issued, the
applicant/permittee (both for-profit, nonprofit and student filming activities)
shall submit the following:
5. City fire safety officers or advisors may be required if warranted by
the activities; such as use of special effects, indoor filming, large
crews, projectile pyrotechnics and filming during fire season or in
fire-sensitive areas.
6. Compliance with the City's administrative rules and regulations.
a. A security deposit, in an amount established by City Council ordinance
or resolution, to ensure cleanup and restoration of the site of the filming
activity. The deposit, in full or part thereof, may be returned to the
applicant upon completion of filming activity and inspection of the site
by the City; and
b. A nonrefundable permit application fee in an amount established by
ordinance or resolution of the City Council to reimburse the City for
staff time required to evaluate and process the application and
establish conditions of approval and to monitor the activity.
c. The security deposit and permit application fee shall not apply to or
affect:
1. City-produced or City-sponsored government or educational access
productions;
2. Student films; and
3. Productions by charitable organizations that have been issued
501(c)(3) status by the Internal Revenue Service and are in good
standing.
d. If deemed necessary by the City Permit Coordinator, additional law
enforcement agency, code enforcement, film monitor and/or other City
services shall be provided for the purpose of assisting, regulating or
providing security or protection to the applicant and/or public for the
proposed activities conducted under the permit, at a cost billed to the
permittee. The cost of providing such additional services shall be paid
in advance to the City by the permittee. Additional City services shall be
provided/coordinated through the City Permit Coordinator. Additionally,
if City property is destroyed or damaged by reason of permittee's use,
event or activity, the permittee shall reimburse the City the actual
replacement or repair cost of the destroyed or damaged property.
§ 9-27.5 COMPTON § 9-27.7
AO:484
§ 9-27.8. Revocation of a City Film Permit.
a. Liability Insurance. If the activity will be conducted on public property,
a certificate of insurance shall be submitted evidencing the following:
1) general liability with limits no less than $1,000,000; 2) auto liability,
if applicable, with limits no less than $1,000,000; 3) workers'
compensation coverage as required by law; and 4) employer's liability
with limits no less than $1,000,000. The general liability and auto
liability policies shall name the City, its officials, officers, employees,
agents and volunteers as additional insureds to protect the City against
claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful death and
property damage and to indemnify the City for damage to City property
arising out of the permittee's activities. An additional aggregate may be
required for the use of pyrotechnics or when other conditions warrant
greater insurance liability. Such policy(ies) shall be provided by an
insured permitted to do business in the State of California and shall not
be subject to cancellation or modification until after 30 days written
notice to the City.
b. Hold Harmless Agreement. An applicant must execute and submit a
hold harmless agreement in a form approved by the City Attorney,
agreeing to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officials,
officers, agents, employees and volunteers against losses and liabilities
incurred from the activities of the permittee or issuance of the permit.
a. A permit may be revoked by the City for any of the following reasons:
1. Misrepresentation(s) on the permit application, including but not
limited to the type or manner of film production, the location of
activity or the parameters or the need for stunts or special effects.
2. Any violations of the local, state or federal law, and/or the City's
administrative rules and regulations for filming activity.
3. Any violation of the conditions imposed on the permit.
b. The City's authorized law enforcement agency, City Fire Department,
Code Enforcement and/or the City Permit Coordinator are authorized to
suspend any filming activity not authorized by the necessary permit or
when permit conditions are violated or where the City's filming rules
and regulations, laws or ordinances are violated. A written notice of
suspension shall be provided to the permittee and the City Permit
Coordinator within 24 hours of the suspension.
1. Depending on the nature of the violation, the City may issue a
verbal or written notification to the permittee demanding that the
violation(s) be immediately addressed and corrected before a
suspension or revocation of the permit.
c. The decision of the City Permit Coordinator to revoke a City film permit
shall be final unless appealed pursuant to Subsection 9-27.9.
§ 9-27.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-27.9
AO:485
§ 9-27.9. Appeal Procedures.
The decision of the City Permit Coordinator to issue, conditionally issue, not
issue, suspend or revoke a permit may be appealed in writing to the City
Manager within two City business days of the decision. The appeal must
include copies of all pertinent material necessary to support the permittee's
position on appeal. The appeal shall be heard by the City Manager, or his/
her designee, within two City business days after the appeal is filed and he/
she shall render a decision within two City business days after the appeal
hearing. Any actions of the City Manager shall be final.
§ 9-27.10. Rules and Regulations.
§ 9-27.11. Enforcement of Violations.
a. Change of Date. Upon the request of the applicant, submitted a
minimum of 24 hours in advance, the City Permit Coordinator or his/her
designee shall have the power, upon a showing of good cause, to change
the date for which the permit has been issued, provided established
limitations are complied with in respect to time and location.
b. Rules. The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized and directed
to promulgate rules and regulations, subject to approval by resolution
of the City Council, governing the time, place and manner of any film
activity within the City. The rules and regulations shall be based upon
the criteria set forth in this section.
a. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Compton Municipal Code to
the contrary, any person who has been issued a filming permit or any
person responsible for conducting filming activities within the City of
Compton without first obtaining a filming permit, causes or permits a
violation of any provision of this section, or who fails to comply with any
obligation or requirement of this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor
violation, or at the discretion of the City Attorney, an infraction,
punishable in accordance with § 1-6 of Chapter 1 of the Compton
Municipal Code.
b. This section does not exclusively regulate filming activity in the City,
and the remedies provided in this section are in addition to other
applicable remedies and penalties authorized by the Compton
Municipal Code, or by the laws of the State of California or of the
United States.
§ 9-27.9 COMPTON § 9-27.11
AO:486
Chapter 10
CABLE, VIDEO, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE
PROVIDERS
Editor's Note: Former Chapter 10, Community Antenna Television
Code, previously codified herein and containing portions of
Ordinance Nos. 1616 and 1760 was amended and has been
designated as an uncodified ordinance by Ordinance No. 2143.
Pursuant to Section 5 of Ordinance No. 2143, Former Chapter 10 will
continue in full force and effect as an uncodified ordinance and is
subject to repeal by the City Council under conditions stipulated in
Ordinance 2143, Section 5. Former Chapter is on file in the office of
the City Clerk.
§ 10-1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 10-1.1. Title. [Ord. #2143, § 3]
This Chapter is known and may be cited as the "Cable, Video, and
Telecommunications Service Providers Ordinance" of the City of Compton.
§ 10-1.2. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. #2143, § 3]
a. The City Council finds and determines as follows:
1. The development of cable, video, and telecommunications services
and systems may provide significant benefits for, and have
substantial impacts upon, the residents of the City.
2. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology
associated with cable, video, and telecommunications services and
systems, the public convenience, safety, and general welfare is best
served by the City's exercise of its regulatory powers.
3. This Chapter adopts provisions that authorize the City to regulate
cable, video, and telecommunications service providers to the
extent authorized by Federal and State law, including but not
limited to the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984,
the Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992, the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996,
applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission,
and applicable California statutes and regulations.
4. The cable, video, and telecommunications services that are
addressed in this Chapter include services provided by cable
television systems, open video systems, master antenna television
systems, satellite master antenna television systems, direct
broadcast satellite systems, multichannel multipoint distribution
systems, local multipoint distribution systems, and other providers
of video programming, whatever their technology, as well as voice
and data services provided by telephone corporations.
§ 9-27.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.2
AO:487
§ 10-1.3. Defined Terms and Phrases. [Ord. #2143, § 3]
Various terms and phrases used in this Chapter are defined below in Section
10-5.
§ 10-2. CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS.
§ 10-2.1. Authority and Findings. [Ord. #2143, § 3]
b. The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to provide for the attainment
of the following objectives:
1. To enable the City to discharge its public trust in a manner
consistent with rapidly evolving Federal and State regulatory
policies, industry competition, and technological development.
2. To authorize and to manage reasonable access to the City's public
rights-of-way and public property for cable, video, and
telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory basis in conjunction with all applicable
requirements of this Code.
3. To obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the City and its
residents for authorizing the private use of the public rights-of-way
and public property.
4. To promote competition in cable, video, and telecommunications
services, minimize unnecessary local regulation of cable, video, and
telecommunications service providers, and encourage the delivery
of advanced and competitive cable, video, and telecommunications
services on the broadest possible basis to local government and to
the businesses, institutions, and residents of the City.
5. To establish clear local guidelines, standards, and time frames for
the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of
cable, video, and telecommunications service providers.
6. To encourage the deployment of advanced cable, video, and
telecommunications infrastructure that satisfies local needs,
delivers enhanced government services, and provides informed
consumer choices in an evolving cable, video, and
telecommunications marketplace.
7. To maintain and to enhance public, educational, and governmental
programming opportunities that will enable local government to
communicate with its residents and to provide its residents with
alternate means of disseminating information.
a. In accordance with applicable Federal and State law, the City is
authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct,
reconstruct, operate, and maintain cable television systems within the
City limits.
§ 10-1.2 COMPTON § 10-2.1
AO:488
§ 10-2.2. Franchise Terms and Conditions. [Ord. #2143, § 3]
b. The City Council finds that the development of cable television services
may provide significant benefits for, and substantial impacts upon, the
residents of the City. Because of the complex and rapidly changing
technology associated with cable television, the City Council further
finds that the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best
be served by establishing regulatory powers to be exercised by the City.
Section 10-2 is intended to specify the means for providing to the public
the best possible cable television services, and every franchise issued in
accordance with Section 10-2 is intended to achieve this primary
objective. It is the further intent of Section 10-2 to adopt regulatory
provisions that will enable the City to regulate cable television services
to the maximum extent authorized by Federal and State law.
a. Franchise Purposes. A franchise granted by the City under the
provisions of Section 10-2 may authorize the Grantee to do the
following:
1. To engage in the business of providing cable television services
that are authorized by law and that Grantee elects to provide to its
subscribers within the designated franchise service area.
2. To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace,
maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment,
supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in
connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over,
under, upon, along and across streets and public rights-of-way
within the designated franchise service area.
3. To maintain and operate the franchise properties for the
origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution
of television and radio signals, and for the delivery of cable services
and such other services as may be authorized by law.
b. Franchise Required.
1. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a cable
television system within any street or public rights-of-way in the
City without first obtaining a franchise under the provisions of
Section 10-2.
2. The City Council finds and determines that certain multichannel
video programming distributors and video providers, as those
terms are defined in Section 10-5, provide cable service, including
video programming, to subscribers within limited geographic areas
where multi-family dwelling complexes and congregate-living
complexes are located. That cable service, including video
programming, is sometimes provided, in whole or in part, by the
transmission of signals over wires or lines that are owned or
controlled by telecommunications service providers or other public
§ 10-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.2
AO:489
utilities and that are within or cross streets or public ways within
the boundaries of a local franchising authority. The multichannel
video programming distributor or video provider may obtain from
the telecommunications service provider or other public utility, by
lease, license, or similar contractual arrangement, the right to use
those wires or lines in order to provide cable service, including
video programming, to subscribers or customers within the multifamily
dwelling complexes and congregate-living complexes
referenced above. The City Council further finds and determines
that these contractual arrangements for signal transmission
facilitate the provision of cable service, including video
programming, and create a nexus between that cable service and
the use of the streets and public rights-of-way of the City.
Consequently, to the maximum extent authorized under California
law, it is the intent of the City Council to subject multichannel
video programming distributors and video providers that intend
to use this signal-transmission methodology to the franchise
requirements set forth in Section 10-2, subject to such waivers and
modifications of those requirements as may, in the discretion of the
City Council or its designee, be warranted in view of the limited
geographic area that is proposed to be served.
c. Term of the Franchise.
1. A franchise granted under Section 10-2 will be for the term
specified in the franchise agreement, commencing upon the
effective date of the ordinance adopted by the City Council that
authorizes the franchise.
2. A franchise granted under Section 10-2 may be renewed upon
application by the Grantee in accordance with the then-applicable
provisions of State and Federal law and of Section 10-2.
d. Franchise Service Area. A franchise is effective within the territorial
limits of the City, and within any area added to the City during the term
of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance granting
the franchise or in the franchise agreement.
e. Federal or State Jurisdiction. Section 10-2 will be construed in a
manner consistent with all applicable Federal and State laws, and it
applies to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of
this Chapter, to the extent authorized by applicable law.
f. Franchise Non Transferable.
1. Grantee may not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, or dispose of,
in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by
ordinary sale, contract, consolidation, or otherwise, the franchise
or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior
written consent of the City Council and then only upon such terms
and conditions as may be prescribed by the City Council, which
consent may not be unreasonably denied or delayed. Any attempt
§ 10-2.2 COMPTON § 10-2.2
AO:490
to sell, transfer, lease, assign, or otherwise dispose of the franchise
or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the
written consent of the City Council is null and void. The granting of
a security interest in any assets of the Grantee, or any mortgage or
other hypothecation, will not be deemed a transfer for the purposes
of this subsection.
2. The requirements of subsection (1) apply to any change in control
of Grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to the
ownership of major stockholder or partnership interests, but
includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. If
Grantee is a partnership or a corporation, prior written
authorization of the City Council is required where ownership or
control of 25% or more of the partnership interests or of the voting
stock of Grantee, or any company in the tier of companies
controlling the Grantee, whether directly or indirectly, is acquired
by a person or a group of persons acting in concert, none of whom,
individually or collectively, owns or controls those partnership
interests or that voting stock of the Grantee, or of Grantee's upper
tier of controlling companies, as of the effective date of the
franchise.
3. Grantee must give prior written notice to the City of any proposed
foreclosure or judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the
Grantee's franchise property. That notification will be considered
by the City as notice that a change in control of ownership of the
franchise will take place, and the provisions of this paragraph that
require the prior written consent of the City Council to that change
in control of ownership will apply.
4. For the purpose of determining whether it will consent to an
acquisition, transfer, or change in control, the City may inquire as
to the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling
party, and Grantee must assist the City in that inquiry. In seeking
the City's consent to any change of ownership or control, Grantee
or the proposed transferee, or both, must complete Federal
Communications Commission Form 394 or its equivalent. This
application must be submitted to the City not less than 120 days
prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee must
establish that it possesses the legal, financial, and technical
qualifications to remedy all then existing defaults and deficiencies,
and, during the remaining term of the franchise, to operate and
maintain the cable system and to comply with all franchise
requirements. If the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of
the proposed transferee are determined to be satisfactory, then the
City will consent to the transfer of the franchise.
5. Any financial institution holding a pledge of the Grantee's assets to
secure the advance of money for the construction or operation of
the franchise property has the right to notify the City that it, or a
designee satisfactory to the City, will take control, of and operate
§ 10-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.2
AO:491
the cable television system upon Grantee's default in its financial
obligations. Further, that financial situation must also submit a plan
for such operation within 90 days after assuming control. The plan
must ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise
requirements during the period that the financial institution will
exercise control over the system. The financial institution may not
exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year
unless authorized by the City, in its sole discretion, and during that
period of time it will have the right to petition the City to transfer
the franchise to another Grantee.
6. Unless prohibited by applicable law, Grantee must reimburse the
City for the City's reasonable review and processing expenses
incurred in connection with any transfer or change in control of the
franchise. These expenses include, without limitation, costs of
administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of
the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal
experts and all costs incurred by these experts), notice and
publication costs, and document preparation expenses. No
reimbursement may be offset against any franchise fee payable to
the City during the term of the franchise.
g. Geographical Coverage.
1. Unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, Grantee
must design, construct, and maintain the cable television system to
have the capability to pass every dwelling unit and commercial
building in the City, subject to any service-area line extension
requirements set forth in the franchise agreement.
2. After service has been established by activating trunk or
distribution cables for any service area, Grantee must provide
service to any subscriber requesting a standard installation within
that activated part of the service area within seven days from the
date of request, provided that the Grantee is able to secure on
reasonable terms and conditions all rights-of-way and permits
necessary to extend service to that subscriber within that sevenday
period. Standard installations are defined as installations that
are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system.
h. Nonexclusive Franchise. Every franchise granted is nonexclusive. The
City specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional
franchises for a cable television system that it deems appropriate,
subject to applicable State and Federal law. If an additional franchise is
proposed to be granted to a subsequent Grantee, a noticed public
hearing must first be held if required under the provisions of
Government Code § 53066.3.
i. Multiple Franchises. The City may grant any number of franchises,
subject to applicable State and Federal law. The City may limit the
number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited
§ 10-2.2 COMPTON § 10-2.2
AO:492
§ 10-2.3. Franchise Applications and Renewal. [Ord. #2143, § 3]
to, the requirements of applicable law and the following specific local
considerations:
1. The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple
cables in addition to the cables, conduits, and pipes of the existing
utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, and
sewerage.
2. The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable
system competition, such as lower rates and improved service.
3. The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition,
such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents'
property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations
within the public rights-of-way.
a. Filing of Applications. Any person desiring an initial franchise for a
cable television system must file an application with the City. An
application fee deposit in an amount established by resolution of the
City Council must accompany the application. That application fee
deposit will cover all anticipated costs associated with reviewing and
processing the application, including without limitation costs of
administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the
applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all
costs incurred by those experts), notice and publication requirements,
and document preparation expenses. If actual costs exceed the
application fee deposit, the applicant must pay the difference to the City
within 30 days following receipt of an itemized statement of those costs.
If actual costs are less than the application fee deposit, the remaining
balance will be refunded to the applicant.
b. Applications — Contents. An application for an initial franchise for a
cable television system must contain, as applicable:
1. A statement describing the proposed franchise service area and an
explanation whether this proposed service area is, or will be, a part
of a larger regional cluster of franchise service areas.
2. A resume of the applicant's prior history, including the experience
and expertise of the applicant in the cable television industry.
3. A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a
partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by
each stockholder, if a closely-held corporation. If the applicant is a
publicly-owned partnership or corporation, each owner of 10% or
more of the partnership interests, or of the issued and outstanding
capital stock, must be identified. If the applicant is a limited
liability company, the following information must be provided: the
address of its principal executive office; the name and business or
residence address of each member and of each holder of an
§ 10-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.3
AO:493
economic interest in the limited liability company, together with the
contribution and the share in profits and losses of each member
and holder of an economic interest; the name and business or
residence address of any manager or managers and the chief
executive officer, if any, appointed or elected in accordance with
the articles of organization or operating agreement.
4. A list of officers and directors of the applicant, together with a
description of the background and qualifications of each such
person.
5. A statement specifying the number of people employed by the
applicant, whether on a full-time or part-time basis.
6. The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the
applicant, or any other business entity owning or controlling
applicant in whole or in part, or that is owned or controlled in
whole or in part by the applicant.
7. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant's
financial ability to:
(a) Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new physical
plant that is proposed to be constructed in the City.
(b) Comply with the City's public, educational, and governmental
access requirements.
(c) Comply with the City's requirement that franchise fees be paid
on the applicant's gross revenues derived from the operation of
the cable system to provide cable services.
8. An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the City that the applicant intends
to use, to purchase, or to lease.
9. A description of the cable services and any other services that will
be offered by the applicant using existing or proposed facilities.
10. The proposed construction and service schedule, the proposed rate
structure for cable services, and the proposed commitment to
provide public, educational, and governmental access capacity,
services, facilities, and equipment.
11. Any additional information that the City deems to be reasonably
necessary to evaluate the applicant's qualifications.
c. Consideration of Initial Applications.
1. Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise, the City
Manager or the City Manager's designee must prepare a report and
§ 10-2.3 COMPTON § 10-2.3
AO:494
§ 10-2.4. Contents of Cable Television Franchise Agreements. [Ord.
#2143, § 3]
make recommendations to the City Council concerning that
application.
2. A public hearing will be noticed prior to any initial franchise grant,
at a time and date approved by the City Council. Within 30 days
after the close of the hearing, the City Council will make a decision
based upon documents and testimony received at the hearing as to
whether the franchise should be granted, and, if granted, subject to
what conditions. The City Council may grant one or more
franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise.
d. Franchise Renewal. Franchise renewals will be processed in
accordance with then-applicable law and with the renewal terms, if any,
of the franchise agreement. The City and Grantee, by mutual consent,
may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the
franchise. Unless prohibited by applicable law, a renewal application
fee deposit in an amount established by resolution of the City Council
must accompany the renewal application or the renewal request. That
renewal application fee deposit will cover all anticipated costs
associated with reviewing and processing the renewal application,
including the review of Grantee's prior compliance with the franchise,
the ascertainment of the community's cable related needs and
interests, the engagement of technical and legal consultants, and
expenses related to negotiations and document preparation. If actual
costs exceed the renewal application fee deposit, the Grantee must pay
the difference to the City within 30 days following receipt of an itemized
statement of those costs. If actual costs are less than the renewal
application fee deposit, the remaining balance will be refunded to the
Grantee. No renewal application fee may be offset against any franchise
fee payable to the City during the term of the franchise. The City
Council must authorize the renewal of a cable television franchise
agreement by ordinance.
a. The terms and provisions of a franchise agreement for the operation of
a cable television system may relate to or include, without limitation,
the following subject matters:
1. The geographical area, duration, and nonexclusive nature of the
franchise.
2. The applicable franchise fee to be paid to the City, including the
amount, the method of computation, and the time for payment.
3. Requirements relating to compliance with and implementation of
State and Federal laws and regulations pertaining to the operation
of the cable television system.
§ 10-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.4
AO:495
4. Requirements relating to the construction, upgrade, or rebuild of
the cable television system, as well as the provision of special
services, such as outlets for public buildings, emergency alert
capability, and parental control devices.
5. Requirements relating to the maintenance of a performance bond,
a security find, a letter of credit, or similar assurances to secure the
performance of the Grantee's obligations under the franchise
agreement.
6. Requirements relating to comprehensive liability insurance,
workers' compensation insurance and indemnification.
7. Requirements relating to consumer protection and customer
service standards, which requirements may include, without
limitation, compliance with the statutes, rules, and regulations set
forth below in subsection 10-2.5.
8. Requirements relating to the Grantee's support of local cable
usage, including the provision of public, educational, and
governmental access channels, the coverage of public meetings
and special events, and financial support for public, educational,
and governmental access channels.
9. Requirements relating to the Grantee's obligation to provide an
institutional network, and channel capacity on that institutional
network for educational or governmental use, subject to the City's
rules and procedures for the use of such channel capacity and for
compatibility with any telecommunications network that has been
or may be developed by the City.
10. Requirements relating to construction, operation, and maintenance
of the cable television system within the City's streets and public
rights-of-way, including compliance with all applicable provisions of
this Code, all applicable building codes and permit requirements of
the City, the abandonment, removal, or relocation of facilities, and
compliance with FCC technical standards.
11. Requirements relating to record-keeping, accounting procedures,
reporting, periodic audits, and performance reviews, and the
inspection of Grantee's books and records.
12. Acts or omissions constituting material breaches of or defaults
under the franchise agreement, and the applicable penalties or
remedies for those breaches or defaults, including fines, penalties,
liquidated damages, suspension, revocation, and termination.
13. Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or other transfer or
change in control of the franchise.
§ 10-2.4 COMPTON § 10-2.4
AO:496
§ 10-2.5. Consumer Protection and Service Standards. [Ord. #2143,
§ 3]
14. The Grantee's obligation to maintain continuity of service and to
authorize, under certain specified circumstances, the City's
operation and management of the cable system.
15. Such additional requirements, conditions, policies, and procedures
as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the franchise
agreement and that will, in the judgment of City staff and the City
Council, best serve the public interest and protect the public
health, welfare, and safety.
b. If there is any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of a
franchise agreement authorized by the City Council and the provisions
of this Chapter, the provisions of the franchise agreement will control.
a. Operational Standards.
1. Grantee must maintain the necessary facilities, equipment, and
personnel to comply with the following consumer protection and
service standards under normal operating conditions:
(a) Sufficient toll free telephone line capacity during normal
business hours to ensure that telephone calls are answered
before the fourth ring. Telephone answer time by a customer
service representative, including wait time, may not exceed 30
seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be
transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds.
(b) A caller must receive a busy signal less than 3% of the time.
(c) Emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a twenty-fourhour
basis, including weekends and holidays. After normal
business hours, the telephone calls may be answered by a
service or an automated response system, including an
answering machine. Calls received after normal business hours
must be responded to by a trained company representative on
the next business day.
(d) A conveniently-located local business and service or payment
office open during normal business hours at least eight hours
daily on weekdays, and at least four hours weekly on evenings
or weekends, and adequately staffed with trained customer
service representatives to accept subscriber payments and to
respond to service requests, inquiries, and complaints.
(e) An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of
responding to and repairing major system malfunctions on a
twenty-four-hour per day basis.
§ 10-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.5
AO:497
(f) A trained installation staff must provide service to any
subscriber requiring a standard installation within seven days
after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder
cable have been activated.
(g) The Grantee must schedule, within a specified four-hour time
period Monday through Saturday (legal holidays excluded), all
appointments with subscribers for installation of service,
service calls, and other activities at the subscriber's location.
The Grantee may schedule installation and service calls
outside of normal business hours for the convenience of the
subscriber. The Grantee may not cancel an appointment with a
subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior
to the scheduled appointment. If a Grantee representative is
delayed in keeping an appointment with a subscriber and will
not be able to honor the scheduled appointment, the
subscriber must be contacted prior to the time of the
scheduled appointment, and the appointment must be
rescheduled, as necessary, at a time that is convenient for the
subscriber. The Grantee must undertake appropriate quality
control measures to ensure that the customer is satisfied with
the work.
(h) Subscribers who have experienced one missed appointment
due to the fault of the Grantee will receive an installation free
of charge if the appointment was for an installation. If an
installation was to have been provided free of charge, and for
all other appointments, the subscriber will receive one month
of the subscribed to service tier, free of charge. Subscribers
also will be entitled to receive a free installation, or one month
free service, as provided above, if the Grantee fails to complete
a standard installation within seven days of receiving an
installation request due to its fault, its failure to schedule an
appointment within a specified four-hour time period, or its
failure to notify the subscriber that the Grantee's
representative will be late for an appointment. Subscribers
who have experienced two missed appointments due to the
fault of the Grantee will receive two months of the subscribed
to service tier, free of charge, in addition to the free installation
or free month of service provided for the first missed
appointment.
(i) Upon a subscriber's request, the Grantee will arrange for
pickup or replacement of converters or other equipment
provided by the Grantee at the subscriber's address within 14
days after the request is made if the subscriber is mobilitylimited.
2. Under normal operating conditions, the standards of paragraphs
(a), (c), (f) and (g) above must be met not less than 90% of the time,
measured on a quarterly basis.
§ 10-2.5 COMPTON § 10-2.5
AO:498
b. Service Standards.
1. The Grantee will render efficient service, make repairs promptly,
and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time
possible. Except in emergency situations, scheduled interruptions
will occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system,
preferably between midnight and 6:00 a.m. Unless the scheduled
interruption lasts for no more than two hours and occurs between
midnight and 6:00 a.m. (in which event 24-hours prior notice must
be given to the City), 48-hours prior notice must be given to
subscribers.
2. The Grantee will maintain a repair force of technicians who will
respond to subscriber requests for service within the following time
frames:
(a) For a system outage: Within two hours, including weekends,
after receiving subscriber calls or requests for service that by
number identify a system outage of sound or picture on one or
more channels, affecting five or more subscribers to the
system.
(b) For an isolated outage: Within 24 hours, including weekends,
after receiving requests for service identifying an isolated
outage of sound or picture on one or more channels.
(c) For inferior signal quality: No later than the following business
day, excluding Sundays and holidays, after a request for
service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound
quality.
3. The Grantee will be deemed to have responded to a request for
service under the provisions of this paragraph b when a technician
arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. If a
subscriber is not home when the technician arrives, the technician
must leave written notification of arrival.
4. The Grantee may not charge for the repair or replacement of
defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by the Grantee to
subscribers, unless the defect or malfunction was caused by the
subscriber.
5. The Grantee must determine the nature of the problem within 24
hours after commencing work and resolve all cable system related
problems within three business days, unless technically infeasible.
c. Billing and Information Standards.
1. Subscriber bills must be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills
must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited
to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges.
§ 10-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.5
AO:499
Bills also must clearly delineate all activity during the billing
period, including optional charges, rebates, and credits.
2. The first billing to a subscriber after a new installation or service
change must be prorated based upon when the new or changed
service commenced. Subscribers must not be charged a late fee or
otherwise penalized for any failure attributable to the Grantee,
including the failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber.
3. In case of a billing dispute, the Grantee must respond in writing to
a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days after
receiving the complaint at the office specified on the billing
statement for receiving that complaint.
4. Upon request by a subscriber, credits or refunds must be provided
by Grantee to subscribers who experience an outage, interruption,
or disconnection of service of four or more consecutive hours,
provided that such loss of service is neither caused by the
subscriber nor attributable to scheduled repairs, maintenance, or
construction in circumstances where Grantee has provided
advance written notice to subscriber, and the loss of service does
not exceed the time period specified by Grantee. For subscribers
terminating service, credits or refunds must be issued promptly,
but no later than 30 days after the return of any Grantee supplied
equipment.
5. Subject to prior review by the City, the Grantee must provide
written information on each of the following matters at the time of
the installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and
at any time upon request:
(a) Products and services offered.
(b) Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services.
(c) Installation and service maintenance policies.
(d) Instructions on the use of the cable service.
(e) Channel positions of programming carried on the system.
(f) Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and
telephone number of the City's office designated for dealing
with cable related issues.
(g) Consumer protection and service standards and penalties for
noncompliance.
6. Subscribers must be notified in writing of any changes in rates,
programming services, or channel positions as soon as possible.
Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in
advance of those changes if the change is within the control of the
§ 10-2.5 COMPTON § 10-2.5
AO:500
Grantee. In addition, the Grantee must notify subscribers in writing
30 days in advance of any significant changes in the information
required above in paragraph 5.
7. The Grantee must maintain a public file containing all written
notices provided to subscribers under these consumer protection
and service standards and all published promotional offers made by
Grantee to subscribers. These documents must be maintained for a
minimum period of two years.
d. Verification of Compliance with Standards.
1. Upon 30 days' prior written notice, the City may require the
Grantee to provide a written report demonstrating its compliance
with any of the consumer service standards specified in this
subsection. The Grantee must provide sufficient documentation to
enable the City to verify compliance.
2. A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the
consumer protection and service standards of this subsection, after
the Grantee's receipt of written notice and an opportunity to cure,
may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement.
e. Subscriber Complaints and Disputes.
1. The Grantee must establish written procedures for receiving,
acting upon, and resolving subscriber complaints without
intervention by the City. The written procedures must prescribe the
manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint, either orally
or in writing, specifying the subscriber's grounds for
dissatisfaction. The Grantee must file a copy of these procedures
with the City. These procedures must include a requirement
consistent with subsection 10-2.5c3 above.
2. Upon request, and subject to applicable law protecting subscriber
privacy rights, the City has the right to review the Grantee's
response to subscriber complaints.
3. All subscribers have the right to continue receiving service so long
as their financial and other obligations to the Grantee are honored.
If the Grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or if the
City gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the
franchise, the Grantee must ensure that all subscribers receive
service while the franchise remains in force.
4. Upon a change of control of the Grantee, or if a new operator
acquires the cable system; the original Grantee must cooperate
with the City, the new Grantee, or the new operator in maintaining
continuity of service to all subscribers. During that transition
period, the Grantee is entitled to the revenues derived from its
operation of the cable system.
§ 10-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.5
AO:501
f. Disconnection/Downgrades.
1. A subscriber may terminate or downgrade service at any time, and
the Grantee must promptly comply with the subscriber's request
within five days or at any later time requested by the subscriber. No
period of notice prior to voluntary termination or downgrade of
service may be required of subscribers. Grantee will impose no
charges for the voluntary termination of service unless a visit to the
subscriber's premises is required to remove a converter box or
other equipment or property owned by Grantee.
2. The Grantee may disconnect a subscriber's service in compliance
with paragraphs (i), (j), and (k) of Section 53088.2 of the California
Government Code. If service is disconnected for nonpayment of
past due fees or charges, the Grantee must promptly reinstate
service upon payment in full by the subscriber of all such fees and
charges, including late charges.
3. Notwithstanding the requirements of paragraph 2 above, the
Grantee may immediately disconnect service to a subscriber if the
subscriber is damaging or destroying the Grantee's cable system or
equipment. In the event of disconnection on such grounds, the
Grantee will resume service to the subscriber upon receiving
adequate assurances that the subscriber has ceased the practices
or conduct that resulted in disconnection and has paid all proper
fees and charges, including any amounts reasonably owed the
Grantee for the damage caused by the subscriber.
4. The Grantee may also disconnect service to a subscriber when
service causes signal leakage exceeding Federal limits. If service is
disconnected, the Grantee will immediately resume service without
charge upon the satisfactory correction of the signal leakage
problem.
5. Upon termination of service to a subscriber, the Grantee will
remove its equipment from the subscriber's premises within 30
days. The equipment will be deemed abandoned if it is not removed
within such time period unless the Grantee has been denied access
to the subscriber's premises.
g. Changes in Service. Except as otherwise provided by Federal or State
law, subscribers must not be required to pay any additional fee or
charge, other than the regular service fee, in order to receive the
services selected. No charge may be imposed for any service or
equipment that the subscriber has not affirmatively selected. Payment
of the regular monthly bill will not by itself constitute an affirmative
selection.
h. Deposits. Grantee may require a reasonable, nondiscriminatory deposit
on equipment provided to subscribers. Such deposits must be placed in
an interest-bearing account. The deposit must be returned, with
§ 10-2.5 COMPTON § 10-2.5
AO:502
interest earned to the date of repayment, within 30 days after the
equipment is returned to the Grantee.
i. Parental Control Option. Grantee must provide parental control devices
to all subscribers who desire to block the video or audio portion of any
programming that the subscriber finds objectionable. Such devices will
be provided at no charge to the subscriber, unless otherwise required
by Federal or State law, or unless a converter box is required to be
installed for the purpose of providing the parental control device.
j. Additional Requirements.
1. All officers, agents, and employees of the Grantee, or of its
contractors or subcontractors, who, in the normal course of work
come into contact with members of the public, or who require entry
onto subscribers' premises, must carry a photo identification card
in a form approved by the City. The Grantee must account for all
identification cards at all times. All vehicles of the Grantee or its
subcontractors must be clearly identified as vehicles engaged in
providing services for the Grantee.
2. In addition to the consumer protection and service standards
specified in this subsection 10-2.5, the Grantee must comply with
all applicable consumer protection and service standards that are
imposed upon cable operators by the following:
(a) Federal statutes, and the rules, regulations, and orders of the
Federal Communications Commission, including the following:
(1) The provisions of Section 76.630 of Title 47 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, as it now exists or may later be
amended, which relate to compatibility with consumer
electronics equipment.
(2) The provisions of Section 551 of Title 47, United States
Code, as it now exists or may later be amended, which
relate to the protection of subscriber privacy.
(b) The provisions of California Government Code Sections 53054,
et seq., titled the "Cable Television and Video Provider
Customer Service and Information Act."
(c) The provisions of California Government Code Section 53088,
et seq., titled the "Video Customer Service Act."
(d) The provisions of California Civil Code Section 1722(b)(1)-(6),
which relate to service or repair transactions between cable
television companies and their subscribers.
(e) The provisions of California Penal Code Section 637.5, which
relate to subscribers' rights to privacy protection.
§ 10-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.5
AO:503
§ 10-3. OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS.
3. If there is any conflict or inconsistency between a consumer
protection and service standard specified in this subsection 10-2.5
and a standard set forth in the statutes, rules, regulations, and
orders that are referenced above in paragraph 2, then the standard
that is specified in this subsection 10-2.5 will apply to the extent
authorized by applicable law.
k. Penalties for Noncompliance.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this paragraph is to authorize monetary
penalties for the violation of the customer service standards
established by this subsection. The liquidated damages or other
monetary sanctions applicable to Grantee's material violation of
any customer service standards set forth in this subsection will be
specified in the franchise agreement between the City and Grantee.
The imposition of penalties authorized by this paragraph k will not
prevent the City or any other affected party from exercising any
other remedy to the extent permitted by law, including but not
limited to any judicial remedy as provided below in paragraph
k2(c).
2. Administration and Appeals.
(a) Assessment of Monetary Penalties. The City Manager or the
City Manager's designee is authorized to administer this
paragraph k. Decisions by the City Manager to assess
monetary penalties against the Grantee must be in writing and
must contain findings supporting the decisions. Decisions by
the City Manager are final, unless appealed to the City Council.
(b) Appeals to City Council. If the Grantee or any interested
person is aggrieved by a decision of the City Manager, the
aggrieved party may, within 10 days of the written decision,
appeal that decision in writing to the City Council. The City
Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the City
Manager.
(c) Judicial Remedy. This paragraph does not preclude any
affected party from pursuing any judicial remedy available to
that party without regard to this paragraph k.
(d) Notification of Violation. The City must give Grantee written
notice of any alleged violation of the consumer service
standards and allow Grantee at least 30 days from receipt of
the notice to remedy the specified violation. For the purpose of
assessing penalties, a material breach is deemed to have
occurred for each day, following the expiration of the period for
cure specified herein, that any breach has not been remedied
by Grantee, regardless of the number of subscribers affected.
§ 10-2.5 COMPTON § 10-3.1
AO:504
§ 10-3.1. Applicability. [Ord. #2143, § 3]
The provisions of Section 10-3 apply to an open video system operator, as
defined below in Section 10-5, that intends to deliver video programming to
consumers in the City over an open video system.
§ 10-3.2. Application Required. [Ord. #2143, § 3]
a. Before commencing the delivery of video programming services to
consumers in the City over an open video system, the open video system
operator must file an application with the City. That application must
include or be accompanied by the following, as applicable:
1. The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
2. Copies of FCC Form 1275, all "Notices of Intent" filed under 47
CFR 76.1503(b)(1), and the Order of the FCC, all of which relate to
certification of the applicant to operate an open video system in the
City in accordance with Section 653(a)(1) of the Communications
Act and the FCC's rules.
3. The area or areas of the City that the applicant proposes to serve.
4. A description of the open video system services that will be offered
by the applicant over its existing or proposed facilities.
5. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
applicant to deliver the open video system services.
6. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical
qualifications, experience, and expertise regarding the ownership
and operation of the open video system described in the
application.
7. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant's
financial ability to:
(a) Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new physical
plant that is proposed to be constructed in the City.
(b) Comply with the City's public, educational, and governmental
access requirements as specified below in subsection 10-3.4b4.
(c) Comply with the City's requirement that gross revenue fees be
paid in the sum of 5%, as specified below in subsection
10-3.4b2.
8. An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the City that the applicant intends
to use, to purchase, or to lease.
§ 10-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-3.2
AO:505
§ 10-3.3. Review of the Application. [Ord. #2143, § 3]
Within 30 days after receipt of an application filed under subsection 10-3.2
that is deemed to be complete, the City Manager will give written notice
to the applicant of the City's intent to negotiate an agreement setting forth
the terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open
video system will be authorized by the City. The commencement of those
negotiations will be on a date that is mutually acceptable to the City and to
the applicant.
§ 10-3.4. Agreement Required. [Ord. #2143, § 3]
9. If the applicant's operation of the open video system will require
the construction of new physical plant in the City, the following
additional information must be provided:
(a) A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
(b) Preliminary engineering plans, specifications, and a network
map of any new facilities to be constructed in the City, in
sufficient detail to identify:
(1) The location and route requested for the applicant's
proposed facilities.
(2) The locations, if any, for interconnection with the facilities
of other video or telecommunications service providers.
(3) The specific structures, improvements, facilities, and
obstructions, if any that the applicant proposes to remove
or relocate on a temporary or permanent basis.
(c) The applicant's statement that, in constructing any new
physical plant, the applicant will comply with all applicable
ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City, including the
payment of all required permit and processing fees.
10. The information and documentation that is required to be
submitted to the City by a video provider, as specified below in
subsection 10-4.2b.
11. Such additional information as may be requested by the City to
evaluate the applicant's qualifications.
12. An application fee deposit in an amount established by resolution of
the City Council.
b. If any item of information specified above in subsection 10-3.2a is
determined under paramount Federal or State law to be unlawful, the
City Manager is authorized to waive the requirement that such
information be included in the application.
§ 10-3.2 COMPTON § 10-3.4
AO:506
a. No video programming services may be provided in the City by an open
video system operator unless the operator and the City have executed a
written agreement, which may be designated as a franchise, setting
forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the
proposed open video system will be authorized by the City. That
agreement must be authorized and approved by ordinance of the City
Council.
b. The agreement between the City and the open video system operator
may contain terms and conditions that relate to the following subject
matters, to the extent that such terms, conditions, and subject matters
are not preempted by Federal law or regulations:
1. The nature, scope, and duration of the agreement, including
provisions for its renewal or extension.
2. The obligation of the open video system operator to pay to the City,
at specified times and in lieu of the franchise fees permitted under
Section 622 of the Communications Act, fees on the gross revenue
received by the operator, as authorized by 47 CFR 76.1511, in
accordance with the following standards and procedures:
(a) The amount of the fees on the gross revenue will be the
maximum amount authorized by Section 6531(2)(B) of the
Communications Act, which is the rate imposed by the City on
the existing franchised cable operator.
(b) The term "gross revenue" means (i) all gross revenue received
by an open video system operator or its affiliates, including all
revenue received from subscribers and all carriage revenue
received from unaffiliated video programming providers; and
(ii) all advertising revenue received by the operator or its
affiliates in connection with the provision of video
programming, where such revenue is included in the
calculation of the cable franchise fee paid to the City by the
incumbent franchised cable operator. The term "gross
revenue" does not include revenue, such as subscriber or
advertising revenue, collected by unaffiliated video
programming providers.
3. The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with
requirements relating to information collection and recordkeeping,
accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits, and
inspection of records in order to ensure the accuracy of the fees on
the gross revenue that are required to be paid as specified above in
subsection 10-3.4b2.
4. The obligation of the open video system operator to meet the City's
requirements with respect to public, educational, and
governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and
equipment, as provided for in 47 CFR 76.1505. In this regard, the
following standards and procedures apply:
§ 10-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-3.4
AO:507
(a) The open video system operator is subject to the same public,
educational, and governmental access requirements that apply
within the cable television franchise service area with which its
system overlaps.
(b) The open video system operator must ensure that all
subscribers receive all public, educational, and governmental
access channels within the franchise service area in which the
City's subscribers are located.
(c) The open video system operator may negotiate with the City to
establish the operator's obligations with respect to public,
educational, and governmental access channel capacity,
services, facilities, and equipment. These negotiations may
include the City's franchised cable operator if the City, the
open video system operator, and the franchised cable operator
so desire.
(d) If the open video system operator and the City are unable to
reach an agreement regarding the operator's obligations with
respect to public, educational, and governmental access
channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment within the
City's jurisdiction, then the following obligations will be
imposed:
(1) The open video system operator must satisfy the same
public, educational, and governmental access obligations
as the City's franchised cable operator by providing the
same amount of channel capacity for public, educational,
and governmental access and by matching the City's
franchised cable operator's annual financial contributions
in support of public, educational, and governmental access
services, facilities, and equipment that are actually used
by the City. For in-kind contributions, such as cameras or
production studios, the open video system operator may
satisfy its statutory obligation by negotiating mutually
agreeable terms with the City's franchised cable operator,
so that public, educational, and governmental access
services to the City are improved or increased. If such
terms cannot be agreed upon, the open video system
operator must pay to the City the monetary equivalent of
the franchised cable operator's depreciated in-kind
contribution, or, in the case of facilities, the annual
amortization value. Any matching contributions provided
by the open video system operator must be used to fund
activities arising under Section 611 of the
Communications Act.
(2) The City will impose upon the open video system operator
the same rules and procedures that it imposes upon the
franchised cable operator with regard to the open video
§ 10-3.4 COMPTON § 10-3.4
AO:508
system operator's use of channel capacity designated for
public, educational, and governmental access use when
that capacity is not being used for such purposes.
(e) The City's franchised cable operator is required under Federal
law to permit the open video system operator to connect with
its public, educational, and governmental access channel
feeds. The open video system operator and the franchised
cable operator may decide how to accomplish this connection,
taking into consideration the physical and technical
characteristics of the cable and the open video systems
involved. If the franchised cable operator and the open video
system operator cannot agree on how to accomplish the
connection, the City has the right to decide. The City may
require that the connection occur on City-owned property or
on public rights-of-way.
(f) All costs of connection to the franchised cable operator's
public, educational, and governmental access channel feed
must be borne by the open video system operator. These costs
will be counted towards the open video system operator's
matching financial contributions set forth above in paragraph
(d)(1).
(g) The City will not impose upon the open video system operator
any public, educational, or governmental access obligations
that are greater than those imposed upon the franchised cable
operator.
(h) If there is no existing franchised cable operator, the provisions
of 47 CFR 76.1505(d)(6) will be applicable in determining the
obligations of the open video system operator.
(i) The open video system operator must adjust its system to
comply with new public, educational, and access obligations
imposed on the City's franchised cable operator following a
renewal of the cable television franchise; provided, however,
that the open video system operator will not be required to
displace other programmers using its open video system to
accommodate public, educational, and governmental access
channels. The open video system operator must comply with
those new public, educational, and governmental access
obligations whenever additional capacity is or becomes
available, whether it is due to increased channel capacity or to
decreased demand for channel capacity.
5. If the City and the open video system operator cannot agree on the
application of the FCC's rules regarding the open video system
operator's obligations to provide public, educational, and
governmental access under the provisions of subsection 10-3.4b4
set forth above, then either party may file a complaint with the FCC
§ 10-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-3.4
AO:509
in accordance with the dispute resolution procedures set forth in
47 CFR 76.1514. No agreement will be executed by the City until
the dispute has been finally resolved.
6. If the open video system operator intends to maintain an
institutional network, as defined in Section 611(f) of the
Communications Act, the City will require that educational and
governmental access channels be designated on that institutional
network to the same extent that those channels are designated on
the institutional network of the City's franchised cable operator. In
addition, to the extent authorized by Federal law, the open video
system operator may be required by the City to satisfy the same
financial obligations and other requirements that are imposed upon
the franchised cable operator to support data transmission and
related services that are provided by the institutional network.
7. The authority of an open video system provider to exercise editorial
control over any public, educational, or governmental use of
channel capacity will be restricted in accordance with the
provisions of 47 CFR 76.1505(f).
8. The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with all
applicable Federal, State, and local statutes, ordinances, and
regulations relating to customer protection and service standards,
including the Cable Television and Video Customer Service and
Information Act (Government Code § 53054, et seq.), the Video
Customer Service Act (Government Code § 53088, et seq.), and
subsection 10-2.5 of this Chapter.
9. If new physical plant is proposed to be constructed within the City,
the obligation of the open video system operator to comply with the
following rights-of-way use and management responsibilities that
are also imposed by the City upon other cable television and
telecommunications service providers in a nondiscriminatory and
competitively neutral manner:
(a) Compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code,
including those pertaining to applications for excavation,
encroachment, and construction permits and the payment of
all required permit and inspection fees.
(b) The coordination of construction activities.
(c) Compliance with established standards and procedures for
constructing lines across private property.
(d) Compliance with all applicable insurance and indemnification
requirements.
(e) The repair and resurfacing of construction-damaged streets.
§ 10-3.4 COMPTON § 10-3.4
AO:510
§ 10-4. OTHER VIDEO AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
AND SYSTEMS.
§ 10-4.1. Other Multichannel Video Programming Distributors.
[Ord. #2143, § 3]
The term "cable system," as defined in Federal law and as set forth below
in subsection 10-5.1a, does not include a facility that serves subscribers
without using any public rights-of-way. Consequently, the categories of
multichannel video programming distributors identified below are not
deemed to be "cable systems" and are therefore exempt from the City's
franchise, lease, and license requirements and from certain other local
regulatory provisions authorized by Federal law, provided that their
distribution or transmission facilities do not involve the use of the City's
streets or public rights-of-way.
(f) Compliance with all public safety requirements that are
applicable to cable television and telecommunications service
providers using public property or public rights-of-way.
10. Acts or omissions constituting breaches or defaults of the
agreement, and the applicable penalties, liquidated damages, and
other remedies, including fines or the suspension, revocation, or
termination of the agreement.
11. Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or transfer of
control of the open video system.
12. Requirements relating to the open video system operator's
compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws,
rules, and regulations pertaining to the operation of the open video
system.
13. Such additional requirements, conditions, terms, policies, and
procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the City and the
open video system operator and that will, in the judgment of the
City Council, best serve the public interest and protect the public
health, welfare, and safety.
a. Multichannel multipoint distribution service ("MMDS"), also known as
"wireless cable," which typically involves the transmission by an FCClicensed
operator of numerous broadcast stations from a central
location using line-of-sight technology.
b. Local multipoint distribution service ("LMDS"), another form of overthe
air wireless video service for which licenses are auctioned by the
FCC, and which offers video programming, telephony, and data
networking services.
c. Direct broadcast satellite ("DBS"), also referred to as "direct-to-home
satellite services," which involves the distribution or broadcasting of
programming or services by satellite directly to the subscriber's
§ 10-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-4.1
AO:511
§ 10-4.2. Video Providers-Registration; Customer Service
Standards. [Ord. #2143, § 3]
premises without the use of ground receiving or distribution
equipment, except at the subscriber's premises or in the uplink process
to the satellite. Local regulation of direct-to-home satellite services is
further proscribed by the following Federal statutory provisions:
1. 47 U.S.C. § 303(v) confers upon the FCC exclusive jurisdiction to
regulate the provision of direct-to-home satellite services.
2. Section 602 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 states that a
provider of direct-to-home satellite service is exempt from the
collection or remittance, or both, of any tax or fee imposed by any
local taxing jurisdiction on direct-to-home satellite service. The
terms "tax" and "fee" are defined by Federal statute to mean any
local sales tax, local use tax, local intangible tax, local income tax,
business license tax, utility tax, privilege tax, gross receipts tax,
excise tax, franchise fees, local telecommunications tax, or any
other tax, license, or fee that is imposed for the privilege of doing
business, regulating, or raising revenue for a local taxing
jurisdiction.
a. Unless the customer protection and service obligations of a video
provider, as that term is defined in Section 10-5, are specified in a
franchise, license, lease, or similar written agreement with the City, a
video provider must comply with all applicable provisions of the
following State statutes:
1. The Cable Television and Video Customer Service and Information
Act (Government Code § 53054, et seq.).
2. The Video Customer Service Act (Government Code § 53088, et
seq.).
b. All video providers that are operating in the City on the effective date of
this Chapter, or that intend to operate in the City after the effective date
of this Chapter,61 and are not required under applicable law to operate
under a franchise, license, lease, or similar written agreement with the
City, must register with the City. The registration form must include or
be accompanied by the following:
1. The video provider's name, address, and local telephone numbers.
2. The names of the officers of the video provider.
3. A copy of the video provider's written policies and procedures
relating to customer service standards and the handling of
customer complaints, as required by Government Code § 53054, et
61.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2143, codified herein as Chapter 10 was adopted September
19, 2006.
§ 10-4.1 COMPTON § 10-4.2
AO:512
seq. These customer service standards must include, without
limitation, standards regarding the following:
(a) Installation, disconnection, service and repair obligations,
employee identification and service call response time and
scheduling.
(b) Customer telephone and office hours.
(c) Procedures for billing, charges, refunds, and credits.
(d) Procedures for termination of service.
(e) Notice of the deletion of a programming service, a change in
channel assignments, or an increase in rates.
(f) Complaint procedures and procedures for bill dispute
resolution.
(g) The video provider's written acknowledgment of its obligation
under Government Code § 53055.1 to provide to new
customers a notice describing the customer service standards
specified above in paragraphs (a) through (f) at the time of
installation or when service is initiated. The notice must also
include, in addition to all of the information described above in
paragraphs (a) through (f), all of the following:
(1) A listing of the services offered by the video provider that
clearly describes all levels of service and the rates for each
level of service.
(2) The telephone number or numbers through which
customers may subscribe to, change, or terminate service,
request customer service, or seek general or billing
information.
(3) A description of the rights and remedies that the video
provider may make available to its customers if the video
provider does not materially meet its customer service
standards.
(h) The video provider's written commitment to distribute
annually to its employees and customers, and to the City, a
notice describing the customer service standards specified
above in paragraphs (a) through (f). This annual notice must
include the report of the video provider on its performance in
meeting its customer service standards, as required by
Government Code § 53055.2. Subject to the written notice and
cure provisions of Government Code § 53056(b), a video
provider that fails to distribute the annual notice required by
Government Code § 53055.1 will be assessed a monetary
penalty in the sum of $500 for each year in which the annual
notice is not distributed to all of its customers.
§ 10-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-4.2
AO:513
4. Unless a video provider is exempt under Federal law from its
payment, a registration fee in an amount established by resolution
of the City Council to cover the reasonable costs incurred by the
City in reviewing and processing the registration form.
5. In addition to the registration fee specified above in subsection
10-4.2(b),(4), the written commitment of the video provider to pay
to the City, when due, all costs and expenses reasonably incurred
by the City in resolving any disputes between the video provider
and its subscribers, which dispute resolution is mandated by
Government Code § 53088.2(o).
c. The customer service obligations imposed upon video providers by the
Video Customer Service Act (Government Code § 53088 et seq.) consist
of the following:
1. Every video provider must render reasonably efficient service,
make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only as necessary.
2. All video provider personnel contacting subscribers or potential
subscribers outside the office of the provider must be clearly
identified as associated with the video provider.
3. At the time of installation, and annually thereafter, all video
providers must provide to all customers a written notice of the
programming offered, the prices for that programming, the
provider's installation and customer service policies, and the name,
address, and telephone number of the City's office that is
designated for receiving complaints.
4. All video providers must have knowledgeable, qualified company
representatives available to respond to customer telephone
inquiries Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, during
normal business hours.
5. All video providers must provide to customers a toll-free or local
telephone number for installation, service, and complaint calls.
These calls must be answered promptly by the video providers.
6. All video providers must render bills that are accurate and
understandable.
7. All video providers must respond promptly to a complete outage in
a customer's service. The response must occur within 24 hours of
the reporting of that outage to the provider, except in those
situations beyond the reasonable control of the video provider. A
video provider will be deemed to respond to a complete outage
when a company representative arrives at the outage location
within 24 hours and begins to resolve the problem.
8. All video providers must provide a minimum of 30 days' written
notice before increasing rates or deleting channels. All video
§ 10-4.2 COMPTON § 10-4.2
AO:514
providers must make every reasonable effort to submit the notice
to the City in advance of its distribution to customers. The thirtyday
notice is waived if the increases in rates or deletion of channels
are outside the control of the video provider. In those cases, the
video provider must make reasonable efforts to provide customers
with as much notice as possible.
9. All video providers must allow every residential customer who pays
his or her bill directly to the video provider at least 15 days from
the date the bill for services is mailed to the customer, to pay the
listed charges unless otherwise agreed to pursuant to a residential
rental agreement establishing tenancy. Customer payments must
be posted promptly. No video provider may terminate residential
service for nonpayment of a delinquent account unless the video
provider furnishes notice of the delinquency and impending
termination at least 15 days prior to the proposed termination. The
notice must be mailed, postage prepaid, to the customer to whom
the service is billed. Notice must not be mailed until the 16th day
after the date the bill for services was mailed to the customer. The
notice of delinquency and impending termination may be part of a
billing statement. No video provider may assess a late fee any
earlier than the 22nd day after the bill for service has been mailed.
10. Every notice of termination of service pursuant to subsection
10-4.2c9 must include all of the following information:
(a) The name and address of the customer whose account is
delinquent.
(b) The amount of the delinquency.
(c) The date by which payment is required in order to avoid
termination of service.
(d) The telephone number of a representative of the video provider
who can provide additional information and handle complaints
or initiate an investigation concerning the service and charges
in question. Service may only be terminated on days in which
the customer can reach a representative of the video provider
either in person or by telephone.
11. Any service terminated without good cause must be restored
without charge for the service restoration. Good cause includes,
but is not limited to, failure to pay, payment by check for which
there are insufficient funds, theft of service, abuse of equipment or
system personnel, or other similar subscriber actions.
12. All video providers must issue requested refund checks promptly,
but no later than 45 days following the resolution of any dispute,
and if service is terminated, following the return of the equipment
supplied by the video provider.
§ 10-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-4.2
AO:515
13. All video providers must issue security or customer deposit refund
checks promptly, but no later than 45 days following the
termination of service, less any deductions permitted by law.
14. Video providers must not disclose the name and address of a
subscriber for commercial gain to be used in mailing lists or for
other commercial purposes not reasonably related to the conduct
of the businesses of the video providers or their affiliates, unless
the video providers have provided to the subscriber a notice,
separate or included in any other customer notice, that clearly and
conspicuously describes the subscriber's ability to prohibit that
disclosure. Video providers must provide an address and telephone
number for a local subscriber to use without toll charge to prevent
disclosure of the subscriber's name and address.
d. As authorized by Government Code § 53088(q), the following schedule
of penalties are adopted. These penalties may be imposed for the
material breach by a video provider of the consumer protection and
service standards that are set forth above in subsection 10-4.2c,
provided that the breach is within the reasonable control of the video
provider. These penalties are in addition to any other remedies
authorized by this Chapter or by any other law, and the City has
discretion to elect the remedy that it will apply. The imposition of
penalties authorized by this paragraph d will not prevent the City or any
other affected party from exercising any other remedy to the extent
permitted by law, including but not limited to any judicial remedy as
provided below in subsection 10-4.2d2.
1. Schedule of Penalties.
(a) For a first material breach: the maximum penalty is $200 for
each day of material breach, but not to exceed a cumulative
total of $600 for each occurrence of material breach,
irrespective of the number of customers affected.
(b) For a second material breach of the same nature for which a
monetary penalty was previously assessed within the
preceding twelve-month period: the maximum penalty is $400
per day, not to exceed a cumulative total of $1,200 for each
occurrence of the material breach, irrespective of the number
of customers affected.
(c) For a third or further material breach of the same nature for
which a monetary penalty was previously assessed within the
preceding twelve-month period: the maximum penalty is
$1,000 per day, not to exceed a cumulative total of $3,000 for
each occurrence of the material breach, irrespective of the
number of customers affected.
(d) The maximum penalties referenced above may be increased by
any additional amount authorized by State law.
§ 10-4.2 COMPTON § 10-4.2
AO:516
§ 10-4.3. Facilities for Video and Telecommunications Services.
[Ord. #2143, § 3]
All telecommunications service providers, and all video providers, other
than cable system operators or open video system operators that are
required by this Chapter to obtain and to operate under a franchise, must
comply with all applicable provisions of this Code that set forth the City's
regulatory requirements relating to the design, placement, and construction
of facilities that are commonly used in providing or receiving video and
telecommunications services.
§ 10-4.4. Telecommunications Service Provided by Telephone
Corporations. [Ord. #2143, § 3]
2. Judicial Remedies Not Affected. The imposition of penalties in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 above does not
preclude any affected party from pursuing any judicial remedy that
is available to that party.
3. Administration, Notice, and Appeal.
(a) The City Manager or the City Manager's designee is authorized
to administer subsection 10-4.2d. Decisions by the City
Manager to assess penalties against a video provider must be
in writing and must contain findings supporting the decisions.
Decisions by the City Manager are final, unless appealed to the
City Council.
(b) If the video provider or any interested person is aggrieved by a
decision of the City Manager, the aggrieved party may, within
10 days of the written decision, appeal that decision in writing
to the City Council. The City Council may affirm, modify, or
reverse the decision of the City Manager.
(c) The imposition of monetary penalties under paragraph 1 above
is subject to the following requirements and limitations:
(1) The City must give the video provider written notice of any
alleged material breach and must allow the video provider
at least 30 days from receipt of that notice to remedy the
breach.
(2) For the purpose of assessing monetary penalties, a
material breach will be deemed to have occurred for each
day following the expiration of the period for cure
specified in paragraph (c)(1) above that the material
breach has not been remedied by the video provider,
irrespective of the number of customers affected.
a. The City Council finds and determines as follows:
§ 10-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-4.4
AO:517
1. The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 preempts and
declares invalid all State rules that restrict entry or limit
competition in both local and long-distance telephone service.
2. The California Public Utilities Commission ("CPUC") is primarily
responsible for the implementation of local telephone competition.
The CPUC issues certificates of public convenience and necessity to
new entrants that are qualified to provide competitive local
telephone exchange services and related telecommunications
service, whether using their own facilities or the facilities or
services provided by other authorized telephone corporations.
3. Section 234(a) of the California Public Utilities Code defines a
"telephone corporation" as "every corporation or person owning,
controlling, operating, or managing any telephone line for
compensation within this State."
4. Section 616 of the California Public Utilities Code provides that a
telephone corporation "may condemn any property necessary for
the construction and maintenance of its telephone line."
5. Section 2902 of the California Public Utilities Code authorizes
municipal corporations to retain their powers of control to
supervise and regulate the relationships between a public utility
and the general public in matters affecting the health, convenience,
and safety of the general public, including such matters as the use
and repair of public streets by any public utility and the location of
the poles, wires, mains, or conduits of any public utility on, under,
or above any public streets.
6. Section 7901 of the California Public Utilities Code authorizes
telephone and telegraph corporations to construct telephone or
telegraph lines along and upon any public road or highway, along or
across any of the waters or lands within this State, and to erect
poles, posts, piers, or abutments for supporting the insulators,
wires, and other necessary fixtures of their lines, in such manner
and at such points as not to incommode the public use of the road
or highway or interrupt the navigation of the waters.
7. Section 7901.1 of the California Public Utilities Code confirms the
right of municipalities to exercise reasonable control over the time,
place, and manner in which roads, highways, and waterways are
accessed, which control must be applied to all entities in an
equivalent manner. Nothing in Section 7901.1 adds to or subtracts
from any existing authority that municipalities have with respect to
the imposition of fees.
8. Section 50030 of the California Government Code provides that any
permit fee imposed by a city for the placement, installation, repair,
or upgrading of telecommunications facilities, such as lines, poles,
or antennas, by a telephone corporation that has obtained all
required authorizations from the CPUC and the FCC to provide
§ 10-4.4 COMPTON § 10-4.4
AO:518
telecommunications services, must not exceed the reasonable costs
of providing the service for which the fee is charged, and must not
be levied for general revenue purposes.
b. In recognition of and in compliance with the statutory authorizations
and requirements set forth above in paragraph a, the following
regulatory provisions are applicable to a telephone corporation that
desires to provide telecommunications service by means of facilities
that are proposed to be constructed within the City's public rights-ofway:
1. The telephone corporation must apply for and obtain, as may be
applicable, a right-of-way agreement, an excavation permit, an
encroachment permit, or a building permit.
2. In addition to all other information that may be required by this
Code, a telephone corporation must submit to the City the
following supplemental information:
(a) A copy of the certificate of public convenience and necessity
issued by the CPUC to the applicant, and a copy of the CPUC
decision that authorizes the applicant to provide the
telecommunications service for which the facilities are
proposed to be constructed in the City's public rights-of-way.
Any applicant that, prior to 1996, provided
telecommunications service under administratively equivalent
documentation issued by the CPUC may submit copies of that
documentation in lieu of a certificate of public convenience and
necessity.
(b) If the applicant has obtained from the CPUC a certificate of
public convenience and necessity to operate as a "competitive
local carrier," the following additional requirements are
applicable:
(1) As required by Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC, the
applicant must establish that it has filed with the City in a
timely manner a quarterly report that describes the type of
construction and the location of each construction project
proposed to be undertaken in the City during the calendar
quarter in which the application is filed, which information
is sufficient to enable the City to coordinate multiple
projects, as may be necessary.
(2) If the applicant's proposed construction project will extend
beyond the utility rights-of-way into undisturbed areas or
other rights-of-way, the applicant must establish that it has
filed a petition with the CPUC to amend its certificate of
public convenience and necessity and that the proposed
construction project has been subjected to a full-scale
environmental analysis by the CPUC, as required by
Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC.
§ 10-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-4.4
AO:519
§ 10-5. DEFINITIONS.
§ 10-5.1. Defined Terms and Phrases. [Ord. #2143, § 3]
(3) The applicant must inform the City whether its proposed
construction project will be subject to any of the mitigation
measures specified in the Negative Declaration
["Competitive Local Carriers (CLCs) Projects for Local
Exchange Communication Service throughout California"]
or to the Mitigation Monitoring Plan adopted in connection
with Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC. The City's
issuance of a right-of-way agreement or ministerial
permits will be conditioned upon the applicant's
compliance with all applicable mitigation measures and
monitoring requirements imposed by the CPUC upon
telephone corporations that are designated as
"competitive local carriers."
c. The City reserves all rights that it now possesses or may later acquire
with respect to the regulation of any cable or telecommunications
service that is provided, or proposed to be provided, by a telephone
corporation. These reserved rights may relate, without limitation, to the
imposition of reasonable conditions in addition to or different from
those set forth in this section, the exaction of a fee or other form of
consideration or compensation for use of public rights-of-way, and
related matters; provided, however, that these regulatory rights and
authority must be consistent with Federal and State law that is
applicable to cable or telecommunications services provided by
telephone corporations.
a. The words, terms, phrases, and their derivations set forth in this
Chapter have the meanings set forth below. Words used in the present
tense include the future tense, and words in the singular include the
plural number.
AFFILIATE — Shall mean, when used in relation to any person, another
person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under
common ownership or control with, such person.
CABLE SERVICE — Shall mean the one-way transmission to
subscribers of video programming, or other programming services,
and subscriber interaction, if any that is required for the selection or
use of that video programming or other programming service. For the
purposes of this definition, "video programming" means programming
provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming
provided by, a television broadcast station; and "other programming
service" means information that a cable system operator makes
available to all subscribers generally.
CABLE SYSTEM OPERATOR — Shall mean any person or group of
persons who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or
§ 10-4.4 COMPTON § 10-5.1
AO:520
through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable
system; or who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of that cable system.
CABLE SYSTEM OR CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR CABLE
TELEVISION SYSTEM — Shall mean a facility, consisting of a set of
closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception,
and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that
includes video programming and that is provided to multiple
subscribers within a community. The term "cable system" does not
include:
CITY — Shall mean the City of Compton as represented by its City
Council or by any delegate acting within the scope of its delegated
authority.
CFR — Shall mean the Code of Federal Regulations. Thus, the citation
of "47 CFR 80.1" refers to Title 47, part 80, section 1, of the Code of
Federal Regulations.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT — Shall mean the Communications Act of
1934 (47 U.S.C. § 151, et seq.), as amended by the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications
Act of 1996.
FCC OR FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION — Shall mean
the Federal administrative agency, or any lawful successor, that is
authorized to regulate telecommunications services and
telecommunications service providers on a national level.
FRANCHISE — Shall mean an initial authorization, or the renewal
of an initial authorization, granted by the City Council, whether such
authorization is designated as a franchise, agreement, permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate, or otherwise, that authorizes the
construction or operation of a cable system or an open video system.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
or more television broadcast stations;
a.
A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-ofway;
b.
A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act, except
that such facility will be considered a cable system (other than
for purposes specified in Section 621c of the Communications Act)
to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video
programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use
is solely to provide interactive on-demand services;
c.
An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the
Communications Act; or Any facilities of an electric utility that are
used solely for operating its electric utility system.
d.
§ 10-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-5.1
AO:521
FRANCHISE FEE — Shall mean any fee or assessment of any kind that
is authorized by State or Federal law to be imposed by the City on a
Grantee as compensation in the nature of rent for the Grantee's use of
the public rights-of-way. The term "franchise fee" does not include:
FRANCHISE SERVICE AREA OR SERVICE AREA — Shall mean the
entire geographic area of the City as it is now constituted, or may in
the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance
granting a franchise, or in a franchise agreement.
GRANTEE — Shall mean any person that is awarded a franchise in
accordance with this Chapter, and that person's lawful successor,
transferee, or assignee.
MULTICHANNEL VIDEO PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTOR OR VIDEO
PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTOR — Shall mean a person such as, but
not limited to, a cable system operator, an open video system operator,
a multichannel multipoint distribution service, a direct broadcast
satellite service, or a television receive-only satellite program
distributor, who makes available multiple channels of video
programming for purchase by subscribers or customers.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM — Shall mean a facility consisting of a set of
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and
control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, including
video programming, and that is provided to multiple subscribers within
the City, provided that the FCC has certified that such system is
authorized to operate in the City and complies with 47 CFR 1500 et
seq., entitled "Open Video Systems."
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM OPERATOR — Shall mean any person or group
of persons who provides cable service over an open video system and
directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in
that open video system, or otherwise controls or is responsible for the
management and operation of that open video system.
Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any
such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable
operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee, or
assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators
or cable subscribers);
a.
Capital costs that are required by the franchise to be incurred by a
Grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;
b.
Requirements or charges that are incidental to the award or
enforcement of the franchise, including payments for bonds,
security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification,
penalties, or liquidated damages; or
c.
d. Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code.
§ 10-5.1 COMPTON § 10-5.1
AO:522
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, partnership, limited liability
company, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or
governmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OR STREET — Shall mean any area in, upon,
above, beneath, or across each of the following that has been dedicated
to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and
that is located within the City limits: streets, roadways, highways,
avenues, boulevards, lanes, alleys, courts, sidewalks, pathways,
medians, parkways, easements, rights-of-way, or similar public property
that the City from time-to-time authorizes to be included within the
definition of a public right-of-way or street.
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES OR
PEG ACCESS FACILITIES — Shall mean the total of the following:
SUBSCRIBER OR CUSTOMER OR CONSUMER — Shall mean any
person who, for any purpose, subscribes to the services provided by a
multichannel video programming distributor and who pays the charges
for those services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — Shall mean the transmission, between
or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's
choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as
sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT — Shall mean equipment,
other than customer premises equipment, used by a
telecommunications service provider to provide telecommunications
service, including software that is integral to that equipment.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — Shall mean the offering of
telecommunications directly to the public for a fee, or to such classes of
users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of
the equipment or facilities that are used.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER — Shall mean any
provider of telecommunications service.
U.S.C. — Shall mean the United States Code. Thus, the citation of "47
U.S.C. § 153" refers to Title 47, section 153, of the United States Code.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING PROVIDER — Shall mean any person or group
of persons who has the right under the Federal copyright laws to select
and to contract for the carriage of specific video programming on a
cable system or an open video system.
VIDEO PROVIDER — Shall mean any person, company, or service that
provides one or more channels of video programming to a residence,
including a home, multi-family dwelling complex, congregate-living
Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public,
educational, or government use; and
a.
b. Facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity.
§ 10-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-5.1
AO:523
§ 10-6. VIOLATIONS; SEVERABILITY.
§ 10-6.1. Violations; Enforcement. [Ord. #2143, § 3]
§ 10-7. SPECIAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO HOLDERS OF
STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES.
§ 10-7.1. City Response to State Video Franchise Applications. [Ord.
#2162, § 1]
complex, condominium, apartment, or mobile home, where some fee
is paid for that service, whether directly or as included in dues or
rental charges, and whether or not public rights-of-way are used in
the delivery of that video programming. A "video provider" includes,
without limitation, providers of cable television service, open video
system service, master antenna television, satellite master antenna
television, direct broadcast satellite, multipoint distribution services,
and other providers of video programming, whatever their technology.
b. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words, terms, and phrases not
defined in this Chapter will be given their meaning as used in Title 47 of
the United States Code, as amended, and, if not defined in that Code,
their meaning as used in Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
a. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and is punishable as provided for in Chapter 1 of this
Code.
b. The misdemeanor penalty specified above in paragraph a is not
applicable to a violation of any provision of this Chapter for which
another sanction or penalty may be imposed under any franchise,
license, lease, or similar written agreement between the City and a
multichannel video programming distributor or telecommunications
service provider.
c. The City may initiate a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction
to enjoin any violation of this Chapter.
a. Applicants for State video franchises within the boundaries of the City
of Compton must concurrently provide to the City complete copies of
any application or amendments to applications filed with the California
Public Utilities Commission. One complete copy must be provided to the
City Manager.
b. The City will provide any appropriate comments to the California Public
Utilities Commission regarding an application or an amendment to an
application for a State video franchise.
§ 10-5.1 COMPTON § 10-7.2
AO:524
§ 10-7.2. Franchise Fee. [Ord. #2162, § 1]
A State video franchise holder operating in the City shall pay to the City a
franchise fee that is equal to 5% of the gross revenues of that State video
franchise holder. The term "gross revenues" shall be defined as set forth in
California Public Utilities Code section 5860.
§ 10-7.3. Audit Authority. [Ord. #2162, § 1]
Not more than once annually, the City may examine and perform an audit
of the business records of a holder of a State video franchise to ensure
compliance with all applicable statutes and regulations related to the
computation and payment of franchise fees.
§ 10-7.4. Customer Service Penalties Under State Video Franchises.
[Ord. #2162, § 1]
§ 10-7.5. PEG Access Channel Capacity. [Ord. #2162, § 1]
a. The holder of a State video franchise shall comply with all applicable
State and Federal customer service and protection standards
pertaining to the provision of video service.
b. The City shall monitor a State video franchise holder's compliance with
State and Federal customer service and protection standards. The City
will provide to the State video franchise holder written notice of any
material breaches of applicable customer service and protection
standards, and will allow the State video franchise holder 30 days from
receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material
breaches not remedied within the thirty-day time period will be subject
to the following monetary penalties to be imposed by the City in
accordance with State law:
1. For the first occurrence of a violation, a monetary penalty of $500
shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to
exceed $1,500 for each violation.
2. For a second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a
monetary penalty of $1,000 shall be imposed for each day the
violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000 for each violation.
3. For a third or further violation of the same nature within 12
months, a monetary penalty of $2,500 shall be imposed for each
day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500 for each
violation.
c. A State video franchise holder may appeal a monetary penalty assessed
by the City within 60 days. After relevant evidence and testimony are
received, and staff reports are submitted, the City Council will vote to
either uphold or vacate the monetary penalty. The City Council's
decision on the imposition of a monetary penalty shall be final.
§ 10-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.5
AO:525
§ 10-7.6. Fee for Support of PEG Access Facilities and Activities.
[Ord. #2162, § 1; reauthorized by Ord. #2283]
a. A State video franchise holder who uses the public rights-of-way shall
designate sufficient capacity on its network to enable the carriage of at
least three public, educational, or governmental (PEG) access channels.
b. Additional requirements relating to PEG access channels are as follows:
1. A State video franchise holder is subject to payment of the PEG
support fee specified below in subsection 10-7.6.
2. PEG access channels shall be for the exclusive use of the City or its
designees to provide public, educational, or governmental
programming.
3. Advertising, underwriting, or sponsorship recognition may be
carried on the PEG access channels for the purpose of funding
PEG-related activities.
4. The PEG access channels shall be carried on the basic service tier.
5. To the extent feasible, the PEG access channels shall not be
separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic
service tier, and the channel numbers for the PEG access channels
shall be the same channel numbers used by the incumbent cable
operator unless prohibited by Federal law.
6. After the initial designation of PEG access channel numbers, the
channel numbers shall not be changed without the prior written
consent of the City, unless the change is required by Federal law.
7. Each PEG access channel shall be capable of carrying a National
Television System Committee (NTSC) television signal.
a. A fee paid to the City is hereby established for the support of public,
educational, and governmental access facilities and activities within the
City, which fee shall be paid by any new City-franchised cable operator
and by State video franchise holders operating within the City. Unless a
higher percentage is authorized by applicable State or Federal law, this
fee shall be 1% of a franchisee's gross revenues derived from the
provision of video services within the City. The term "gross revenues"
shall be defined as set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section
5860.
b. The fee established by this section shall be remitted quarterly to the
City Treasurer and must be received not later than 45 days after the
end of the preceding calendar quarter. The fee payment shall be
accompanied by a summary that describes all sources of the gross
revenues upon which the fee is based, which summary must be verified
by a responsible financial officer or employee of the video service
provider.
§ 10-7.5 COMPTON § 10-7.7
AO:526
§ 10-7.7. Interconnection. [Ord. #2162, § 1]
Where technically feasible, a State video franchise holder and incumbent
cable operator shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks
for the purpose of providing PEG access channel programming.
Interconnection may be accomplished by direct cable, microwave link,
satellite, or other reasonable method of connection. State video franchise
holders and incumbent cable operators shall provide interconnection of
the PEG access channels on reasonable terms and conditions and may
not withhold the interconnection. If a State video franchise holder and
an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable
interconnection agreement, the City may require the incumbent cable
operator to allow the State video franchise holder to interconnect its
network with the incumbent's network at a technically feasible point on the
holder's network as identified by the holder. If no technically feasible point
for interconnection is available, the State video franchise holder shall make
an interconnection available to the channel originator and shall provide the
facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection
shall be borne by the State video franchise holder requesting the
interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the parties.
§ 10-7.8. Emergency Alert System and Emergency Overrides. [Ord.
#2162, § 1]
A State video franchise holder must comply with the Emergency Alert
System requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order
that emergency messages may be distributed over the holder's network.
Provisions in City-issued franchises authorizing the City to provide local
emergency notifications shall remain in effect, and shall apply to all State
video franchise holders in the City for the duration of the City-issued
franchise, or until the term of the franchise would have expired had it
not been terminated pursuant to subdivision (m) of Section 5840 of the
California Public Utilities Code, or until January 1, 2009, whichever is later.
§ 10-7.9. Encroachment Permit Applications. [Ord. #2162, § 1]
a. As used in this section, the term "encroachment permit" means any
permit issued by the City relating to construction or operation of
facilities by the holder of a State video franchise.
b. The City shall either approve or deny an application from a holder of a
State video franchise for an encroachment permit within 60 days of
receiving a completed application.
c. If the City denies an application for an encroachment permit, the City
shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of the denial, furnish to the
applicant a detailed explanation of the reason for the denial. An
applicant may appeal the City's denial of an encroachment permit
application to the City Council. A written notice of appeal stating the
facts of the matter and the grounds for appeal shall be filed with the
City Clerk within 10 days of the denial. The City Clerk shall set the
§ 10-7.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.9
AO:527
§ 10-7.10. Defined Terms. [Ord. #2162, § 1]
As used in this Section 10-7, the following terms shall be defined as set forth
in Section 5830 of the California Public Utilities Code:
matter for hearing at a regular meeting of the City Council and shall
give the appellant written notice of the time and place of hearing at
least five days before the hearing. The decision of the City Council
taken after the appellant has had an opportunity to be heard will be
final.
a. Broadband;
b. Cable operator;
c. Cable service;
d. Cable system;
e. Commission;
f. Franchise;
g. Franchise fee;
h. Local franchising entity;
i. Holder;
j. Incumbent cable operator;
k. Local entity;
l. Network;
m. Open-video system;
n. OVS operator;
o. Public right-of-way;
p. State franchise;
q. Subscriber;
r. Video programming;
s. Video service;
t. Video service provider.
§ 10-7.9 COMPTON § 10-7.10
AO:528
Chapter 11
ANIMALS
Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of
Ordinance Nos. 1536, 1567, 1585, 1627, 1788, 1842, 1854 and 1881.
§ 11-1. ADOPTION OF LOS ANGELES COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL
ORDINANCE.
§ 11-1.1. Adoption by Reference. [Ord. #2158, § 1]
Subject to the amendments, deletions, and additions set forth in this
Chapter, Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code titled “Animals,” as may be
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference. This ordinance
shall become the Animal Control Ordinance of the City of Compton,
governing the licensing, impounding and regulation of animals and animalrelated
businesses.
At least one copy of said Title 10 shall be kept on file in the office of the City
Clerk and shall be maintained by said City Clerk for the use and examination
by the public.
In the event of any provisions in Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code
referenced above, and any amendments or additions thereto, is ambiguous
or conflicts with any provisions of the Compton Municipal Code now or
hereinafter enacted, the provisions of the Compton Municipal Code shall
prevail over the ambiguous or conflicting County Code provisions.
§ 11-2. AMENDMENTS TO COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL
ORDINANCE.
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 11-1.1, the Animal Control
Ordinance is hereby amended as follows:
§ 11-2.1. Violation; Penalty. [Ord. #2158, § 1]
a. Unless a different penalty is provided for, any person violating any of
the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of an infraction which is
punishable by a fine not exceeding $100 for the first violation; a fine not
exceeding $200 for a second violation within one year; and, a fine not
exceeding $500 for each additional violation of this Chapter within one
year; unless another penalty is provided for in this Chapter.
b. Violations of sections: 10.12.190, 10.12.200, 10.20.280, 10.20.310,
10.28.060, 10.32.020, 10.32.070, 10.32.080, 10.37.030, 10.40.010,
10.40.040 of the Animal Control Ordinance is a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment in the
County jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
§ 10-7.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-2.2
AO:529
§ 11-2.2. Surcharge Authorized. [Ord. #2158, § 1]
The City Council of the City of Compton may add a surcharge, in an amount
established by resolution, on any one or more of the fees imposed under the
Chapter to pay for the City’s administrative costs in enforcing the provisions
of this Chapter.
Chapter 12
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Editor's Note: For regulations concerning Abandoned Vehicles, see
Chapter 8, Section 8-5. For statutory provisions authorizing the
City to regulate traffic, see Vehicle Code § 31100 et seq. For billing
procedure for drug or alcohol related traffic accidents, see Chapter
4, Section 4-22.
§ 12-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #856, §§ 3400 — 3400.16; Ord. #2231,
§ 1]
Unless specified otherwise, for purposes of this chapter, the following words
and phrases are defined and shall be construed as follows:
ALLEY — Shall mean any street less than 25 feet in width between property
lines.
CENTRAL TRAFFIC DISTRICT — Shall mean all streets and portions of
streets within the area described as follows: All that area bounded by Palm
Street on the south, Magnolia Street on the north, the west roadway of
Willowbrook Avenue on the west and Alameda Street on the east.
HITCHHIKING — Shall mean the standing in or upon any roadway, street
or other public place for the purpose of, or while, soliciting a ride from the
operator of any private vehicle or getting in or upon any moving vehicle or
train without the consent of the operator thereof.
LOADING ZONE — Shall mean that space adjacent to a curb reserved for
the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers
or materials.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE — Shall mean any sign, signal,
marking, or device not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction
for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNAL — Shall mean any device, whether manually,
electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternatively
directed to stop and to proceed and which is erected, or may be erected, by
authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction.
OTHER AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICERS — Shall mean any regularly
employed and salaried employees assigned by the City to direct traffic or
enforce parking laws and regulations of the City.
§ 11-2.2 COMPTON § 12-1
AO:530
PARK — Shall mean to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether
occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while
actually engaged in, the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
PARKWAY — Shall mean that portion of a street other than the roadway or
a sidewalk.
PASSENGER LOADING ZONE — Shall mean the space adjacent to a curb
reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
PEDESTRIAN — Shall mean any person afoot.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the authorized law enforcement
agency of the City.
POLICE OFFICER — Shall mean every officer of the Police Department of
the City.
STOP — When required shall mean complete cessation of movement.
STOP OR STAND — When prohibited, shall mean any stopping or standing
of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or official control device.
STREET CAR — Shall mean any device traveling exclusively upon rails.
TRAFFIC — Shall mean pedestrians, vehicles and street cars, whether
singly or together, while using any street for purpose of travel.
TRAFFIC AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Street Superintendent and/or his
authorized representative.
§ 12-2. REGULATIONS.
§ 12-2.1. Authority of Police, Fire Officials and Other Authorized
City Officers. [Ord. #856, § 3401; Ord. #2231, § 2]
§ 12-2.2. Obedience to Police. [Ord. #856, § 3402]
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order,
direction, or signal of a Police Officer.
a. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department and/or other
authorized City officers to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
b. Officers of the Police Department and/or other authorized City officers
are authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance
with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency
or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police
Department may direct traffic as conditions may require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
c. Officers of the Fire Department, in the course of their duties at the
scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic.
§ 12-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.3
AO:531
§ 12-2.3. (Reserved)62
§ 12-2.4. Public Employees to Obey Traffic Regulations. [Ord. #856,
§ 3404]
The provisions of this section shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, any
county, city and county or municipal corporation, or other public agency,
and no driver shall violate any of the provisions of this section, except as
expressly permitted in this section.
§ 12-2.5. Exemptions to Certain Vehicles. [Ord. #856, § 3405]
§ 12-2.6. Report of Damage to Certain Property. [Ord. #856, § 3406]
a. The provisions of this section regulating the operation, parking and
standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the Police or Fire
Department, any public ambulance, or any public utility vehicle, or any
private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance
has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle when any vehicle
mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified in the
Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.
b. The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any
such vehicle from the consequences of his willful disregard of the safety
of others.
c. The provisions of this section regulating the parking or standing of
vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a City department or public
utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work, or any
vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection,
transportation or delivery of United States mail.
a. The driver of a vehicle, or the person in charge of any animal, involved
in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or
owned by any public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant,
ornamental lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole,
ornamental shade tree or other property of a like nature located in or
along any street, shall within 24 hours after such accident make a
written report of such accident to the Police Department of the City.
b. Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the
accident took place, the name and address of the person owing and of
the person driving or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license
number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property
damaged in such accident.
62.Editor's Note: Former subsection 12-2.3, Direction of Traffic, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance No. 856, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 2231.
§ 12-2.3 COMPTON § 12-2.7
AO:532
§ 12-2.7. The Traffic Authority to Erect Traffic Control Devices.
[Ord. #856, § 3407]
The Traffic Authority shall have the exclusive power and duty to place and
maintain or cause to be placed or maintained official traffic control devices
when and as required under this section to make effective the provisions
of the section and may place and maintain such additional traffic control
devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this section or
under state law, or to guide or warn traffic.
§ 12-2.8. The Traffic Authority to Install Traffic Signals, Safety
Zones and Lanes for Traffic. [Ord. #856, § 3408]
The Traffic Authority is hereby authorized:
§ 12-2.9. Obedience to Traffic Control Devices. [Ord. #856, § 3409]
§ 12-2.10. Signs Required. [Ord. #856, § 3410]
No provision of this section for which signs or markings are required shall
be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign or marking is not in place and sufficiently
legible and visible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
§ 12-2.11. Signs Prohibiting Left Turns. [Ord. #856, § 3411]
The Traffic Authority may erect and maintain signs at any intersection
prohibiting the making of left turns by drivers of vehicles wherever the
said Traffic Authority determines that such left turns would cause traffic
congestion or traffic hazard. The making of such left turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours
a. To install and maintain official traffic signals at such intersections and
other places as he may deem necessary for the regulation of traffic.
b. To establish safety zones at such places as he may deem necessary for
the protection of pedestrians.
c. To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may
deem advisable, consistent with the Vehicle Code and this Code.
a. The driver of any vehicle and the person in charge of any animal, and
the motorman of any street car, shall obey the instructions of any traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this section
unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exemptions
granted by this section.
b. The driver of any vehicle and the person in charge of any animal, and
the motorman of any street car, shall obey the instructions of any
barrier or sign erected by any of the public departments of this City or
public utilities in this City, or by any other person, pursuant to law.
§ 12-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.11
AO:533
in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs erected by
said Traffic Authority.
§ 12-2.12. When Left Turns Prohibited. [Ord. #856, § 3412]
When authorized signs are erected giving notice thereof, no vehicle shall be
turned to the left in violation of the directions contained on said signs.
§ 12-2.13. Turning Markers. [Ord. #856, § 3413]
§ 12-2.14. U-Turns in Certain Districts. [Ord. #856, § 3414]
No vehicle shall be turned at any time at an intersection in the Central
Traffic Districts or in any business district in a complete circle or in such
manner as to proceed in the opposite direction upon the street upon which
said vehicle is traveling at the time of entering said intersection.
§ 12-2.15. The Traffic Authority to Sign One Way Streets and Alleys.
[Ord. #856, § 3415]
The Traffic Authority may designate that traffic upon any street or alley
shall be one way only, and shall place and maintain signs giving notice
thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are
in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall
be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
§ 12-2.16. One Way Streets and Alleys. [Ord. #856, § 3416]
When signs are erected on one way streets or in any alley giving notice
thereof, no person shall drive any vehicle in a direction contrary thereto.
§ 12-2.17. The Traffic Authority to Erect Stop Signs. [Ord. #856,
§ 3417]
The Traffic Authority may designate and describe any street or portion
thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are
required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, and the Traffic Authority
shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows:
a. The Traffic Authority may place markers, buttons or signs within or
adjacent to intersections, indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning at such intersections.
b. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
such indications.
§ 12-2.11 COMPTON § 12-2.17
AO:534
A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such
through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of
other intersections where a stop is required.
Every such sign shall be placed at or near the entrance to the highway or
intersection where a stop is required and every such sign shall conform to
the requirements of the Vehicle Code.
§ 12-2.18. Stop at Through Street or Stop Intersection. [Ord. #856,
§ 3418]
When stop signs are erected as herein provided, at the entrance to any
intersection, every driver of a vehicle and every motorman of a street car
shall stop at every such sign, before entering the intersection, except when
directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal.
§ 12-2.19. Emerging from Alley or Private Driveway. [Ord. #856,
§ 3419]
The driver of a vehicle emerging from any alley, driveway or buildings, shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the
sidewalk area extending across any alley way.
§ 12-2.20. Interference with Fire Apparatus. [Ord. #856, § 3420]
§ 12-2.21. Driving Through Funeral Processions. [Ord. #856,
§ 3421]
No driver of a vehicle or motorman of a street car shall drive between
the vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and
when the vehicles in such procession are conspicuously so designated. This
provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by
official traffic signals or police officers.
§ 12-2.22. Riding on Motorcycles and Bicycles. [Ord. #856, § 3422]
A person operating a motorcycle or bicycle shall not ride other than upon
the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor carry any other
person upon such motorcycle or bicycle other than upon a firmly attached
seat to the rear of the operator and unless said motorcycle, or bicycle is
a. No driver of a vehicle shall follow any fire apparatus answering a fire
alarm, closer that 500 feet, or park any vehicle within 500 feet of a fire,
or operate or park any vehicle in such manner as to interfere with any
fire apparatus or line of fire hose when in use at a fire or when in place
for use in response to a fire alarm.
b. No street car or vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the
Fire Department when laid down on any street, private driveway or
street car tract, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire without the
consent of the officials of the Fire Department in command.
§ 12-2.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.22
AO:535
equipped with adequate foot rests and hand grips for the use of such extra
passenger, nor shall any person ride upon a motorcycle or bicycle other than
as above authorized.
§ 12-2.23. Clinging to Moving Vehicle. [Ord. #856, § 3423]
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, roller skates or any
toy vehicle, shall attach the same to himself to any street car or moving
vehicle upon any roadway.
§ 12-2.24. Vehicles Shall Not Be Driven on the Sidewalk. [Ord.
#856, § 3424; Ord. #2177, § 1]
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area, parkway or
median except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
§ 12-2.25. New Pavement. [Ord. #856, § 3425]
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any
newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a
barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such
pavement or markings, or when a sign is in place stating that the street or
any portion thereof is closed.
§ 12-2.26. Closing of Roads While Under Repair. [Added by Ord.
#859, § 3425.1; Ord. #1894, § 2]
a. The Street Superintendent may close streets, highways, roads and
alleys to travel during the course of improvement if he deems it
necessary to avoid injury to or interference with the work or
improvement of any public road, highway or alley or portion thereof,
and the same shall thereupon remain closed to travel until such
improvement is completed or said Superintendent shall order the road
or highway or alley reopened.
b. Whenever any public road or portion thereof shall be closed to travel
under the provisions of paragraph a hereof, it shall be the duty of the
contractor, foreman, engineer or other person in charge of the work of
improving said road, to post conspicuously at each end of the portion of
the highway closed, and at all intersections thereof with other public
roads, signs containing in clearly legible letters not less than three
inches high, the words "Road Closed," and in clearly legible letters not
less than one-inch high the words "By Order of the Street
Superintendent" and a designation of the portion of said highway in
width closed, if less than the whole width thereof is closed to travel.
c. No person shall lead, ride or drive any horse, mule or other animal, or
drive or propel any wagon, automobile or other vehicle upon any public
road, highway or alley, or portion thereof, that is closed to travel under
the provisions of paragraph a of this section, provided nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to prohibit riding or driving thereon for
§ 12-2.22 COMPTON § 12-2.26
AO:536
§ 12-2.27. Certain Vehicles Prohibited in Central Traffic District.
[Ord. #856, § 3426; Ord. #1894, § 3]
§ 12-2.28. Advertising Vehicles. [Ord. #856, § 3427]
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes
or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or loudspeaking
device upon any street or alley at any time within the Central
Traffic District.
§ 12-2.29. Horse-Drawn Vehicles. [Ord. #856, § 3428]
No person shall drive any animal-drawn vehicle into or within the Central
Traffic District between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day.
purposes connected with the improvement thereof which is in progress;
and provided further, that no person shall be guilty of a violation of
this section who shall go upon the closed portion of any public road,
highway or alley at any intersection thereof with another public road,
or at either end of such closed portion of such road unless at such
intersection or at such end of the closed portion of such road, as the
case may be, the sign required by paragraph b hereof is posted, or
unless such person has before going upon the closed portion of such
road, been informed that such road, highway, alley, or portion thereof is
closed to travel.
d. Any violation of this section is an infraction of the Compton Municipal
Code.
a. No person shall operate any of the following vehicles in the Central
Traffic District between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day.
1. Any freight vehicle more than 8 1/2 feet in width, with load, or any
freight vehicle so loaded that any part of its load extends more than
20 feet to the front or rear of said vehicle;
2. Any vehicle carrying building material that has not been loaded, or
is not to be unloaded, at some point within the Central Traffic
District;
3. Any freight vehicle with a trailer;
4. Any vehicle conveying refuse, rubbish or garbage;
5. Any vehicle carrying crude or fuel oil.
b. Provided that the Chief of Police may by written permit authorize the
operation of any such vehicle for the purpose of making necessary
emergency deliveries to or from points within the Central Traffic
District.
c. Any violation of this section is an infraction of the Compton Municipal
Code.
§ 12-2.26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.30
AO:537
§ 12-2.30. Truck Routes. [Ord. #856, § 3429; Ord. #1561, § 1; New;
Ord. #1782, § 1; Ord. #1920, § 1; Ord. #1943, § 1]
a. Whenever this Chapter or any section designates and describes any
street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is permitted by
any commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of
6,000 pounds, the Traffic Authority is hereby authorized to designate
such streets by appropriate signs as "LIMITED TRUCK TRAFFIC
ROUTES" and "UNLIMITED TRUCK TRAFFIC ROUTES" for the
movement of commercial vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight
of 6,000 pounds.
b. When any such truck traffic route or routes are established and
designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any commercial
vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of 6,000 pounds may
use the routes accordingly:
1. Northbound and southbound truck routes: Limited truck routes.
May be used only when necessary for the purpose of making
pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to
any building or structure located on such restricted streets, or for
the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and
bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any
building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a
building permit has previously been obtained.
2. Atlantic Avenue: Unlimited truck route. May be used for
unrestricted through truck traffic.
3. Eastbound and westbound routes: Unlimited truck routes on
portions of streets. May be used for unrestricted through truck
traffic on designated portions of streets.
c. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
1. Public or private school buses or passenger buses under the
jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission; or
2. Any commercial vehicles owned by a public utility or licensed
contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, installation
or repair of any public utility, or to any vehicle subject to the
provisions of Section 1031-1036 of the Public Utilities Code; or to
3. Any person acting under authority of a permit granted by the
Traffic Authority.
d. No person shall drive, park, stop or stand any commercial vehicle
exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of 6,000 pounds, or exceeding
96 inches in total outside width (vehicle or load or a combination of
both) on any street or portion thereof except when making pickups or
deliveries under the conditions described in paragraph b above;
§ 12-2.30 COMPTON § 12-2.30
AO:538
§ 12-2.31. Commercial Vehicles Prohibited From Using Certain
Streets. [Ord. #856, § 3430]
§ 12-2.32. The Traffic Authority to Establish Crosswalks. [Ord.
#856, § 3431]
provided, however, that the provisions of this paragraph shall not apply
to any vehicle operated under the authority of the public utilities.
e. A commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of 6,000
pounds is prohibited from traveling into the City except as provided for
in paragraphs b through d.
f. If a commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross limit of 6,000
pounds is not exempted by paragraphs b through d above, it must
utilize Atlantic Avenue or one of the peripheral freeways (San Diego
405, Harbor 110, Artesia 91, Long Beach 710, Century 105) and refrain
from entering the City of Compton.
g. Except for Atlantic Avenue and the relevant freeways listed in
paragraph f, the City does not have designated truck routes for
northbound and southbound commercial vehicles exceeding a
maximum gross limit of 6,000 pounds that seek to traverse the City
without meeting the requirements of paragraph b through d.
h. Truck Fines. A violation of the maximum gross weight limit of 6,000
pounds is an infraction and shall be punished by a fine as set out in
Chapter 1, subsection 1-6.3.
a. The Traffic Authority may designate and describe any street or portion
thereof as a street, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial
vehicle or by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of
6,000 pounds. The Traffic Authority shall erect and maintain
appropriate signs on streets so designated.
b. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under
the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission.
a. The Traffic Authority shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks
at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway as follows:
Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections
within the Central Traffic District and at such intersections outside
such district, and at other places within or outside said district where
the Traffic Authority determines that there is particular hazard to
pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in
paragraph b of this subsection.
b. Other than crosswalks at intersections no crosswalk shall be
established in any block which is less than 400 feet in length. In any
block exceeding 400 feet in length not more than one additional
§ 12-2.30 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.32
AO:539
§ 12-2.33. Crossing in Central Traffic District. [Ord. #856, § 3432]
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the
Central Traffic District or in any business district.
§ 12-2.34. Crossing at Right Angles. [Ord. #856, § 3433]
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb, or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a marked crosswalk.
§ 12-2.35. Streets-Sidewalks — Playing Ball or Games of Sport.
[Added by Ord. #867, § 3434.1]
No person shall play ball or any game of sport with a ball or football
or throw, cast, shoot or discharge any stone, pellet, bullet, arrow or any
other missile, in, over, across, along or upon any street or sidewalk or in
any public park, except on those portions of said park set apart for such
purpose.
§ 12-2.36. Street Car Speed. [Ord. #856, § 3435]
§ 12-2.37. Trains Not to Block Streets. [Ord. #856, § 3436]
No person shall operate any train or train of cars, or permit the same to
remain standing, so as to block the movement of traffic upon any street for
a period of time longer than five minutes.
§ 12-2.38. Driving on Street Car Tracks. [Ord. #856, § 3437]
The driver of any vehicle proceeding upon any street car track in front of a
street car upon a street shall remove such vehicle from the track as soon as
practical after signal from the operator of said street car unless prevented
by other vehicles or while awaiting a traffic signal.
§ 12-2.39. Boarding, Alighting From Street Car or Vehicle. [Ord.
#856, § 3438]
No person shall board or alight from any street car or vehicle while such
street car or vehicle is in motion.
crosswalk shall be established and such crosswalk shall be located as
nearly as practicable at midblock.
a. The motorman or operator of any street car shall not drive any street
car at a speed exceeding the prima facie speed limits fixed by the
California Vehicle Code for vehicles.
b. The provisions of this section shall not apply when a street car is being
operated upon a private right-of-way which is effectively protected from
vehicular traffic.
§ 12-2.32 COMPTON § 12-2.40
AO:540
§ 12-2.40. Unlawful Riding. [Ord. #856, § 3439]
No person shall ride on any street car or vehicle upon any portion thereof
not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not
apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to
persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
§ 12-2.41. Railway Gates. [Ord. #856, § 3440]
No person shall drive any vehicle through or under any safety gate or
railroad barrier which is maintained at a railroad crossing for the purpose of
warning persons of the approach of a train or car, while such gate or barrier
is closed or while it is being opened or closed.
§ 12-2.42. Washing Vehicles in Streets. [Ord. #856, § 3467]
No person shall dust, wipe, wash, or otherwise clean, use or employ any
method of dusting, wiping, washing or otherwise cleaning any vehicle or
portion thereof while on any street unless such vehicle is owned by or under
the direct control or supervision of the person doing any of the acts here
enumerated.
§ 12-2.43. Repairing Vehicles on Streets. [Added by Ord. #867,
§ 3467.1; Ord. #1894, § 4]
§ 12-2.44. Hitchhiking. [Ord. #856, § 3469]
No person shall hitchhike within the limits of the City.
§ 12-2.45. Parking Vehicles At or Near Certain Businesses. [Ord.
#856, § 3475; Ord. #1180]
No person shall store, display, or park any vehicles in his possession or
under his control, upon any public street or highway at a location thereon
within one mile of the place or places of business of such person engaged
in conducting or carrying on any one or more of the following or similar
type businesses: buying, selling, exchanging, repairing, washing, painting,
adding onto, installing any part on, overhauling, financing, repossessing,
parking, towing, storing, or servicing any vehicle, either new or used, of
a. No person shall repair, or make any repairs, or add or install any part or
accessory to or on any vehicle while the same is upon any public street
or alley.
b. The provisions of this subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit the
driver of any vehicle, which is disabled while on any public street or
alley to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping, from making,
or causing to be made, the repairs necessary to enable such vehicle to
be moved from the public street or alley.
c. Any violation of this section is an infraction of the Compton Municipal
Code.
§ 12-2.40 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.45
AO:541
a type required to be registered under the Vehicle Code of the State of
California.
This section shall not apply to any vehicle registered in the name of such
person or to any vehicle for which an application and fee for registration
in the name of such person has been filed with the Department of Motor
Vehicles of the State of California.
§ 12-3. PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
§ 12-3.1. Parking Parallel With Curb. [Ord. #856, § 3441; Ord.
#947]
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of traffic and with
the right hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb line or
edge of the roadway; provided, however, that upon recommendation of the
Traffic Authority the City Council may by resolution authorize diagonal
or angle parking, with the front end of the vehicle headed into the curb,
upon any street or portion of a street. Such resolution, if adopted, shall
contain instruction to the Traffic Authority to paint parking lines on the
surface of the streets where angle parking is authorized, and no such angle
parking shall be permitted until the painting of such parking lines has been
completed. The City Council also may by resolution order the removal of
any street or portion of a street from among those where angle parking is
permitted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle other than as indicated
by visible marks on the street, and it shall be unlawful for any person to so
park a vehicle as to straddle said mark or marks or in such a manner as to
cause a vehicle to occupy more than one parking stall.
§ 12-3.2. Stopping, Standing and Parking. [Ord. #856, § 3442]
§ 12-3.3. Stopping or Standing Prohibited; No Sign Required. [Ord.
#856, § 3443; Ord. #886]
Regardless of the existence of warning signs, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle in or upon any of the following places:
a. The provisions of this section prohibiting the stopping, standing or
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein
specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer
or official traffic control device.
b. The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on standing or
parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and
more restrictive provisions hereof or of law prohibiting or limiting the
standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
§ 12-2.45 COMPTON § 12-3.3
AO:542
§ 12-3.4. The Traffic Authority to Erect Signs. [Ord. #856, § 3444]
The Traffic Authority shall appropriately sign or mark the following places
and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
in any of said places:
§ 12-3.5. "No Standing" Signs or Marks. [Ord. #856, § 3445]
The Traffic Authority may appropriately sign or mark the following places
and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
in any of said places:
§ 12-3.6. Curb Markings. [Ord. #856, § 3446; Ord. #1562, § 1]
a. Within any parkway.
b. Upon any bridge, viaduct or approach thereto.
c. Within any pedestrian crosswalk.
d. In front of any space or area used as the means of vehicle ingress or
egress to or from the adjoining property, which space and area is
commonly known and referred to as a "driveway."
e. So that any portion of the vehicle is within, upon, or extends over any
portion of any sidewalk.
a. At any place between a safety zone and the nearest curb and any place
within 20 feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the midblock
end of a safety zone.
b. At any place within 30 feet of an intersecting roadway in the Central
Traffic District or in any business district except that a bus may stop at
a designated bus stop.
a. At any place within 30 feet of an intersection other than hereinbefore
mentioned.
b. Within 25 feet of the approach to the nearest line of the crosswalk.
a. The Traffic Authority is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and
limitations of this section, to place, and when required herein shall
place, the following curb markings which shall have the meanings as
herein set forth:
1. Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time;
except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus
zone.
2. Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time
between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday for any
purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials, provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers
§ 12-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3.6
AO:543
§ 12-3.7. Loading Zones. [Ord. #856, § 3447]
shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or
unloading of materials more than 20 minutes.
3. White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose
other than loading or unloading of passengers which shall not
exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday and except as
follows:
When such zone is in front of a hotel the restrictions shall apply at
all times;
When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply
at all times except when the theater is closed.
4. Green shall mean no standing or parking for longer than 20
minutes at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day
except Sunday.
5. Blue shall mean parking only for the exclusive use of disabled
persons and disabled veterans who are issued and who display
either a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to
either California Vehicle Code Section 22511.5 or CVC Section
9105. Any vehicle parked adjacent to a blue curb or alley edge
marking without such distinguishing place or placard displayed
thereon shall be parked in violation of this subsection regardless of
whether or not the owner or operator thereof was then in fact
either eligible for or in possession of the required plate or placard.
b. When the Traffic Authority as authorized under this section has caused
curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of
the provisions of this subsection.
a. The Traffic Authority is hereby authorized to determine and to mark
loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:
1. At any place in the Central Traffic District or any business district.
2. Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in
front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.
b. In no event shall more than 1/2 of the total curb length in any block be
reserved for loading zone purposes exclusive of the passenger loading
zones at the entrance to public theaters.
c. Loading zones shall be indicated only by a yellow paint line stenciled
with black letters, "LOADING ONLY," upon the tops of all curbs within
such zones.
§ 12-3.6 COMPTON § 12-3.7
AO:544
§ 12-3.8. Effect of Permission to Load or Unload. [Ord. #856,
§ 3448]
§ 12-3.9. Standing in Any Alley. [Ord. #856, § 3449]
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose other than
the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley.
§ 12-3.10. Standing for Loading or Unloading Only. [Ord. #856,
§ 3450]
When authorized signs or marks are in place giving notices thereof, no
person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose other than
loading or unloading passengers or materials for such time as is permitted
herein in any of the following places:
§ 12-3.11. Standing in Passenger Loading Zone. [Ord. #856, § 3451]
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone
for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such
time as is permitted under this section.
d. Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by a white line stenciled
with black letters, "PASSENGER LOADING ONLY," upon the tops of all
curbs in said zones.
a. Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for the purpose of
loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial
vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in
no event for more than 20 minutes.
b. The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial
deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post
packages and United States mail.
c. Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or
unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal
baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in
no event for more than three minutes.
d. Within the total time limits above specified the provisions of this section
shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable
loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges
hereby granted.
a. In any yellow loading zone; or
b. Within 50 feet of any entrance to any school or any other building used
for the transaction of governmental business.
§ 12-3.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3.12
AO:545
§ 12-3.12. Additional Loading or Unloading Places. [Ord. #856,
§ 3452]
Whenever the Traffic Authority has determined that parking shall be limited
and authorized signs or marks are in place giving notice thereof, no person
shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose other than loading or
unloading passengers or materials in any of the following places:
§ 12-3.13. Bus Zones to Be Established. [Ord. #852, § 3453]
§ 12-3.14. Limited Parking, Standing or Stopping on Public Streets
or Off-Street Parking Facilities. [Ord. #856, § 3457; Ord. #1224;
Ord. #1246; Ord. #1726, § 1]
a. On any part of the roadway having a width of not more than 25 feet;
b. In front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assemblage;
c. In front of the entrance to any place in use for business outside the
Central Traffic District; or
d. At any other place where the parking of vehicles would result in traffic
congestion or particular hazard.
a. The Traffic Authority is hereby authorized to establish bus zones
opposite curb spaces for the loading and unloading of buses or common
carriers of passengers engaged in local transportation and to determine
the location thereof.
b. No bus zone shall exceed 50 feet in length except that when satisfactory
evidence has been presented to the Traffic Authority showing the
necessity therefor, the Traffic Authority may extend bus zones in such
places not to exceed 125 feet in length.
c. No bus zone shall be established opposite and to the right of a safety
zone.
d. The Traffic Authority shall paint a red line stenciled with white letters
"NO STANDING," together with the words "BUS ZONE," upon the tops
of all curbs and places specified as a bus zone.
a. Parking, Stopping, or Standing Limited on Public Streets or Off-Street
Parking Facilities. The Traffic Authority may erect signs, limiting
parking, stopping, or standing on public streets or any off-street
parking facility owned or controlled by the City of Compton Parking
Authority, and when such authorized signs are in place giving notice
thereof, no person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle on any of said
streets or off-street parking facilities for a period of time longer than so
designated by said signs.
b. The Designation of Disabled Person Parking Facilities. The Traffic
Authority may designate stalls or spaces for the exclusive use of
physically disabled persons as defined under California Vehicle Code
§ 12-3.12 COMPTON § 12-3.14
AO:546
§ 12-3.15. Parking Prohibited in Specified Places. [Ord. #856,
§ 3458]
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle upon that portion of any
public street or place in the City where the Traffic Authority shall erect, or
cause to be erected, a sign prohibiting such parking or cause to be painted
in red a portion of the curbline.
§ 12-3.16. Parking Other Than Passenger Automobiles or Certain
Vehicles on Streets. [Ord. #856, § 3459; Ord. #1180; Ord. #1212;
Ord. #1565, § 1]
No person shall park any vehicles, except those vehicles hereinafter
expressly excluded, for a period of time more than five hours on any street
except:
Section 22511.5 and California Vehicle Code Section 22511.9 on public
streets and within publicly-owned, leased or controlled off-street
parking facilities and to denote them through the use of appropriate
signs and markings.
c. Parking or Standing in Disabled Persons Parking Zones Prohibited. No
person shall park or stand any vehicle in a disabled persons parking
zone unless the operator or the passenger being transported by said
vehicle, is physically disabled and the vehicle displays a license plate or
placard issued under the provisions of Section 22511.5 or Section
22511.9 of the California Vehicle Code.
Disabled persons parking zones shall be operative 24 hours a day
(Sundays and holidays included).
a. Passenger automobiles designed to carry not more than nine persons;
and
b. Pickup trucks and campers used and maintained primarily for the
transportation of persons and as to which any and all property which
may be located thereon is covered in such a manner as not to be visible
to public view; providing that such pickup trucks are not designed or
modified to a capacity for carrying loads in excess of 3/4 tons, are
equipped with truck bed with outside dimensions of not over 10 feet in
length and seven feet in width, which bed does not have a permanent
type cover, and having solid sides and rear or not over four feet six
inches above grade, and such campers are designed for living and
sleeping purposes with the camper unit not more than 11 feet to the
rear of the cab and having a width not over eight feet and height not
over nine feet above grade.
§ 12-3.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3.17
AO:547
§ 12-3.17. Parking Nonmotorized Vehicle or Trailer. [Added by Ord.
#1565, § 3459.1]
No person shall park any nonmotorized vehicle or trailer unless such
nonmotorized vehicle or trailer is attached to a motorized vehicle, and then
only in compliance with the provisions in the Traffic Ordinance of this City;
provided, however, that nonmotorized recreational vehicles, attached or
unattached to a vehicle, may be parked for the sole purpose of loading and
unloading for a period of time not to exceed 72 consecutive hours.
§ 12-3.18. Storage of Trailers, Boats, Etc., on Private Property.
[Added by Ord. #1565, § 3459.2]
No person who owns or has possession, custody, or control of any motor
vehicle, trailer, tractor, airplane, boat, or parts thereof shall store or park
any of the foregoing within the front yard or unfenced street side yard
setback area for more than a period of 72 consecutive hours without first
having obtained a permit from the Traffic Committee following the
procedure specified by City Council Resolution.
§ 12-3.19. Commercial Vehicle Parking Restricted. [Added by Ord.
#1565, § 3459.3; amended by Ord. #2057, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #2208, § 1]
No person shall stand or park, when authorized signs are in place within
the City giving notice of the restriction, any commercial vehicle with a
manufacturer's gross vehicle rating of 10,000 pounds or more, at any time
on any street in the City of Compton. In accordance with California Vehicle
Code Section 350(a), a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) means the
weight specified by the manufacturer as the located weight of a single
vehicle.
a. Exceptions. Subsection 12-3.19 shall not apply to:
1. Emergency Vehicles. The parking, or standing of emergency
vehicles upon any street in the City.
2. Commercial Vehicles. The parking or standing of trucks owned or
operated by the City, public utilities, or waste removal companies;
any contractor or material mover, while engaged in the repair,
maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements, or
street utilities within the City.
3. Recreational Vehicles. The owner of recreational vehicles who
parks or stands such vehicles(s) owned by them on private property
which is also owned by them. The vehicle(s) shall be operational
and shall not constitute a public nuisance nor violate any other
provisions of the Compton Municipal Code.
4. Delivery of Goods. Commercial vehicles or trailers making pickups
or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from, or to, any
building or structure located on the restricted streets.
§ 12-3.17 COMPTON § 12-3.19
AO:548
§ 12-3.20. Parking of Vehicles Six Feet or More in Height Near
Intersections. [Added by Ord. #1565, § 3459.4; amended by Ord.
#2048, § 1; Ord. #2231, § 4]
§ 12-3.21. Parking of Unattached Trailer and Semitrailer is
Prohibited. [Added by Ord. #1565, § 3459.5]
No person shall park or leave unattended on any street or right-of-way
within the City of Compton any commercially licensed trailer or semitrailer
unless such vehicle is attached to a truck, tractor or to vehicle capable of
moving the trailer or semitrailer.
§ 12-3.22. Commercial Vehicles in Excess of 10,000 Pounds —
Restricted Parking in Residential Districts. [Added by Ord. #1565,
§ 3459.6; Ord. #2208, § 2]
No person shall stand or park, when authorized signs are in place within
the City giving notice of the restriction, any commercial vehicle with a
manufacturer's gross vehicle rating of 10,000 pounds or more, at any time
in a residential district. In accordance with California Vehicle Code Section
350(a), a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) means the weight specified
by the manufacturer as the located weight of a single vehicle. For the
purpose of this section, "residential district" is defined to include all areas
5. Delivery of Materials. Commercial vehicles or trailers using the
streets for the purpose of delivering material to be used in the
actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction
of any building or structure upon the restricted streets for which a
building permit has previously been obtained.
6. City Council Designated Locations and Times. At locations and for
the time period authorized by City Council and posted by the Street
Superintendent; where parking of commercial vehicles with a gross
weight of over 10,000 pounds is permitted overnight, illuminated
clearance lights or safety reflectors must be provided and utilized.
a. When authorized signs or markings are in place giving adequate notice
thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park, any vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, that is six feet or more in height, including any
load thereon, within 100 feet of an intersection.
b. Nothing contained within this section shall prohibit the parking,
standing or stopping of: emergency vehicles, buses engaged as a
common carrier at a designated bus stop; trucks owned or operated by
the City, public utilities or waste removal companies, contractors or
material movers, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or
construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within
the City; public or private school buses under the jurisdiction of the
California Public Utilities Commission; or, any person who is acting
under authority of a permit granted by the City Engineer or Street
Superintendent.
§ 12-3.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3.22
AO:549
in which any one of the following zoning classifications are applicable in
accordance with Chapter 30 of the Compton Municipal Code: R-A, R-L, R-M,
R-H.
§ 12-3.23. Penalty and Towing Provisions. [Added by Ord. #1565,
§ 3459.7; Ord. #2208, § 3; Ord. #2222, § 2]
§ 12-3.24. (Reserved)63
a. Exceptions. Subsection 12-3.22 shall not apply to:
1. Emergency Vehicles. The parking, or standing of emergency
vehicles upon any street in the City.
2. Commercial Vehicles. The parking or standing of trucks owned or
operated by the City, public utilities, or waste removal companies;
any contractor or material mover, while engaged in the repair,
maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements, or
street utilities within the City.
3. Recreational Vehicles. The owner of recreational vehicles who
parks or stands such vehicles(s) owned by them on private property
which is also owned by them. The vehicle(s) shall be operational
and shall not constitute a public nuisance nor violate any other
provisions of the Compton Municipal Code.
4. Delivery of Goods. Commercial vehicles or trailers making pickups
or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from, or to, any
building or structure located on the restricted streets.
5. Delivery of Materials. Commercial vehicles or trailers using the
streets for the purpose of delivering material to be used in the
actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction
of any building or structure upon the restricted streets for which a
building permit has previously been obtained.
6. City Council Designated Locations and Times. At locations and for
the time period authorized by City Council and posted by the Street
Superintendent; where parking of commercial vehicles with a gross
weight of over 10,000 pounds is permitted overnight, illuminated
clearance lights or safety reflectors must be provided and utilized.
a. Towing of Vehicles in Violation of the Law. In accordance with California
Vehicle Code Section 226512(n), a peace officer or regularly employed
and salaried employee, who is engaged in directing traffic or enforcing
parking laws and regulations of the City in which a vehicle is located is
hereby authorized to remove or cause to have removed any vehicle that
is parked or left standing in violation of the California Vehicle Code or
the Compton Municipal Code and where signs are posted giving notice
of removal for such violation. The procedure for removal and
impounding of vehicles shall be as set forth in California Vehicle Code
Sections 22850 et seq.
§ 12-3.22 COMPTON § 12-3.25
AO:550
§ 12-3.25. (Reserved)64
§ 12-3.26. Parking on Private Property Prohibited. [Ord. #856,
§ 3461]
No person shall park a vehicle in a private driveway or on private property
without the consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such
driveway or property.
§ 12-3.27. Driving or Parking on Private Property. [Ord. #856,
§ 3462; Ord. #1588, § 4; Ord. #1687, § 1; Ord. #1732, § 2]
No person shall enter, drive or park a vehicle on private property without
the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession
of such driveway or property.
§ 12-3.28. Emergency Parking Signs. [Ord. #856, § 3468]
§ 12-3.29. (Reserved)65
§ 12-3.30. Parking Prohibited Where Use of Street is Necessary for
Cleaning, Repair or Construction of Street or Installation of
Underground Utilities. [Ord. #2168, § 1]
a. Whenever the Traffic Authority shall determine that an emergency
traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private
assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the Traffic
Authority shall have the power and authority to order temporary signs
to be erected and posted indicating that the operation, parking or
standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the
Traffic Authority shall direct during the time such temporary signs are
in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of
such emergency and the Traffic Authority shall cause such signs to be
removed promptly thereafter.
b. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place
giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle
contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs.
a. Whenever the Traffic Authority or his authorized representative finds
and determines that the use of a street or highway, or portion thereof, in
the City is necessary for the cleaning (including street sweeping),
repair or construction of the highway or street, or for the installation of
63.Editor's Note: Former subsection 12-3.24, Peddlers and Vendors, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 856, 1361, 1396, 1588, 1732, 1751,
1764, 1769, 1996, 2002, 2008 and 2053, was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2243.
64.Editor's Note: Former subsection 12-3.25, Definitions, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1588 and 1679, was deleted in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2243.
65.Editor's Note: Subsection 12-3.29, Parking and Driving Commercial Vehicles in
Residential Areas, previously contained herein, has been repealed in entirety by Ord. No.
1759, § 1.
§ 12-3.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3.30
AO:551
§ 12-3.31. Vehicle Removal for Street Cleaning, Repair or
Construction or for Installation of Underground Utilities. [Ord.
#2168, § 2]
§ 12-4. IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
§ 12-4.1. Impounding Vehicles Obstructing Driveways. [Ord. #856,
§ 3463]
Any vehicle which is parked or left standing in or upon any private property
without the actual or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful
possession of such property, so as to block or obstruct any driveway or
other means of vehicular ingress or egress from such property, may be
removed and placed in any garage maintained by the City or in any public
garage or other place of safety for safekeeping by any police officer upon
the complaint of such owner or person in possession.
underground utilities, and that the parking or standing of vehicles
hereon would prohibit or interfere with such cleaning, repair,
construction or installation, he or she is authorized to erect or place
signs, or have signs erected or placed, on such street, highway or
portion, in the manner required and subject to the requirements of the
Vehicle Code of the State of California, giving notice that the parking or
standing of vehicles upon said street, highway or portion is forbidden
for the day and duration stated on such signs.
b. Upon and after the erection or placing of such signs thereon and until
said signs are removed, no person who owns or has possession, custody
or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle, or leave such vehicle
standing, upon the street or highway or portion thereof upon which said
signs are erected or placed.
a. Whenever he or she finds that it is or will be necessary for the cleaning,
repair or construction of any street or highway or portion thereof in the
City, or for the installation of underground utilities therein, to remove
vehicles illegally parked or left standing thereon in violation of
subsection 12-3.30 of this Code, the Traffic Authority or his authorized
representative is authorized to erect or place signs, or cause to be
erected or placed, on said street or highway or portion thereof, in the
manner provided and subject to the requirements of the Vehicle Code of
the State of California, giving notice that any vehicle illegally parked or
left standing thereon may be removed.
b. Upon and after the expiration of 24 hours from and after the time said
signs shall have been erected or placed on said street, highway or
portion thereof, any law enforcement officer with jurisdiction within the
City of Compton may remove from said street, highway or portion
thereof, in the manner provided and subject to the requirements of the
Vehicle Code of the State, any vehicle illegally parked or left standing
thereon in violation of subsection 12.3-30 of this Code.
§ 12-3.30 COMPTON § 12-4.2
AO:552
§ 12-4.2. Duty of Officers Impounding Vehicles. [Ord. #856, § 3464]
Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from private property pursuant to
the authority granted by subsection 12-4.1 of this section, and the officer
knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle
or from the registration records of the Department of Motor Vehicles of the
State the name and address of the owner thereof, such officer immediately
shall give, or cause to be given, notice in writing to such owner of the fact of
such removal, the reasons therefor, and the place to which such vehicle has
been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a
copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage.
§ 12-4.3. Impounding Vehicles: Garage Keeper's Liens. [Ord. #856,
§ 3465]
Whenever any vehicle has been removed to a garage pursuant to the
provisions of subsection 12-4.1 of this section, the keeper of such garage
shall have a lien dependent upon possession for his compensation for
towage and for caring for and keeping safe such vehicle for a period not
exceeding 90 days and, if such vehicle is not recovered by the owner within
said 90 days, or the owner is unknown, such garage keeper may satisfy his
lien in the manner provided by the Vehicle Code and the Civil Code of the
State.
§ 12-4.4. Impounding Vehicles Parked on Streets. [Ord. #856,
§ 3466; Ord. #1237]
Any vehicles which have been parked or left standing on any street, alley, or
public way for a period longer than 72 consecutive hours may be removed
by any police officer provided such officer complies with the provisions of
Section 22652 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California.
§ 12-5. SPEED LIMITS.
Section 21 of the California Vehicle Code declares that, unless expressly
authorized, all provisions of the Vehicle Code ("Code") shall be applicable
and uniform throughout the State and in all counties and municipalities.
Section 22352 of the Code establishes a prima facie speed limit of 25 miles
per hour on any highway other than a State highway, in any business or
residence district; however, whenever a local authority determines based
on an Engineering and Traffic Survey that a speed greater than 25 miles
per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and would be
reasonable and safe on a street, other than a State highway, Section 22357
of the Code explicitly authorizes a local authority by ordinance to determine
and declare a prima facie speed limit of 30 miles per hour to a maximum
speed limit of 65 miles per hour.
The higher prima facie speed limit established by the local authority shall
not become effective until signs giving notice of the prima facie speed limit
are erected on the affected street(s).
§ 12-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-5
AO:553
Additionally, Section 40902 of the Code, relating to "speed traps" requires
that the local authority must first conduct an Engineering and Traffic Study
in order to prosecute a speed violation based on the use of radar, laser
or other electronic device. The last Engineering and Traffic Survey was
conducted on behalf of the City approximately seven years ago and adopted
by the Council on June 22, 2010 pursuant to Ordinance No. 2, 210; thus,
the engineering firm of Evan Brooks Associates ("Brooks") was contracted
to perform an Engineering and Traffic Survey in 2016.
§ 12-5.1. Increasing State Speed Limits in Certain Zones. [Ord.
#856, § 3470; Ord. #860; Ord. #947; Ord. #975; Ord. #1031; Ord.
#1058; Ord. #1149; Ord. No. 2210; Ord. #2294]
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 22357 of the California Vehicle Code,
the City Council does hereby determine, upon the basis of an Engineering
and Traffic Survey that the speeds permitted by state laws upon the street
section set forth in this section are less than necessary to facilitate the
orderly movement of vehicular traffic in a reasonable and safe manner, and,
therefore, it is declared that, when appropriate signs are erected giving
notice thereof, the prima facie speed limits on said street sections shall be
as follows:
Name of Street of Portion Affected
Street From To
Declared Prima
Facie Speed
Limit
East Alameda
Street
Auto Drive Greenleaf
Boulevard
35
East Alameda
Street
Greenleaf
Boulevard
Compton
Boulevard
35
East Alameda
Street
Compton
Boulevard
Rosecrans
Avenue
35
East Alameda
Street
Rosecrans
Avenue
North City Limit 40
West Alameda
Street
South City Limit Greenleaf
Boulevard
40
West Alameda
Street
Greenleaf
Boulevard
Alondra
Boulevard
40
West Alameda
Street
Alondra
Boulevard
Compton
Boulevard
40
West Alameda
Street
Compton
Boulevard
Rosecrans
Avenue
40
West Alameda
Street
Rosecrans
Avenue
North City Limit 45
Alondra
Boulevard
West City Limit Wilmington
Avenue
40
§ 12-5 COMPTON § 12-5.1
AO:554
Name of Street of Portion Affected
Street From To
Declared Prima
Facie Speed
Limit
Alondra
Boulevard
Wilmington
Avenue
Alameda Street 40
Alondra
Boulevard
Alameda Street Long Beach
Boulevard
40
Alondra
Boulevard
Long Beach
Boulevard
East City Limit 40
Apra Street Victoria Street Acacia Avenue 45
Artesia
Boulevard (Eb)
Central Avenue Acacia Avenue 45
Artesia
Boulevard (Wb)
Central Avenue Acacia Avenue 45
Artesia
Boulevard
Acacia Avenue Santa Fe Avenue 45
Artesia
Boulevard
Santa Fe Avenue Susana/Harbor 45
Atlantic Avenue Alondra
Boulevard
South City Limit 35
Bradfield Avenue Rosecrans
Avenue
Compton
Boulevard
30
Bullis Road Compton
Boulevard
Rosecrans
Avenue
30
Bullis Road Rosecrans
Avenue
North City Limits 30
Central Avenue South City Limit Greenleaf
Boulevard
40
Central Avenue Greenleaf
Boulevard
Compton
Boulevard
40
Central Avenue Compton
Boulevard
Rosecrans
Avenue
40
Central Avenue Rosecrans
Avenue
North City Limit 45
Compton Avenue Slater Avenue El Segundo
Boulevard
35
Compton
Boulevard
West City Limit Wilmington
Avenue
35
Compton
Boulevard
Wilmington
Avenue
Acacia Avenue 35
§ 12-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-5.1
AO:555
Name of Street of Portion Affected
Street From To
Declared Prima
Facie Speed
Limit
Compton
Boulevard
Acacia Avenue Santa Fe Avenue 35
Compton
Boulevard
Santa Fe Avenue Bullis Road 40
Compton
Boulevard
Bullis Road East City Limit 40
El Segundo
Boulevard
Central Avenue Wilmington
Avenue
40
Greenleaf
Boulevard
Central Avenue Willowbrook
Avenue
35
Greenleaf
Boulevard
Willowbrook
Avenue
Long Beach
Boulevard
40
Greenleaf
Boulevard
Long Beach
Boulevard
East City Limit 35
Long Beach
Boulevard
South City Limit Alondra
Boulevard
40
Long Beach
Boulevard
Alondra
Boulevard
Compton
Boulevard
35
Long Beach
Boulevard
Compton
Boulevard
Rosecrans
Avenue
35
Long Beach
Boulevard
Rosecrans
Avenue
North City Limit 35
Manville Street West City Limit East City Limit 35
McMillan street Thorson Avenue East City Limit 25
Palmer Street Alameda Street Santa Fe Avenue 30
Palmer Street Santa Fe Avenue Long Beach
Boulevard
30
Parmelee Avenue 138th Street El Segundo
Boulevard
30
Rosecrans
Avenue
West City Limit Wilmington
Avenue
40
Rosecrans
Avenue
Wilmington
Avenue
Acacia Avenue 40
Rosecrans
Avenue
Acacia Avenue Santa Fe Avenue 40
Rosecrans
Avenue
Santa Fe Avenue Bullis Road 40
§ 12-5.1 COMPTON § 12-5.1
AO:556
Name of Street of Portion Affected
Street From To
Declared Prima
Facie Speed
Limit
Rosecrans
Avenue
Bullis Road East City Limit 40
Santa Fe Avenue Artesia Boulevard Greenleaf
Boulevard
40
Santa Fe Avenue Greenleaf
Boulevard
Alondra
Boulevard
40
Santa Fe Avenue Alondra
Boulevard
Compton
Boulevard
40
Santa Fe Avenue Compton
Boulevard
Rosecrans
Avenue
40
Santa Fe Avenue Rosecrans
Avenue
North City Limit 40
Victoria Street Wilmington
Avenue
Apra Street 40
Victoria Street Apra Street South City Limit 45
Walnut Street West City Limit Wilmington
Avenue
35
Walnut Street Wilmington
Avenue
Acacia Avenue 35
Willowbrook
Avenue (East)
Greenleaf
Boulevard
Alondra
Boulevard
30
Willowbrook
Avenue (East)
Alondra
Boulevard
Compton
Boulevard
30
Willowbrook
Avenue (East)
Compton
Boulevard
Rosecrans
Avenue
30
Willowbrook
Avenue (West)
Greenleaf
Boulevard
Alondra
Boulevard
30
Willowbrook
Avenue (West)
Alondra
Boulevard
Compton
Boulevard
35
Willowbrook
Avenue (West)
Compton
Boulevard
Rosecrans
Avenue
35
Wilmington
Avenue
South City Limit Greenleaf
Boulevard
35
Wilmington
Avenue
Greenleaf
Boulevard
Alondra
Boulevard
35
Wilmington
Avenue
Alondra
Boulevard
Compton
Boulevard
40
§ 12-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-5.1
AO:557
Name of Street of Portion Affected
Street From To
Declared Prima
Facie Speed
Limit
Wilmington
Avenue
Compton
Boulevard
Rosecrans
Avenue
35
Wilmington
Avenue
Rosecrans
Avenue
North City Limit 35
That appropriate speed limit signs shall be posted and/or changed,
immediately, as necessary.
§ 12-5.2. Decrease of State Law Maximum Speed. [Added by Ord.
#1058, § 3471; Ord. #1149; Ord. #1419]
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Council by the provisions of Section
511.3 of the Vehicle Code of the State, the Council determines, upon the
basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that the prima facie speed
limit of 55 miles per hour is more than is reasonable or safe under the
conditions found to exist upon such streets, and it is hereby declared that
the prima facie speed limit shall be as set forth on those streets or parts of
streets as follows:
Name of Street or Portion Affected Declared Prima Facie
Speed Limit
168th Street from the westerly City limits to
the easterly City limits
35 miles per hour
Alameda Street from Artesia Street to the
south City limits
40 miles per hour
Aranbe Avenue from Compton Boulevard to
Rosecrans Avenue
25 miles per hour
Central Avenue from the north City limits to
the south City limits
35 miles per hour
Compton Avenue from El Segundo Boulevard
to 136th Street
25 miles per hour
Greenleaf Drive from east roadway
Willowbrook to the east City limits
35 miles per hour
McMillan Street from Thorson Avenue east to
El Segundo Boulevard
25 miles per hour
Parmelee Avenue from El Segundo Boulevard
to 138th Street
25 miles per hour
Santa Fe Avenue from Alondra Boulevard to
Artesia Street
35 miles per hour
Wilmington Avenue from Compton Boulevard
to the south City limits
35 miles per hour
§ 12-5.1 COMPTON § 12-5.2
AO:558
Name of Street or Portion Affected Declared Prima Facie
Speed Limit
East roadway Willowbrook Avenue from
Palmer Avenue to Rosecrans Avenue
25 miles per hour
The speed limits set forth in this subsection on the streets, or portions
thereof, set forth in this subsection shall be the prima facie speed limits and
shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected
upon such streets, or portions thereof. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply in respect to any 25 mile per hour prima facie limit which
is applicable when passing a school building, or the grounds thereof, as
provided in Section 511 (b-2) of the Vehicle Code of the State.
With respect to any of the streets, or portions thereof, set forth in this
subsection, which streets are boundary line streets and highways, where
portions thereof are within jurisdictions other than the City, the provisions
of this subsection to that extent and to those boundary line streets and
highways, if any, shall not be effective unless and until all authorities having
jurisdictions of those portions of the streets or highways set forth in this
section have approved the same.
§ 12-5.3. Decrease of State Law Speed Between Districts. [Added by
Ord. #1058, § 3472]
Reference is hereby made to the following portions of streets where the
State speed law of 55 miles per hour is applicable for a distance of not
exceeding 2,000 feet in length between districts, either business or
residence, and it is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering
and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law upon the
following described portions of said streets which are not State highways is
greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon
the described portions of such streets, and is hereby declared that the prima
facie speed limit shall be as herein set forth on these portions of streets
herein designated when signs are erected giving notice thereof:
Portion of Street Affected
Not Exceeding 2,000 Feet
Between Districts
Declared Prima Facie Speed
Limit
__________ __________
__________ __________
__________ __________
§ 12-5.4. Regulation of Speed by Traffic Signals. [Added by Ord.
#1058, § 3473]
The City traffic authority is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic
signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe
manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable
§ 12-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-5.4
AO:559
within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs
giving notice thereof.
§ 12-5.5. Truck Routes. [Added by Ord. #1172, § 3474; Ord. #1943,
§ 2]
§ 12-5.6. Parking and Driving Commercial Vehicles in Residential
Areas. [Ord. #1759, § 1; Ord. #2049, § 1; Ord. #2222, § 3]
a. In accordance with subsections 12-2.30a through g, and when signs are
erected giving notice thereof, the following streets are hereby declared
to be limited truck traffic routes for the movement of vehicles
exceeding a maximum gross weight of 6,000 pounds:
Alameda Avenue – From north to south City limits.
Atlantic Avenue – From north to south City limits.
Long Beach Boulevard – From north to south City limits.
Santa Fe Avenue – From Artesia Boulevard to Alondra Boulevard.
Wilmington Avenue – From north to south City limits.
b. In accordance with subsections 12-2.30a through g, and when signs are
erected giving notice thereof, the following streets are hereby declared
to be unlimited truck traffic routes for the movement of vehicles
exceeding a maximum gross weight of 6,000 pounds:
Alondra Boulevard – From east to west City limits.
Artesia Boulevard – From east to west City limits.
Compton Boulevard – From Wilmington Avenue to west City limits.
El Segundo Boulevard – From Central Avenue to Wilmington Avenue.
Greenleaf Avenue – From Alameda Street to Long Beach Boulevard.
Rosecrans Avenue – From east to west City limits.
a. Definitions:
1. MOTOR VEHICLE – Shall mean a vehicle which is self-propelled.
2. VEHICLE – Shall mean a device by which any person or property
may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a
device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
3. TRAILER – Shall mean a vehicle designed for carrying persons or
property on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon any
other vehicle. "Trailer" includes a semitrailer when used in
§ 12-5.4 COMPTON § 12-5.6
AO:560
conjunction with an auxiliary dolly, if the auxiliary dolly is of a type
constructed to replace the function of the drawbar and the front
axle or axles of a trailer.
4. COMMERCE – Shall mean the exchange of goods, productions, or
property of any kind.
5. COMMERCIAL – Shall mean relating to or connected with trade
and traffic or commerce in general.
6. TRUCK TRACTOR – Shall mean a motor vehicle designed and used
primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to
carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load
so drawn.
7. TRUCK – Shall mean a motor vehicle designed, or maintained
primarily for the transportation of property.
8. PARK OR PARKING – Shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, otherwise temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers.
b. That it shall be unlawful for those vehicles outlined in paragraph a to
park, drive or otherwise use the public streets and private property in
residential areas.
c. That this Compton Municipal Code Section shall include but is not
limited to those commercial vehicles outlined in paragraph a designed
or operated for the transportation of property and whose body weight
or whose combined body and load weight exceeds 6,000 pounds.
Notwithstanding this paragraph, it shall be unlawful for those vehicles
defined in paragraph a to use or park on the public streets or private
property in residential areas.
d. The penalty for the violation of subsection 12-5.6 may include the
towing away of those vehicles or motor vehicles outlined in paragraph a
through c at the owner's expense when such towing is necessary in the
interest of public health, safety and welfare of the community.
e. Subsection 12-5.6 shall not prohibit:
1. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the City or
any bona fide delivery truck delivering or picking up merchandise.
2. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the City, public
utilities, any contractor or material mover, while engaged in the
repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street
improvements, or street utilities within the City.
3. The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in
any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the
street for which such detour is established.
§ 12-5.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-5.6
AO:561
§ 12-6. BAIL RATE SCHEDULE.
§ 12-6.1. Bail Rate Schedule. [Added by Ord. #1480; amended by
Ord. #1603, § 2; Ord. #1638, § 2; Ord. #1682, § 2; Ord. #1752, §§ 1,
2; Ord. #1870, § 1; Ord. #1911, § 1; Ord. #2077, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #2200,
§ 1; Ord. #2222, § 5]
4. The owner of recreational vehicles who park such vehicles owned
by them on private property also owned by them providing the
vehicle(s) is operational and does not constitute a public nuisance
nor violate any other provisions of the Compton Municipal Code.
a. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsections 8-6.3, 12-3.1, 12-3.5a and 12-3.5b of this Code
shall be punishable by the following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, the fine is $40; and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
in paragraph a1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40206, but before a Notice of
Intent is issued, $60 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $90 shall be assessed.
b. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsections 12-3.3a, 12-3.3b, 12-3.11, 12-3.12a, 12-3.12b,
12-3.12c, 12-3.12d, and 123.14 of this Code shall be punishable by the
following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $45 shall be assessed;
and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
in paragraph b1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40206 but before a Notice of Intent
is issued, $75 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $120 shall be assessed.
c. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsections 12-3.6a3 and 12-3.6a5 of this Code shall be
punishable by the following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $65 shall be assessed;
and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
in paragraph c1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
§ 12-5.6 COMPTON § 12-6.1
AO:562
California Vehicle Code Section 40206 but before a Notice of Intent
is issued, $100 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $120 shall be assessed.
d. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsections 12-2.9a, 12-2.9b, 12-2.12, 12-2.13, 12-2.14,
12-2.18 and 12-2.24 of this Code shall be punishable by the following
fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $50 shall be assessed;
and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
in paragraph d1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40206 but before a Notice of Intent
is issued, $70 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $105 shall be assessed.
e. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsections 12-2.21, 12-2.27a1 through 12-2.27a5, 12-2.29
and 12-2.41, of this Code shall be punishable by the following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $55 shall be assessed;
and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
in paragraph e1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40206 but before a Notice of Intent
is issued, $80 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $115 shall be assessed.
f. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary,
violation's of subsections 12-3.20, 12-2.23, and 12-2.25, of this Code
shall be punishable by the following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $80 shall be assessed;
and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
in paragraph f1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40206 but before a Notice of Intent
is issued, $100 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $130 shall be assessed.
g. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsections 12-2.2 and 12-2.37 of this Code shall be
punishable by the following fines:
§ 12-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-6.1
AO:563
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of the violation, $220 shall be
assessed; and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail posted as set forth in
paragraph g1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
Section 40206 of the Vehicle Code of the State but before a warrant
of arrest is issued, $240 shall be assessed; and
3. If a warrant of arrest is issued, $270 shall be assessed.
h. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsections 12-2.28, 12-2.40 and 12-2.42 of this Code shall
be punishable by the following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $40 shall be assessed;
and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
in paragraph h1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40206 but before a Notice of Intent
is issued, $60 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $90 shall be assessed.
i. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsections 12-3.10a and 12-3.10b of this Code shall be
punishable by the following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of the violation, $35 shall be assessed;
and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail posted as set forth in
paragraph i1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
Section 40206 of the Vehicle Code of the State but before a warrant
of arrest is issued, $65 shall be assessed; and
3. If a warrant of arrest is issued, $110 shall be assessed.
j. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsections 12-2.3, 12-2.19, 12-2.22 and 12-2.39 of this
Code shall be punishable by the following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of the violation, $40 shall be assessed;
and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail posted as set forth in
paragraph j1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
Section 40206 of the Vehicle Code of the State but before a warrant
of arrest is issued, $60 shall be assessed; and
§ 12-6.1 COMPTON § 12-6.1
AO:564
3. If a warrant of arrest is issued, $95 shall be assessed.
k. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsection 12-2.44 of this Code shall be punishable by the
following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of the violation, $45 shall be assessed;
and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail posted as set forth in
paragraph k1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
Section 40206 of the Vehicle Code of the State but before a warrant
of arrest is issued, $70 shall be assessed; and
3. If a warrant of arrest is issued, $105 shall be assessed.
l. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsection 9-16.8 of this Code shall be punishable by the
following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of the violation, $40 shall be assessed;
and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail posted as set forth in
paragraph l.1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
Section 40206 of the Vehicle Code of the State but before a Notice
of Intent is issued, $60 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $95 shall be assessed.
m. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsections 12-3.3c, 12-3.3d, 12-3.3e and 12-3.15 of this
Code shall be punishable by the following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $60 shall be assessed;
and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
in paragraph m1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40206 but before a Notice of Intent
is issued, $105 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $150 shall be assessed.
n. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsections 12-3.9 of this Code shall be punishable by the
following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $67.50; and
§ 12-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-6.1
AO:565
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
paragraph n1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40206 but before a Notice of Intent
is issued, $97.50 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $132.50 shall be assessed.
o. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsection 12-3.16 of this Code shall be punishable by the
following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $75 shall be assessed;
and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
in paragraph o1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40206 but before a Notice of Intent
is issued, $112.50 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of intent is issued, $147.50 shall be assessed.
p. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsections 12-3.6a1, 12-3.6a2, 12-3.6a4 of this Code shall
be punishable by the following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $90; and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
in paragraph p1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40206 but before a Notice of Intent
is issued, $142.50 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $162.50 shall be assessed.
q. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsection 12-2.16 of this Code shall be punishable by the
following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $67.50; and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
in paragraph q1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40206 but before a Notice of Intent
is issued, $97.50 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $132.50 shall be assessed.
r. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsection 12-2.30 of this Code shall be punishable by the
following fines:
§ 12-6.1 COMPTON § 12-6.1
AO:566
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $75 shall be assessed;
and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
in paragraph r1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40206 but before a Notice of Intent
is issued, $112.50 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $147.50 shall be assessed.
s. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsection 12-3.27 of this Code shall be punishable by the
following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $112.50 shall be
assessed; and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
in paragraph s1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40206 but before a Notice of Intent
is issued, $127.50 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $157.50 shall be assessed.
t. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsection 12-2.43 of this Code shall be punishable by the
following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $52.50 shall be assessed;
and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
in paragraph t1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40206 but before a Notice of Intent
is issued, $82.50 shall be assessed; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $112.50 shall be assessed.
u. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsections 12-2.33 and 12-2.34 of this Code shall be
punishable by the following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $30 shall be assessed;
and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail is posted as set forth
in paragraph u1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40206 but before a Notice of Intent
is issued, $50 shall be assessed; and
§ 12-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-6.1
AO:567
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $80 shall be assessed.
v. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsection 30-20.3(e)(4) of this Code shall be punishable
by the following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $45; and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail posted as set forth in
paragraph v1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
Section 40206 of the Vehicle Code of the State but before a Notice
of Intent is issued, $78; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $111 shall be assessed.
w. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsection 12-9.12a, of this Code shall be punishable by
the following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $52; and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail posted as set forth in
paragraph w1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
Section 40206 of the Vehicle Code of the State but before a Notice
of Intent is issued, $67; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $97 shall be assessed.
x. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary,
violation of subsections 12-3.17, 12-3.18, 12-3.19, 12-3.21 and 12-3.22,
of this Code shall be punishable by the following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $155; and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail posted as set forth in
paragraph x1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
Section 40206 of the Vehicle Code of the State but before a Notice
of Intent is issued, $255; and
3. If a Notice of intent is issued, $505 shall be assessed.
y. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary,
violations of subsections 12-5.6, of this Code shall be punishable by the
following fines:
1. If a court appearance is made or bail is posted within the time set
forth in the notice of citation of violation, $160; and
2. If no appearance is made nor the required bail posted as set forth in
paragraph y1 of this subsection after notice is given pursuant to
§ 12-6.1 COMPTON § 12-6.1
AO:568
§ 12-6.2. Fee for Collection of Delinquent Penalty Payments. [Ord.
#2237]
If the City incurs collection costs in conjunction with the assignment of a
parking citation for collection, that cost shall be added to the penalty and
the violator shall be liable to the City for both the civil penalties and the
collection costs, including administrative costs, civil service of process costs
and other direct costs.
Each person who is assessed a civil penalty under the provisions of this
section shall be assessed a separate civil penalty for each and every
violation and shall be liable for the cumulative amount of all such penalties
and collection costs.
§ 12-7. TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT AND TRIP
REDUCTION MEASURES.
§ 12-7.1. Definitions. [Added by Ord. #1889, § 1]
Wherever used in this section, the following words or phrases have the
following meanings:
ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION — Shall mean the use of modes of
transportation other than the single-passenger motor vehicle, including but
not limited to carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and
bicycling.
APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any development project that
is determined to meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria
contained in the Development Standards (subsection 12-7.2b) of the
Transportation Demand Management and Trip Reduction Measures set
forth in this section.
APPLICANT — Shall mean the property owner, developer or tenant
responsible for complying with the provisions of this section, as determined
by the property owner.
BUSPOOL — Shall mean a vehicle carrying 16 or more passengers
commuting on a regular basis to and from work with a fixed route and
according to a fixed schedule.
CARPOOL — Shall mean a vehicle carrying two to six persons commuting
together to and from work on a regular basis.
CONGESTION MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (CMP) — Shall mean a program
enacted by the California State Legislature as a new approach to addressing
congestion concerns. The CMP was created to link land use, transportation
and air quality decisions; to develop a partnership among transportation
decision makers on devising appropriate transportation solutions that
Section 40206 of the Vehicle Code of the State but before a Notice
of Intent is issued, $260; and
3. If a Notice of Intent is issued, $350 shall be assessed.
§ 12-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.1
AO:569
include all modes of travel, and to propose transportation projects which
are eligible to compete for State gas tax funds.
DEVELOPER — Shall mean the builder who is responsible for the planning,
design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer
may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this section, as
determined by the property owner.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the construction or addition of new building
square footage. Additions to buildings which existed prior to the adoption
of this section and which exceed the thresholds defined in the Development
Standards (subsection 12-7.2b) of the Transportation Demand Management
and Trip Reduction Measures set forth in this section shall comply with the
applicable requirements but shall not be added cumulatively with existing
square footage; existing square footage shall be exempt from these
requirements. All calculations shall be based on gross square footage.
EMPLOYEE PARKING AREA — Shall mean the portion of total required
parking at a development used by on-site employees. Unless specified
otherwise, employee parking shall be calculated as follows:
Type of Use Total Required Parking Devoted
to Employees
Commercial 30%
Office/Professional 85%
Industrial/Manufacturing 90%
LAND USE ANALYSIS PROGRAM — Shall mean the program insuring
that local jurisdictions consider the regional transportation impact of new
development through the land use approval process.
LOS ANGELES COUNTY METROPOLITAN TRANSPORTATION AUTHORITY
(MTA) — Shall mean the agency responsible for providing transportationrelated
services to the traveling public of Los Angeles County.
PREFERENTIAL PARKING — Shall mean parking spaces designated or
assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings for carpool and
vanpool vehicles carrying commute passengers on a regular basis, that
are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than
parking spaces provided for single-occupant vehicles.
PROPERTY OWNER — Shall mean the legal owner of a development who
serves as the lessor to a tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for
complying with the provisions of this section either directly or by delegating
such responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or the tenant's agent.
SOUTH COAST AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — Shall mean the
regional authority appointed by the California State Legislature to meet
Federal standards and otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air
Basin (the non-desert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San
Bernardino Counties).
§ 12-7.1 COMPTON § 12-7.1
AO:570
TENANT — Shall mean the lessee of facility space at an applicable
development project.
THE CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA) — Shall mean
the statute that requires all jurisdictions in the State to evaluate the extent
of environmental degradation posed by proposed development.
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM) — Shall mean the
alteration of travel behavior, usually on the part of commuters, through
programs of incentives, services and policies. TDM addresses alternatives
to single-occupant vehicles, such as carpooling and vanpooling, and
changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or
eliminate them altogether (as in the case of telecommuting or compressed
work weeks).
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS GUIDELINES (TIA GUIDELINES)
— Shall mean guidelines intended to assist local agencies in evaluating
impacts of land use decisions on the CMP system. TIA Guidelines are based
on specified requirements of the CMP and travel data sources available
specifically for Los Angeles County.
TRIP REDUCTION — Shall mean reduction in the number of work-related
trips made by single-occupant vehicles.
VANPOOL — Shall mean a vehicle carrying seven or more persons
commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a
vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven to 15 adult
passengers and on a prepaid subscription basis.
VEHICLE — Shall mean any motorized form of transportation, including but
not limited to automobiles, vans, buses and motorcycles.
§ 12-7.2. Transportation Demand Management and Trip Reduction
Measures. [Added by Ord. #1889, § 2]
In order to encourage carpooling, vanpooling, transit ridership and use of
non-motorized transportation, the following measures are adopted:
a. Applicability of Requirements. Prior to approval of any development
project, the applicant shall make provision for, as a minimum, all of the
following applicable transportation demand management and trip
reduction measures. This section shall not apply to projects for which a
development application has been deemed "complete" by the City
pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, or for which a Notice of
Preparation (NOP) for a Draft Environmental Impact Report has been
circulated pursuant to the requirements of CEQA or for which an
application for a building permit has been received prior to the effective
date of this section. All facilities and improvements constructed or
otherwise required shall be maintained in a state of good repair.
b. Development Standards.
1. Nonresidential development of 25,000 square feet or more shall
provide the following to the satisfaction of the City:
§ 12-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.2
AO:571
(a) A bulletin board, display case or kiosk displaying
transportation information located where the greatest number
of employees are likely to see it. Information in the area shall
include, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit
routes servicing the site.
(2) Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation
information including numbers for the regional
ridesharing agency and local transit operators.
(3) Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuteroriented
organizations.
(4) Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/
local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information.
(5) A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers,
bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site.
2. Nonresidential development of 50,000 square feet or more shall
comply with the requirements of item b1 immediately preceding
and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of
the City:
(a) Not less than 10% of employee parking area shall be located as
close as is practical to the employee entrance(s), and shall be
reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles without
displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This
preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be identified on
the site plan upon application for building permit, to the
satisfaction of the City. A statement that preferential carpool/
vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description
of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on
the required transportation information board. Spaces will be
signed/striped as demand warrants; provided that all times at
least one space for projects of 50,000 square feet to 100,000
square feet and two spaces for projects over 100,000 square
feet will be signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles.
(b) Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be
accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking
structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet
two inches shall be provided for those spaces and accessways
to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radii and
parking space dimensions shall also be included in vanpool
parking areas.
(c) Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided
to accommodate four bicycles per the first 50,000 square feet
of development and one per each additional 50,000 square feet
§ 12-7.2 COMPTON § 12-7.2
AO:572
§ 12-7.3. Land Use Analysis Program. [Added by Ord. #1889, § 3]
In order to analyze the impacts of land use decisions on the regional
transportation system, including an estimate of the cost of mitigating
associated impacts, the following program is adopted:
of development. Calculations which result in a fraction of 0.5
or higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A
bicycle parking facility may also be a fully enclosed space or
locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle
which protects the bike from inclement weather. Specific
facilities and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers or
locked room) shall be to the satisfaction of the City.
3. Nonresidential development of 100,000 square feet or more shall
comply with the requirements of paragraphs b1 and b2
immediately preceding and shall provide all of the following
measures to the satisfaction of the City:
(a) A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool
vehicles may deliver or board their passengers.
(b) Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and
safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to
each building in the development.
(c) If determined necessary by the City to mitigate the project, bus
stop improvements must be provided. The City will consult
with the local bus service providers in determining appropriate
improvements. When locating bus stops and/or planning
building entrances, entrances must be designed to provide safe
and efficient access to nearby transit stations/stops.
(d) Safe and convenient access from the external circulation
system to bicycle parking facilities on-site.
a. Land Use Analysis Program. All development projects for which an
Environmental Impact Report (EIR) is required to be prepared shall be
subject to the Land Use Analysis Program contained in the Los Angeles
County CMP, and shall incorporate into the EIR an analysis of the
project's impacts on the regional transportation system. Said analysis
shall be conducted consistent with the TIA Guidelines contained in the
most recent CMP adopted by the MTA.
b. Review of Transit Impacts. Prior to approval of any development project
for which an EIR will be prepared pursuant to the requirements of
CEQA or based on a local determination, regional and municipal fixedroute
transit operators providing service to the project shall be
identified and consulted with. Projects for which a NOP for a Draft EIR
has been circulated pursuant to the provisions of CEQA prior to the
effective date of this section shall be exempted from its provisions. The
"Transit Impact Review Worksheet" contained in the Los Angeles
§ 12-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.3
AO:573
§ 12-7.4. Monitoring and Enforcement. [Added by Ord. #1889, § 4]
In order to insure that TDM requirements are being implemented, the
following provisions are adopted:
§ 12-8. PARKING METERS.
§ 12-8.1. Parking Meter Zone Established. [Ord. #1910, § 1]
All streets within the City of Compton are hereby declared to be within
a parking meter zone. In the event a parking meter is placed or installed
as herein provided along the curb adjacent to any parking space in such
zone, the provisions of this section shall regulate parking in such parking
space, provided, however that in the event no parking meter is so placed or
installed adjacent to any parking space within such zone, then the maximum
time for parking in any such space shall be that which is permitted or
provided for under the provisions of this Code applicable to such space.
Within a parking meter zone no parking meter shall be installed adjacent
County CMP Manual, or similar worksheets, shall be used in assessing
impacts. Pursuant to the provisions of CEQA, transit operators shall be
sent a NOP for all contemplated EIRs and shall, as part of the NOP
process, be given opportunity to comment on the impacts of the project,
to identify recommended transit service or capital improvements which
may be required as a result of the project and to recommend mitigation
measures which minimize automobile trips on the CMP network.
Impacts and recommended mitigation measures identified by the
transit operator shall be evaluated in the Draft EIR prepared for the
project. Related mitigation measures adopted shall be monitored
through the mitigation monitoring requirements of CEQA. Phased
development projects, development projects subject to a development
agreement or developed projects requiring subsequent approvals need
not repeat this process as long as no significant changes are made
to the project. It shall remain the discretion of the lead agency to
determine when a project is substantially the same and therefore
covered by a previously certified EIR.
a. Monitoring. To effectively monitor compliance with TDM development
standards, a program requiring that inspection of a development site
prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy will be instituted for all
development projects. In addition, review and approval of a plot plan
for those development projects contained in paragraphs b2 and b3 of
the Development Standards (subsection 12-7.2b) of the Transportation
Demand Management and Trip Reduction Measures set forth in this
section will be required as part of the plan check process for issuance of
building permits.
b. Enforcement. To effectively enforce compliance with TDM development
standards, the provisions of this section will be enforced by the City's
Code Enforcement Unit.
§ 12-7.3 COMPTON § 12-8.1
AO:574
to any parking place abutting upon a piece of property zoned either R-L or
R-M.
§ 12-8.2. Installation of Parking Meters. [Ord. #1910, § 2]
The Transportation Authority is hereby authorized and directed to install
or cause to be installed, parking meters in all parking meter zones hereby
established or hereafter created by the Council of the City of Compton, in
such numbers as may be designated by said Council and in such places in
parking meter zones as may be determined by said Council to be necessary
to the regulation, control and inspection of the parking of vehicles therein;
said determination shall be based upon good traffic engineering principles,
traffic investigation and surveys made from time to time by the
Transportation Authority. All meters shall be installed immediately adjacent
to the respective parking spaces which they are designated to regulate.
§ 12-8.3. Parking Meter Charge and Operation. [Ord. #1910, § 3]
Parking meters may be installed in all public streets in all or any part of
parking meter zones. Each such parking meter installed in a public street
shall be of such type as to display a signal showing legal parking upon
the deposit therein of one or more five $0.05, $0.10, or $0.25 coins of the
United States of America. Each such meter shall by its device provide six
minutes of parking upon the deposit of a $0.05 coin; 30 minutes parking
upon the deposit of a $0.25 coin; and one hour parking upon the deposit
of two $0.25 coins, except that such coins shall purchase less time to the
extent that the maximum time limit on the meter is less. Each such meter
shall be so arranged that, upon the expiration of said parking time, it will
indicate by mechanical operation and the showing of a proper signal that
the lawful parking period has expired. Depending on the traffic flow and
turnover characteristics of any street, the Transportation Authority shall set
the maximum parking time limit for each meter at no less than six minutes
and no more than one hour. Shorter time limit meters shall be used where
it is necessary to ensure parking turnover around mercantile and service
establishments, and long-term meters shall be used where it is necessary
to regulate indefinite-term and all-day parking. Such meters shall be placed
upon the curb alongside of, and next to, parking spaces. Such parking
spaces shall be of sufficient size to accommodate a motor vehicle and shall
indicate parallel or diagonal parking by painted lines on the pavement. For
any parking space adjacent to any curb which may be painted green the
maximum parking limit shall be 20 minutes, and the parking meters shall
be adjusted and installed accordingly.
§ 12-8.4. Public Parking Lots and Structures. [Ord. #1910, § 4]
Parking meters of the type described in this section may be installed in any
publicly operated and owned parking lot or parking structure, and the same
rates shall apply.
§ 12-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-8.5
AO:575
§ 12-8.5. Hours of Operation. [Ord. #1910, § 5]
The provisions of this section governing the operation of parking meters
and parking structures shall be effective during the hours of the respective
days, as follows:
§ 12-8.6. Maintenance and Repair of Parking Meters. [Ord. #1910,
§ 6]
The Transportation Authority is hereby authorized and directed to repair,
maintain, replace and otherwise keep said parking meters in good working
order and condition at all times or cause the same to be done.
§ 12-8.7. Parking Meter Spaces To Be Indicated and Maintained.
[Ord. #1910, § 7]
The Transportation Authority shall cause distinct lines or markings to be
painted or placed, replaced and maintained upon the curb or roadway
adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking
meter space for which said meter is to be used. Said lines or markings shall
be painted or placed as to permit parking in the manner provided by the
Vehicle Code of the State of California.
a. On each Monday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
b. On each Tuesday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
c. On each Wednesday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
d. On each Thursday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
e. On each Friday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
f. On each Saturday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
g. On each Sunday - not effective.
h. In the event any of the above mentioned days falls upon a legal holiday,
the provisions of this section shall not be effective on such legal holiday.
a. No other officer, board or department of this City, and no private agency
or person, shall repair, maintain or replace any parking meter within
the purview of this chapter except upon the order of the Transportation
Authority.
b. All persons engaged in repairing, maintaining, replacing or otherwise
working upon said parking meters shall bear identification showing that
such persons are authorized to do such repair, maintenance or
replacement work.
a. It shall be unlawful when such lines or markings are in place for any
person to park, stop or stand any vehicle other than completely within
the confines or limits of such parking meter space.
§ 12-8.5 COMPTON § 12-8.8
AO:576
§ 12-8.8. Time of Parking in Parking Meter Zones. [Ord. #1910, § 8]
The maximum legal parking time for each portion of the area or areas
described in subsection 12-8.7 hereof shall be as determined from time to
time by the Transportation Authority. Said determination shall be based
upon good traffic engineering principles, traffic investigation and surveys
made from time to time.
§ 12-8.9. Parking Meters-Times for Operation. [Ord. #1910, § 9]
Provisions of this section which require deposit of coins in parking meters
located on City streets shall apply at such times and hours as may be
determined from time to time by the Transportation Authority, based upon
engineering and traffic investigation. Such times and hours shall be
indicated by signs or on the parking meter; provided however, that the
Transportation Authority may, in its discretion, from time to time prohibit
all parking in areas included in the parking meter zones during times of
emergency by causing the appropriate "NO PARKING" signs to be posted.
§ 12-8.10. Operation of Parking Meters. [Ord. #1910, § 10]
Every parking meter shall also be so arranged that upon the expiration of
the parking time for which said coins have been deposited, it will indicate
by proper signal that the lawful parking time has expired. Every parking
meter shall indicate the legal parking time which has been or may be
established for that area or zone of the street upon which said parking
meter is installed.
§ 12-8.11. Parking Meters-Deposit of Coins. [Ord. #1910, § 11]
When the operator of a vehicle parks such vehicle in the parking zone
on a public street, he/she shall immediately deposit in the parking meter
adjacent thereto lawful money of the United States in the amount of the
hourly rate established and provided therefor in subsection 12-8.3 of this
section in accordance with the payment schedule adopted by the
Transportation Authority for said meter, as indicated by appropriate signs
on the meter itself.
a. Said maximum legal parking time in parking meter zones shall not be in
excess of the maximum legal parking time as prescribed and
determined and posted by said commissioners or by such other
department or bureau authorized to so determine and so post, as
provided elsewhere in this section.
b. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed or construed to permit
parking during times of hours prohibited elsewhere in this section.
§ 12-8.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-8.12
AO:577
§ 12-8.12. Collection of Coins from Parking Meters. [Ord. #1910,
§ 12]
The Transportation Authority shall make or cause to be made regular
collections of the money deposited in the coin containers in said parking
meters by uniformed collectors and shall count or cause to be counted the
money contained therein and deliver the same into the City Treasury.
§ 12-8.13. Parking Meters and Parking Meter Standards Not to Be
Used for Certain Purposes. [Ord. #1910, § 13]
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach anything or to allow a bicycle,
news rack or any other article or thing to lean against a parking meter or a
parking meter standard.
§ 12-8.14. Improper Use or Misuse of Meters. [Ord. #1910, § 14]
It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter
any defaced or bent coin, slug, device, metallic or other substitute for any
coins of the United States of America, or for any person to deface, injure,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any
parking meter, or to place any foreign matter or substance in said parking
meter or any part thereof.
§ 12-8.15. Extending Parking Time. [Ord. #1910, § 15]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in
a parking meter any coin for the purpose of increasing or extending the
parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been
established by the Transportation Authority for the parking space adjacent
to which said meter is placed.
§ 12-8.16. Failure to Deposit Coins. [Ord. #1910, § 16]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to cause, allow, permit or
suffer to be parked, a vehicle in any parking meter space without
immediately depositing or causing to be deposited a coin or coins in the
parking meter as provided by subsection 12-8.3, provided, however,
that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle
described in subsection 12-2.5 of this Code or Section 22511.5(B)(2) of
the California Vehicle Code.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any
vehicle to remain in any parking meter space for more than the time
indicated by proper signs placed on such parking meter indicating the
maximum parking time allowed in such parking meter space, or during
any time the parking meter is indicating that the time has elapsed for
which coins of the United States of America have been deposited in said
parking meter, provided, however, that the provisions of this section
shall not apply to any vehicle described in subsection 12-2.5 of this
Code or Section 22511.5(B)(2) of the California Vehicle Code.
§ 12-8.12 COMPTON § 12-9
AO:578
§ 12-9. PREFERENTIAL PERMIT PARKING PROGRAM.66
§ 12-9.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2298 § 1]
This section is enacted pursuant to authority granted by California Vehicle
Code §§ 22507 and 22507.5, to alleviate serious problems in certain
residential areas of the City due, in part, to the misuse of available off-street
parking, the parking of motor vehicles on streets therein by nonresidents
thereof for extended periods of time, and the ignoring of public transit
alternatives to automobile travel available to said nonresidents, resulting in
neighborhood decline in said areas by reason of traffic congestion, noise,
air pollution, traffic hazards and inability of residents therein to park their
motor vehicles near their residences.
§ 12-9.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2298 § 1]
CITY COUNCIL — City Council of the City of Compton.
GUEST — A person who visits or is employed by an occupant of a dwelling
unit located in a preferential parking district.
HOLIDAYS — Within the meaning of this Section, holidays are as defined in
California Government Code, Section 6700, as it may be amended from time
to time.
NON-RESIDENT VEHICLE — A motor vehicle parked in a residential area
which is neither owned, leased or otherwise controlled by a resident who
lives in the area designated as a preferential parking district nor by a guest
visiting a resident living in a preferential parking district.
PARKING RESTRICTION — The amount of time and/or time of day vehicles
may park on the street in a preferential residential parking district. Such
restrictions may include, without limitation, "one hour parking except by
permit", "two hour parking except by permit", "no parking except by
permit", and "no parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. except by permit".
PREFERENTIAL PARKING DISTRICT — "Preferential parking area" means
an area designated as herein provided wherein motor vehicles displaying a
valid permit as described herein shall be exempt from the time limit parking
regulations, which would otherwise be applicable.
RESIDENT — A person who lives in a dwelling unit located in a preferential
parking district.
§ 12-9.3. Designation and Termination of Districts. [Ord. #2298 § 1]
a. The process for designating a Preferential Parking district may be
initiated by petition or a motion of the City Council.
b. The City Clerk shall provide petition forms for preferential parking
districts. Such petition shall be established by resolution of the City
Council.
66.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ord. #s 2166, 2206, 2213, 2222.
§ 12-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-9.3
AO:579
c. Proceedings for designating a preferential parking district may be
initiated by petition containing the signatures of at least 2/3 of the
residents of all units of occupancy fronting curbs proposed to be
included in the district. The petition shall indicate and set forth the
positive desire of all signators for preferential parking privileges and
their willingness to assume all associated administrative and
enforcement costs, by affixing their signature, printed name, and
address to the petition calling for the creation of a district. The petition
shall be distributed and presented to the City Clerk by advocates of
such district's creation.
d. After a petition meeting the eligibility requirements is received by the
City Clerk, the petition shall be forwarded to the City Manager and/or
designee (i.e., City Engineer) for a survey or studies as necessary. The
City Manager and/or designee shall notify the applicant whether the
establishment of a residential preferential parking district would be
recommended to the City Council.
e. Upon recommendation of the City Manager and/or designee, the City
Council shall set a place for a public hearing on the proposed district.
The City Clerk shall mail notice of the hearing at least 10 days prior to
the hearing to all property owners, residents and commercial occupants
within the proposed district and within 400 feet of the boundaries of
such district, measured from the outer edges of the rights-of-way
constituting the outer district boundaries.
f. Following the receipt of the petition, and following the public hearing,
the City Council shall determine if the district is to be designated for
preferential parking. That determination shall be based upon, but not
limited to, substantial compliance with the following guidelines:
1. High Demand. More than 75% of on-street spaces are occupied
during period proposed for parking restriction or prohibition. In
cases where a time limit parking restriction or parking prohibition
is already in place, the City Manager or his/her designee shall use
reasonable judgment as to whether the demand criteria would
likely be met without the restriction or prohibition.
2. Self-Contained Area. The district, alone or in combination with
other existing or potential preferential parking districts,
constitutes a reasonably self-contained area of parking demand and
supply. City Manager or his/her designee shall make the
determination of a reasonably self-contained area, utilizing
boundaries such as major streets, nonresidential land uses, edges
of higher or lower density residential areas, waterbodies and other
natural features; and utilizing surveys of existing conditions to
determine extent of area impacted by nonresident parking. City
Manager or his/her designee shall designate each such selfcontained
preferential parking district with a unique letter or
combination of letters, which shall be the official designation of
said district. The purpose of this designation process is to ensure
§ 12-9.3 COMPTON § 12-9.3
AO:580
§ 12-9.4. Termination of a Preferential Permit Parking District.
[Ord. #2298 § 1]
§ 12-9.5. Permit Issuance. [Ord. #2298 § 1]
that proposed preferential parking districts are of sufficient size as
to reasonably encompass the problem area and to offer sufficient
on-street parking spaces to provide reasonable opportunity for
residents to obtain parking.
3. The interference by non-resident vehicles has occurred at regular
and significant daily or weekly intervals.
4. A shortage of reasonably available and convenient residentialrelated
parking spaces exists in the area of the proposed district.
5. If the district is proposed solely for daytime preferential parking,
the following guidelines shall apply: Nonresidential users. More
than 50% of vehicles parked at curbside during the period
proposed for parking restriction or prohibition are owned by
nonresidents of the district. In cases where a time limit parking
restriction or prohibition is already in place, the City Manager or
his/her designee shall use reasonable judgment as to whether the
demand criteria would likely be met without the restriction or
prohibition.
6. Such additional criteria may be applied as the City Council may
deem and identify as reasonably related to the designation of such
districts.
a. Once a resolution establishing a residential preferential parking district
is established, parking permits must be issued to at least 50% of
residents in the district before signs will be installed designating the
preferential parking district. If the minimum number of permits is not
obtained within 60 days, or the number of permit holders drops below
50% following annual permit renewals, the residential preferential
parking district may be terminated by resolution of the City Council at a
public hearing noticed as described above.
b. The City Council may terminate a preferential parking district upon
receipt of a petition calling for such termination which has been
received and transmitted by the City Clerk, and contains signatures and
the corresponding printed name and address representing a majority
(50% plus one) of the dwelling units in the district. The City Council
may also terminate such district, without petition, based upon, but not
limited to, any changes in the criteria upon which the original
designation was based.
a. The Business License Division shall issue preferential parking permits.
Preferential parking permits shall be of three types:
1. Residential preferential parking permits.
§ 12-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-9.5
AO:581
§ 12-9.6. Permit Application and Term. [Ord. #2298 § 1]
2. Guest preferential parking permits.
3. Temporary preferential parking permits.
b. Except for guest preferential parking permits, no more than one permit
shall be issued for each vehicle for which application is made. Each
permit issued shall reflect by statements thereon or by color thereof, or
both, the particular preferential parking district for which the permit is
issued and, except for guest preferential parking permits, the permit
shall reflect the license number of the vehicle for which the permit is
issued.
c. Preferential parking permits may be issued only for passenger vehicles,
pickup trucks, and vans, and only upon application of a person whose
legal address is on a street, or portion thereof, designated as part of a
preferential parking district in subsection 12-9.13.
d. Preferential permits may be issued as follows:
1. Up to three residential permits may be purchased per address. For
each residential permit, proof of residency and registered
ownership or exclusive use and control of a vehicle shall be
demonstrated in a manner determined by the Business License
Division. The applicant shall provide the vehicle license plate
number and such additional information as the Business License
Division deems necessary for the proper processing of the
application.
2. One guest parking permit may be purchased per address. A guest
parking permit may be issued to a person whose legal address is on
a street, or portion thereof, designated as part of a preferential
parking district in subsection 12-9.13. Use of a guest permit is
limited to visitors and providers of services to the applicant or the
applicant's residence and is not limited to a particular vehicle. The
applicant is responsible for the proper use of the guest parking
permit.
3. Temporary preferential parking permits may be issued for bona
fide guests of residents of a preferential parking district provided
that such permits shall be valid for no more than seven consecutive
days.
a. Except for temporary preferential parking permits, each preferential
parking permit shall be issued by the Business License Division on a
calendar year basis, and each such permit shall expire at midnight
(12:00 a.m.), December 31 next following its issuance. Permits may be
renewed annually by mail. Each application or reapplication shall
contain such information as the Business License Division deems
necessary for the proper processing of the application. The application
shall also contain a statement to the effect that the applicant agrees
§ 12-9.5 COMPTON § 12-9.6
AO:582
§ 12-9.7. Permit Fee. [Ord. #2298 § 1]
Applications for issuance of initial permits, renewal permits, transfer
permits in the case of a holder of a permit in one preferential parking
district moving to another preferential parking district and desiring a new
permit for the latter district, or a replacement permit in the case of a lost
or mutilated permit, shall be filed with the Business Licensing Division and
shall be accompanied by such fee therefore as may be established from time
to time by resolution of the City Council. The fee charged for permits issued
for less than 12 months may be reduced in proportion to the time already
elapsed in the current calendar year for which the permit would be valid.
The Business Licensing Division shall not issue a replacement permit unless
the Business License Division has received satisfactory evidence that the
permit being replaced has been lost or mutilated.
§ 12-9.8. Permits Display. [Ord. #2298 § 1]
Residential parking permits shall be firmly attached to the left side of the
rear bumper of the vehicle for which the permit is issued so as to be readily
visible to a person approaching the vehicle from the rear thereof. Guest
permits or temporary permits shall be displayed from the rear-view mirror
or by such other method as directed in instructions contained on the permit
itself.
§ 12-9.9. Permits Revocation or Fine for Misuse. [Ord. #2298 § 1]
that the permit applied for may not be sold or transferred in any
manner, except that a guest permit may be used by various visitors and
service people to the applicant's residence. The application shall also
state that the sale or transfer of a permit in violation of this section shall
be subject to a fine in the amount of $100, and that any misuse of any
permit issued under this section is grounds for revocation of the permit
by the Business License Division pursuant to this section.
b. An application may be submitted by either the owner of the property for
which a permit is sought or the tenant of such property, but in the case
of applications submitted by tenants, the owner of the property shall
also be required to sign the application form.
a. The Business License Division is authorized to revoke a preferential
parking permit or a guest parking permit of any person found to be in
violation of any of the provisions of this Section and, upon the written
notification thereof, such person shall surrender the permit to the
Business License Division or prove its destruction or disfigurement.
Additionally, the sale or transfer of a permit in violation of this section
shall constitute an infraction punishable by fine per Compton Municipal
Code Section 1-6.3.
b. Any person whose preferential parking permit has been revoked shall
not be issued a new permit until expiration of a period of one year
following the date of revocation and until such person has made
§ 12-9.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-9.9
AO:583
§ 12-9.10. Sign Posting. [Ord. #2298 § 1]
The City Manager or his/her designee shall place and maintain or cause
to be placed and maintained on each of the streets, or portions of streets,
designated in subsection 12-9.13, appropriate signs notifying the public that
vehicles must display preferential parking permits as well as showing the
applicable time limits for parking of vehicles without said permits.
§ 12-9.11. Enforcement Hours/Overnight Parking Prohibited. [Ord.
#2298 § 1]
Preferential parking referenced in this section shall be in effect and
enforced on such days of the week and during such time periods as shall be
determined by the City Council when designating each preferential parking
district.
§ 12-9.12. Parking Privileges for Permit Holders. [Ord. #2298 § 1]
Any passenger vehicle, pickup truck or van properly displaying valid,
unrevoked preferential parking permits may be parked on any of the
streets, or portions of streets, designated in subsection 12-9.10 for which
said permits have been issued without being limited by time restrictions
on parking, other than those in effect for purposes of street sweeping or
of prohibiting parking or stopping at any time or of prohibiting parking
more than 72 consecutive hours, set forth in this Chapter and applicable
generally to parking of vehicles. Preferential parking permits shall not
guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof any on-street parking space.
§ 12-9.13. Areas Designated. [Ord. #2298 § 1]
Such areas shall be designated by resolution. Upon designation as a
preferential parking area, motor vehicles displaying a valid parking permit
may stand or be parked without limitation by parking time zone and
regulations except as specifically set forth in the resolution designating
preferential parking areas.
§ 12-9.14. Violations Designated. [Ord. #2298 § 1]
required application therefore and has paid the fee required for a
renewal permit.
a. No person shall falsely represent himself or herself as eligible for
preferential parking permits or furnish false information in an
application therefore to the Business License Division.
b. No person shall park or leave standing in a Preferential Parking District
a motor vehicle on which is displayed a preferential parking permit,
which has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this Section for a
different passenger vehicle, pickup truck, or van.
§ 12-9.9 COMPTON § 12-9.14
AO:584
§ 12-9.15. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #2298 § 1]
The Business License Division may, from time to time, promulgate rules and
regulations, consistent with the purpose and provisions of this section, to
facilitate implementation of this section, which rules and regulations may
include, but need not be limited to, procedures for the application for and
issuance and renewal of permits hereunder and provision for a limitation of
the number of permits that may be issued per dwelling unit.
Chapter 13
AIRPORT CODE
§ 13-1. ADOPTION OF COUNTY AIRPORT CODE. [Added by Ord.
#1374, § 3800]
The Airport Code of the County, being Ordinance No. 9979, adopted by the
Board of Supervisors of the County, effective April 24, 1970, three copies of
which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby adopted as though
set forth in this section in full.
Chapter 14
BUILDING AND HOUSING
Editor's Note: For statutory provisions authorizing cities to adopt
Codes by reference, see Gov. Code § 50022.1 et seq.; for State law
adopting Building Codes and other Codes to apply as housing
construction regulations, see Health and Safety Code, § 17922.
§ 14-1. BUILDING CODE.67
c. No person shall copy, produce, or otherwise bring into existence a
facsimile or counterfeit preferential parking permit without written
authorization of the Business License Division.
d. No person shall park or leave standing in a Preferential Parking District
a motor vehicle on which is displayed a facsimile or counterfeit
preferential parking permit.
e. No person whose preferential parking permit has been revoked shall
refuse or fail to surrender the permit to the Business License Division
when requested in writing, to do so.
67.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1956 repealed and replaced subsections 14-1.1 through
14-1.9 and 14-1.35. Prior ordinance history for these subsections include portions of
Ordinance Nos. 856, 909, 1169, 1261, 1310, 1316, 1354, 1394, 1412, 1529, 1605, 1803,
1820, 1898.
§ 12-9.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.1
AO:585
§ 14-1.1. Adoption of the California Building Code. [Ord. #1956,
§ 1; Ord. #2012, § 1; Ord. #2066, § 1]
That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of
the City Clerk, being marked and designated as the "2001 Edition of the
California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2" (hereafter the "Building Code"),
published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby
adopted as the Code of the City of Compton for regulating the erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition,
conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of
all buildings and/or structures in the City, and providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor and penalties for the violation
thereof; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of such Building Code and supplements thereto hereinafter published
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this Chapter, except as the same may hereafter be modified or amended.
§ 14-1.2. Building Official. [Ord. #1956, § 1; Ord. #2224, § 1]
Wherever the term Building Official is used in said Building Code, it shall
mean the Chief Building Inspector, who is charged with the administration
and enforcement of its provisions. In the absence of the Chief Building
Inspector, the Senior Building Inspector will assume the administration and
enforcement duties of the Chief Building Inspector.
§ 14-1.3. Amendment: Section 102 - UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR
STRUCTURES. [Ord. #1956, § 1]
Section 102 of said Building Code is amended by adding the following
paragraph thereto:
In the event the mailing address of interested parties is not listed on official
records concerning the property, or if contact cannot be made by certified
mail directed to the listed address, the service shall be by posting a copy
of the notice on the substandard or unsafe buildings. The designated period
within which the owner or persons in charge are required to comply with
such notice shall begin 10 days following the date of posting. The failure
of any owner, party concerned, or other person to receive such notice shall
not affect the validity of any proceedings taken pursuant to the provisions
of this section.
§ 14-1.4. Amendment: Section 103 - VIOLATIONS. [Ord. #1956, § 1]
Section 103 of said Building Code is replaced in its entirety by the following:
SECTION 103 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain
any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done, without
§ 14-1.1 COMPTON § 14-1.4
AO:586
first obtaining a separate building permit for each such building or
structure from the Building Official.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of said
Building Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person,
firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the
provisions of said Building Code is committed, continued or permitted, and,
upon the conviction of any such violation, such person, firm or corporation
shall be punishable as provided for violations of the Compton Municipal
Code.
§ 14-1.5. Amendment: Section 105 - BOARD OF APPEALS. [Ord.
#1956, § 1; Ord. #1991, § 1; Ord. #2224, § 2]
Section 105 of the Building Code shall be replaced in its entirety by the
following:
SECTION 105 - HOUSING ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD (HAAB) OR
HEARING OFFICER
Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official
relative to the application and interpretation of the Building Code shall be
administered by one of the following means:
a. Housing Advisory and Appeals Board (HAAB).
There is hereby created a Housing Advisory and Appeals Board
(hereinafter the "HAAB" or the "Board") consisting of five voting
members who are not employees of the City of Compton and who
are qualified and specifically knowledgeable in the California Building
Standards Codes and applicable local ordinances. The Board is
authorized by the City Council to hear appeals regarding the
requirements of the City relating to the use, maintenance and change
of occupancy of buildings and structures, including requirements
governing alteration, additions, repair, demolition and moving. The
Building Official shall be an ex officio member of the Board and shall
act as Secretary to said Board, but shall have no vote on any matter
before the Board. The Board shall be appointed by the City Council and
shall hold office at its pleasure. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules
of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions
and findings in writing to the Building Official, with a duplicate copy to
the appellant, and may recommend to the City Council new legislation
as is consistent therewith. The Board shall have no authority relative to
interpretation of the administrative provisions of the Building Code nor
shall it be empowered to waive requirements of the Code.
Members of the Board shall receive compensation at a rate set by
resolution of the City Council for attendance at meetings.
§ 14-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.5
AO:587
§ 14-1.6. Amendment. Section 107.1. FEES, General. [Ord. #1956,
§ 1]
Section 107.1 of said Building Code is amended by adding the following
sentence thereto:
The City Council may waive the fees prescribed herein for governmental
agencies, charitable organizations or religious organizations when it is
determined by the City Council that the waiver of such fees is in the public
interest.
§ 14-1.7. Amendment: Section 107.3 FEES, Plan Review Fees. [Ord.
#1956, § 1]
Section 107.3 of said Building Code is amended to provide that the plan
review fee shall be 85% of the building permit fee as shown in Table 1-A.
§ 14-1.8. Amendment: Table 1-A BUILDING PERMIT FEES. [Ord.
#1956, § 1; Ord. #2295 § 6]
(Reserved)
§ 14-1.9. Amendment: Section 310.9.1.1 Smoke Detectors, General.
[Ord. #1956, § 1]
Section 310.9.1.1 of said Building Code is amended by adding the following
sentence thereto:
Each existing dwelling unit with bars installed on the windows shall be
equipped with an approved smoke detector when remodeled, rehabilitated
or title is transferred.
§ 14-1.10. Amendment: Section 2902.3 NUMBER OF FIXTURES,
Groups B, F, H, M and S Occupancies. [Ord. #1956, § 1]
The first paragraph of Section 2902.3 of said Building; Code is replaced in
its entirety by the following:
A majority of the membership of the Board shall constitute a quorum to
perform the duties of the Board. In the absence of a quorum, a Hearing
Officer may perform the duties of the Board.
b. Hearing Officer.
Provided that the Board is unable to constitute a quorum, the City
Council hereby authorizes the City Manager to appoint a Hearing
Officer who is not an employee of the City and who is qualified and
specifically knowledgeable in the California Building Standards Codes
and applicable local ordinances to perform the same duties of the
Board. The same rights, rules and procedures that apply to the
administration of duties by the Board shall also apply to the
administration of duties by the Hearing Officer as well.
§ 14-1.5 COMPTON § 14-1.10
AO:588
Every building or portion thereof where less than five persons are employed
shall be provided with at least one toilet. Every building and each
subdivision thereof where five or more persons comprising both sexes are
employed shall be provided with access to at least two toilets located either
in such building or conveniently in a building adjacent thereto on the same
property. At least one toilet shall be available to the public.
§ 14-1.11. Appendix Chapter 15 REROOFING. [Ord. #2012, § 1; Ord.
#2066, § 2]
This appendix relative to roofing materials and methods of application is
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
Chapter.
§ 14-1.12. Appendix Chapter 31 Division III PATIO COVERS. [Ord.
#2012, § 1; Ord. #2066, § 3]
This appendix relative to the definition and construction of patio covers is
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
Chapter.
§ 14-1.13. Appendix Chapter 33 EXCAVATION AND GRADING. [Ord.
#2012, § 1; Ord. #2066, § 4]
This appendix relative to excavation and grading requirements, permits and
fees is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out
in this Chapter.
§ 14-1.14. through § 14-1.19. (Reserved)
§ 14-1.20. Notices to Secure Unoccupied Buildings or Structures.
[Added by Ord. #1331, § 8111]
When any unoccupied building or structure is not properly secured, locked
or closed; and is accessible to juveniles, transients and undesirables, and is
a health, fire or safety hazard to the adjacent community; and the Building
Official so finds, he shall serve the record owner and, if not the owner, the
person having control of such building or structure, with notice to secure
or close the building forthwith so as to prevent unauthorized persons from
gaining access thereto.
§ 14-1.21. Materials to Secure Unoccupied Buildings or Structures.
[Added by Ord. #1433, § 8111.1]
Building materials affixed, attached or annexed to an unoccupied boardedup
or abandoned structure shall be by a method and materials approved by
the Building Department. Such materials shall be 3/8 inch plywood, finished
on the outer surface with an outdoor grade paint, and affixed, attached or
annexed in a work manlike manner. Materials and methods equivalent to or
exceeding the aforementioned may be approved by the Building Official.
§ 14-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.22
AO:589
§ 14-1.22. Contents of Notices. [Added by Ord. #1331, § 8112; Ord.
#1433]
The notice provided for in subsection 14-1.20 of this section shall give
notice to the record owner, or, if the owner is not available or amenable to
notice, to the person having the control of such building or structure, that:
§ 14-1.23. Notification to Other Persons. [Added by Ord. #1331,
§ 8113]
The Building Official may, but shall not be required to, send copies of any
notice provided for in subsection 14-1.20 of this section to the holder of any
mortgage, trust deed, or other lien or encumbrance, the holder or owner of
any lease, or the holder of any other estate or interest in or to the building
or structure or the land upon which it is located.
§ 14-1.24. Posting. [Added by Ord. #1331, § 8114]
A copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the building
or structure which is the subject of the notice. Further, the Building Official
may cause to be posted on such building a sign or signs to read: "Vacated
Building, Do Not Enter or Damage, by Order of the Department of Building
and Safety, Building Official, City of Compton, California."
Such sign may contain additional information and warnings as, in the
opinion of the Building Official, are expedient. Such notice shall remain
posted until the building again is lawfully occupied. No person shall remove
such notice without the written permission of the Building Official. No
person, other than a person having the right of occupancy, shall enter the
building.
a. He shall forthwith secure or close such building or structure so as to
prevent unauthorized persons from gaining access thereto. The method
used to secure or close such a building or structure and the materials
used therefor shall be approved by the Building Official and shall be
finished on the outer surface in a workmanlike manner.
b. If, in the opinion of the owner or person having the control of such
building or structure, the building or structure is sufficiently secure and
closed, the methods or materials required by the Building Official are
not in accordance with the law, or for any other reason the owner or
person having control cannot lawfully be required to comply with the
provisions of paragraph a above within 10 days after the receipt of the
notice, he may request a hearing by filing with the Building Official a
written demand for such hearing.
c. If the required work is not performed within 10 days after the service of
the notice, and if a timely demand for a hearing is not made, the City
may perform the work at the expense of the owner.
§ 14-1.22 COMPTON § 14-1.25
AO:590
§ 14-1.25. Service. [Added by Ord. #1331, § 8115]
Proper service of any notice required by subsections 14-1.20 through
14-1.34 of this section shall be by personal service or by certified mail upon
the record owner and, if not the owner, the person having the control of
such building or structure.
In the event the Building Official is unable to serve any notice on any such
person, proper service on such person shall be by posting the notice in a
conspicuous place on the building or structure.
The failure of any owner or other person to receive a notice shall not
affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings set forth in subsections
14-1.20 through 14-1.34 of this section.
§ 14-1.26. Request for Hearings. [Added by Ord. #1331, § 8116]
Within 10 days after the service upon the record owner of a notice pursuant
to the provisions of subsection 14-1.20 of this section, the record owner or
any other person deeming himself aggrieved may request a hearing.
§ 14-1.27. Notices of Hearings. [Added by Ord. #1331, § 8117;
amended by Ord. #2224, § 3]
Upon receiving a request for a hearing, the Building Official shall set the
matter for a hearing before the Board or Hearing Officer and shall serve
a notice, not less than 10 days prior thereto, upon the person requesting
such hearing and upon every person upon whom the notice provided for in
subsection 14-1.20 of this section was served.
§ 14-1.28. Procedure. [Added by Ord. #1331, § 8118; amended by
Ord. #2224, § 4]
Unless inconsistent with any other provisions of subsections 14-1.20
through 14-1.34 of this section, all procedures taken by the Board, a
Hearing Officer or the City shall proceed as provided for in this section,
including costs collected, in the case of substandard and unsafe buildings.
§ 14-1.29. Securing Structures by City: Authorized. [Added by Ord.
#1331, § 8119; amended by Ord. #2224, § 5]
If a person is properly served a notice pursuant to the provisions of
subsection 14-1.20 to secure or close a building so as to prevent
unauthorized persons from gaining access thereto and neither he nor any
other person requests a hearing, or after a hearing the Board or Hearing
Officer determines that such person is obliged to so secure or close such
building, the City may perform the work as provided for in this section in the
case of a substandard or unsafe building if such building is not secured or
closed within 10 days after service of the notice if no hearing is requested,
or within the time specified by the Board or Hearing Officer.
§ 14-1.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.30
AO:591
§ 14-1.30. Securing Structures by City: Procedures. [Added by Ord.
#1331, § 8120]
The Building Official may proceed to secure or close any building or
structure subject to the provisions of subsection 14-1.29 of this section so
as to prevent unauthorized persons from gaining access thereto by either
using available City forces, or by contract with qualified contractors, or by
any method he deems proper. The Building Official shall keep an accurate
record of the costs of such work.
§ 14-1.31. Liens. [Added by Ord. #1331, § 8121]
Any lien for the costs incurred by the City in securing a building or structure
from unlawful entry shall be subordinate to any mortgage, trust, deed, or
other lien of any person who received no notice pursuant to the provisions
of either subsection 14-1.20 or subsection 14-1.27 of this section.
§ 14-1.32. Demolition and Repair Provisions Applicable. [Added by
Ord. #1331, § 8122; amended by Ord. #1874, § 1]
Nothing set forth in subsections 14-1.20 through 14-1.34 of this section
shall be deemed to preclude, prohibit, or restrict the Building Official from
causing the prompt demolition, repair or securing of buildings found to be
substandard or unsafe pursuant to other provisions of this Code.
§ 14-1.33. Emergency Procedure. [Added by Ord. #1331, § 8123;
amended by Ord. #1874, § 2]
Whenever the conditions described in subsection 14-20 or subsection 14-3.2
of this Code constitute such an immediate hazard that the building or
structure must be demolished, secured or closed forthwith or within less
time than the designated period, either the Health Department, Chief of
Police, or the Fire Department so finds and so notifies the Building Official,
he shall cause the immediate abatement of the substandard building or
structure by demolition, securing or closing.
Notice shall be given to the record owner or the person in charge or both
as the circumstances will permit or without any notice whatever, when in
the opinion of the building Official immediate action is necessary in order to
protect the general welfare and safety of the public.
§ 14-1.34. Emergency Procedure: Hearings. [Added by Ord. #1331,
§ 8124]
The provisions of subsections 14-1.20 through 14-1.34 of this section
providing for hearings shall apply to any person having any right, title, or
interest in any building secured pursuant to the provisions of subsection
14-1.33 of this section. Such person may request a hearing as to the
necessity and reasonable cost of the work performed by order of the
Building Official within 10 days after the building is secured or within 10
days after receiving a notice of such work.
§ 14-1.30 COMPTON § 14-1.35
AO:592
§ 14-1.35. (Reserved)
§ 14-2. REPORTS OF RESIDENTIAL RECORDS.
§ 14-2.1. Intent. [Added by Ord. #1422, § 8126; Ord. #1434]
The intent of the Council is to assure that the grantee of a residential
building within the City is furnished a report of matters of City record
pertaining to the authorized use, occupancy, and zoning classification of
real property prior to its sale or exchange. It is the further intent of
the Council to protect the unwary buyer of residential property against
undisclosed Municipal Code and Building Code violations on the property
and that the buyer be furnished a report of all existing Code violations.
§ 14-2.2. Definitions. [Added by Ord. #1422, § 8127; Ord. #1434]
As used in this section:
AGREEMENT OF SALE — Shall mean any agreement or written instrument
which provides that title to any property shall thereafter be transferred
from one owner to another owner.
BUYER — Shall mean any person, copartnership, association, corporation,
or fiduciary who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for
property described in an agreement of sale, as defined in this subsection.
EXCHANGE — Shall mean the transfer of the title of real property or
an agreement to transfer real property in consideration for cash or for
something other than all cash.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, copartnership, association, corporation,
or fiduciary having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real
property.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Shall mean any improved real property,
designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, situated in the
City and shall include the building or structures located on such improved
property.
§ 14-2.3. Required. [Added by Ord. #1422, § 8128; Ord. #1434; Ord.
#1527]
Prior to entering into an agreement of sale or exchange of any residential
building, the owner or his authorized representative shall apply for, from
the Department of Building and Safety, a report of Building Code violations,
if any, in that building and of the residential building records showing
the regularly authorized use, occupancy, and zoning classification of such
property. Such report shall be valid for a period not to exceed six months
after the date of issue. If the provisions of this section would require that an
application be made on a holiday, the application shall be made on the next
City business day.
§ 14-1.35 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-2.4
AO:593
§ 14-2.4. Fees. [Added by Ord. #1527, § 8128.1; Ord. #1800, § 1;
Ord. #1817, § 2; Ord. #1902, § 1; Ord. #2295 § 7]
Fees for the investigation and inspection services required by the provisions
of subsection 14-2.3 of this section shall be collected by the Department
of Building and Safety. Such fees shall be established by ordinance or
resolution of the City Council.
§ 14-2.5. Waiver of Fees. [Added by Ord. #1527, § 8128.2]
The Chief Building Inspector may waive the fee and inspection on real
estate inherited or transferred as a result of divorce or order of the court.
Parties seeking waivers of fees shall submit documentation to support their
requests.
§ 14-2.6. Applications. [Added by Ord. #1422, § 8129; Ord. #1434]
Upon the application of the owner or his authorized agent, the Building
Official shall schedule an inspection of such property for compliance with
the Building Code, shall review pertinent City records, and shall deliver to
the applicant a report which shall contain the following information insofar
as it is available:
§ 14-2.7. Delivery. [Added by Ord. #1422, § 8130; Ord. #1434]
The report of the residential building record shall be delivered by the
owner, or the authorized designated representative of the owner, to the
buyer or transferee of the residential building prior to the execution of an
escrow agreement or of any document of title pertaining to the property and
prior to the transfer of any consideration of money, or the like, under any
agreement of sale, sale, or exchange of any residential building. The buyer
or transferee shall execute a receipt therefor as furnished by the City, and
such receipt shall be delivered to the Building Department by the owner
or authorized designated representative as evidence of compliance with the
provisions of this section.
a. The street address and legal description of the subject property;
b. The zone classification and authorized use as set forth in this Code;
c. The occupancy as indicated and established by permits of record;
d. Any variances, conditional use permits, exceptions, or other pertinent
legislative acts of record;
e. Any special restrictions in use or development which may apply to the
subject property;
f. The nature, extent, and date of the inspection made pursuant to the
provisions of this section by the Building Department; and
g. The Code violations, if any, observed by the Inspector at the time of the
inspection.
§ 14-2.4 COMPTON § 14-2.7
AO:594
The Building Official may, in lieu of such completed receipt, accept a
declaration or statement under oath of the owner or the authorized
representative that the individual making the declaration or statement
under oath personally delivered the report to the buyer or transferee.
In such cases the Building Official shall enter his decision to waive the
completion of the receipt by the buyer or transferee on the receipt and file
it in the same manner and to the same effect as if the buyer or transferee
had signed the receipt.
§ 14-2.8. Exceptions. [Added by Ord. #1422, § 8131; Ord. #1434]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the first sale of a residential
building located in a subdivision whose final map has been approved and
recorded in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act not more than two
years prior to the first sale.
§ 14-2.9. Failure to Comply: Effect. [Added by Ord. #1422, § 8132;
Ord. #1434]
The failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this section shall
not in and of itself invalidate any agreement for the sale or exchange of
residential property.
§ 14-2.10. Violations: Penalties. [Added by Ord. #1422, § 8133; Ord.
#1434]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor as provided in Chapter 1, Section 1-6.
§ 14-3. DANGEROUS AND SUBSTANDARD RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS.
§ 14-3.1. Declaration of Purpose. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8134]
It is the purpose of the provisions of this section to provide a just, equitable,
and practicable method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any
other remedy available at law, whereby buildings or structures which are
dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unsanitary, or are a menace to the life,
limb, health, morals, property, safety, and general welfare of the people of
the City, or which tend to constitute a fire hazard, may be required to be
repaired, vacated, or demolished.
§ 14-3.2. Defined. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8135]
a. Dangerous Buildings. For the purposes of this section, any building or
structure which has any or all of the following defects shall be deemed a
dangerous building:
1. Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of
exit is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to
provide safe and adequate means of exit, in case of fire or panic, for
§ 14-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-3.2
AO:595
all persons housed or assembled therein who would be required
to, or might, use such door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other
means of exit;
2. Whenever the stress in any materials or member, or portion
thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than 1 1/2 times the
working stress or stresses allowed in Chapters 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 of
the Uniform Building Code;
3. Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by earthquake,
wind, flood, or by any other cause in such a manner that the
structural strength or stability thereof is appreciably less than it
was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum
requirements of this Code for a new building or similar structure,
purpose, or location;
4. Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely
to fall, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and
thereby injure persons or damage property;
5. Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance,
or ornamentation on the exterior thereof, is not of sufficient
strength or stability or is not so anchored, attached, or fastened in
place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of 1/2 that
specified by Chapter 23 of the Uniform Building Code, without
exceeding the working stresses permitted in Chapters 24, 25, 26,
27, or 28 of the Uniform Building Code;
6. Whenever any portion thereof has settled to such an extent that
walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to
winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of new
construction;
7. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof,
because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, or faulty
construction, or because of the removal or movement of some
portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such
building or portion thereof, or because of some other cause is likely
to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the
foundation or underpinning is likely to fall or give way;
8. Whenever for any reason whatsoever the building or structure, or
any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which
it is used;
9. Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle 1/3 of
the base;
10. Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation,
shows 33% or more of damage or deterioration to the member or
§ 14-3.2 COMPTON § 14-3.2
AO:596
members, or 50% of damage or deterioration of a nonsupporting
enclosing or outside wall or covering;
11. Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire,
wind, earthquake, or flood, or has become so dilapidated or
deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children who
might play therein to their danger, or as to afford a harbor for
vagrants, criminals, or immoral persons, or as to enable persons to
resort thereto for the purpose of committing nuisances or unlawful
or immoral acts;
12. Any building or structure which has been constructed, or which
now exists or is maintained, in violation of any specific requirement
or prohibitions applicable to such building or structure of the
building regulations of the City as set forth in this section, or of any
provisions of the Fire Code of the City or this Code relating to the
prevention of fire when so determined and reported by the Fire
Chief or Fire Department, or of any County Health Code provision
relating to the protection of health when so determined and
reported by the Health Officer, or of any law of the State or City
relating to the condition, location, or structure of buildings;
13. Any building or structure which, whether or not erected in
accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any
nonsupporting part, member, or portion less than 50%, or in any
supporting member less than 66% of the strength, fire resisting
qualities, or characteristics or weather-resisting qualities or
characteristics required by law or ordinance in the case of a newlyconstructed
building of like area, height, and occupancy in the
same location;
14. Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, or
faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is unsanitary or
unfit for human habitation or is in a condition that is likely to cause
sickness or disease, when so determined by the Health Officer, or
likely to work injury to the health, safety, or general welfare of
those living within;
15. Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes has light, air, and sanitation facilities inadequate
to protect the health, safety, or general welfare of persons living
within;
16. Whenever any building or structure, by reason of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damages, electric wiring, gas
connections, heating apparatus, or other cause, is in such condition
as to be a fire hazard and is so situated as to endanger life or other
buildings or property in the vicinity or to provide a ready fuel
supply to augment the spread and intensity of the fire arising from
any cause; and
§ 14-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-3.2
AO:597
§ 14-3.3. Other Definitions. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8135.1;
amended by Ord. #2224, § 6]
As used in this section:
BOARD — Unless otherwise specified, shall mean the Housing Advisory and
Appeals Board. (HAAB).
BUILDING OFFICIAL — Unless otherwise specified, shall mean and include
the Chief Building Inspector or his duly authorized representative.
DEPARTMENT — Unless otherwise specified, shall mean the Department of
Building and Safety.
HEARING OFFICER — Unless otherwise specified, shall mean a person
who is appointed by the City Manager to perform the duties of the Board,
provided that the Board is unable to constitute a quorum.
§ 14-3.4. Public Nuisances. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8135.2]
All dangerous buildings and substandard residential buildings within the
terms of subsection 14-3.2 of this section are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and shall be vacated, repaired, or demolished as set forth in
subsections 14-3.5 through 14-3.39 of this section.
§ 14-3.5. Inspections: When Required. [Added by Ord. #1450,
§ 8136]
The Department of Building and Safety shall cause any building or structure
to be inspected for the purpose of determining whether or not it is a
dangerous building or substandard residential building in any of the
following events:
17. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site
after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned and vandalized,
damaged and/or left unsecured for a period in excess of six months
so as to constitute such buildings, or portion thereof, an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
b. Substandard Residential Buildings. For the purposes of this section, any
residential building or structure defined by Chapter 10 of the Uniform
Building Code Volume III (Housing Code) shall be deemed a
substandard residential building.
a. Whenever the Department, in its reasonable discretion, shall determine
that such inspection is necessary;
b. Whenever the Housing Authority, acting pursuant to the provisions of
the Housing Authorities Law of the State, shall transmit to the
Department its written recommendations and findings that a building
or structure is in such condition as to be dangerous to the public health,
morals, safety, or welfare;
§ 14-3.2 COMPTON § 14-3.5
AO:598
§ 14-3.6. Inspections: Reports. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8137]
Upon the completion of the inspection, a written report shall be filed setting
forth the facts as to the condition of the building or structure and the work
needed to be done thereon.
§ 14-3.7. Hearings: Notices. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8138;
amended by Ord. #2224, § 7]
If the Building Official shall determine from the report that there is a
probable cause to believe that the building or structure is a dangerous
building or substandard residential building, he or she may request that
the matter be set for hearing by the Board or Hearing Officer and a notice
of such hearing shall be given as set forth in subsections 14-3.8 through
14-3.13 of this section.
§ 14-3.8. Hearings: Notices: Form and Contents. [Added by Ord.
#1450, § 8139]
Notice of the hearing shall be given upon a form prescribed by the Building
Official. The notice shall set forth the street address and a legal description,
sufficient for identification, of the premises upon which the building or
structure is located. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the
conditions which show probable cause to believe that the building or
structure is a nuisance within the terms of subsection 14-3.2 of this section.
The notice shall state the date, hour, and place of the hearing and shall
order all interested parties who desire to be heard in the matter to appear
and to show cause why the building or structure should not be repaired,
vacated, and repaired, or demolished.
§ 14-3.9. Hearings: Notices: Posting. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8140]
One copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the
building or structure involved.
§ 14-3.10. Hearings: Notices: Persons to Be Notified. [Added by Ord.
#1450, § 8141]
One copy of the notice shall be served upon the following: the person, if
any, in real or apparent charge and control of the premises involved; the
c. Whenever any person files with the Department a verified complaint
wherefrom there is, in the opinion of the Department, probable cause to
believe that a building or structure is a dangerous building or
substandard residential building; and
d. Whenever any member of the Fire Department, Police Department, or
County Health Department transmits to the Department a written
report from the facts of which there is, in the opinion of the
Department, probable cause to believe that a building or structure is a
dangerous building or substandard residential building.
§ 14-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-3.10
AO:599
record owner; the holder of any mortgage, trust, deed, or other lien or
encumbrance of record; the owner or holder of any lease of record; and
the record holder of any other estate or interest in or to the building or
structure or the land upon which it is located.
§ 14-3.11. Hearings: Notices: Transfers of Titles: Effect. [Added by
Ord. #1450, § 8141.1]
A transfer of title after a dangerous or substandard residential building has
been recorded or the building or structure has been posted shall serve as a
notice to all persons of the intent of the City, and it shall be the duty of the
person or interested party to investigate action in progress by the City.
§ 14-3.12. Hearings: Notices: Service. [Added by Ord. #1450,
§ 8142]
§ 14-3.13. Hearings: Notices: Posting and Service: Time. [Added by
Ord. #1450, § 8143]
The notice of hearing shall be posted and served at least 10 days prior to
the date set for the hearing.
§ 14-3.14. Hearings. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8144; Ord. #2224, § 8]
The Board or a duly appointed Hearing Officer appointed or designated by
the City Manager shall:
a. Method of Service. The notice of hearing shall be served upon all
persons entitled thereto either personally or by certified or registered
mail. Service by certified or registered mail shall be effective on the
date of the mailing if a certified or registered letter containing a copy of
such notice is mailed, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to
each such person at the address of such person as it appears on the last
equalized assessment roll of the County or as known to the City Clerk. If
no such address so appears or is known to the City Clerk, then a copy
shall be addressed to such person at the address of the building or
structure involved in the proceedings. The failure of any owner or other
person to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the validity
of any proceedings taken hereunder.
b. Affidavit of Service. The officer or employer of the department, upon
giving notice as provided herein, shall file an affidavit thereof certifying
to the time and manner in which such notice was given. He shall also
file therewith any receipt card which may have been returned to him in
acknowledgement of the receipt of such notice by certified or
registered mail.
a. Hold a hearing as requested by the Building Official and hear and
consider any evidence pertaining to the matter set forth in the report
offered by the owner, occupant, or person in charge and control,
§ 14-3.10 COMPTON § 14-3.14
AO:600
§ 14-3.15. Hearings: Records. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8145; Ord.
#2224, § 9]
A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording or any
other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the
Board or Hearing Officer.
§ 14-3.16. Repair, Vacation and Repair, or Demolish: Standards.
[Added by Ord. #1450, § 8146]
The following standards shall be allowed in substance in ordering the repair,
vacation, or demolition of any building or structure. Any order to demolish
rendered pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall not indicate
an alternative permission to repair; however, an order to repair may be
satisfied by demolition:
§ 14-3.17. Repair, Vacation and Repair, or Demolish: Requests for
Reports of Other Departments. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8147;
amended by Ord. #2224, § 10]
mortgagee or beneficiary under any deed of trust, lessee, or any other
person having any estate or interest in such building or structure; and
b. Make written findings of fact as to whether or not the building or
structure in question is a dangerous building or substandard residential
building within the terms of this section.
a. If the dangerous building or substandard residential building can be
reasonably repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the
provisions of this Code, the building shall be ordered to be repaired.
b. If the dangerous building or substandard residential building is in such
condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or
general welfare of its occupants, the building shall be ordered to be
vacated.
c. If any case where a dangerous building is 50% damaged, decayed, or
deteriorated, the building shall be ordered to be demolished.
d. In all cases where a dangerous building or substandard residential
building cannot be reasonably repaired so that it will no longer exist in
violation of the terms of this Code, the building shall be ordered to be
vacated and demolished.
e. In all cases where a dangerous building or substandard residential
building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of
this section or any law of the City or statute of the State, the building
shall be ordered to be demolished.
a. In the course of any proceedings taken hereunder, whenever either the
Hearing Officer, or Building Official shall have cause to require
additional evidence as to whether or not any building or structure is a
§ 14-3.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-3.17
AO:601
§ 14-3.18. Hearings: Findings. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8148;
amended by Ord. #2224, § 11]
Within 60 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Board or Hearing
Officer shall submit its finding and recommendations to the Building
Official.
§ 14-3.19. Repair, Vacation and Repair, or Demolish: Orders. [Added
by Ord. #1450, § 8149; amended by Ord. #2224, § 12]
If, from the findings and recommendations of the Board or Hearing Officer
and the report of inspection, the Building Official shall determine that
the building or structure involved is a dangerous building or substandard
residential building within the terms of this section, then he or she shall
issue an order:
§ 14-3.20. Repair, Vacation and Repair, or Demolish: Orders:
Contents. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8150; amended by Ord. #2224,
§ 13]
fire or life hazard, or is detrimental to the health of the persons living
therein, in comparison with buildings or structures constructed in
accordance with the minimum requirements of this Code, the Board,
Hearing Officer, or Building Official may request that such building or
structure be inspected by the Fire Department or by the County Health
Department, as the case may be, or by both such departments.
b. The department to which such request is directed shall cause the
building or structure to be inspected with particular reference to the
characteristics inquired about and a report thereof in writing shall be
transmitted to the requesting authority within five days after the
receipt of the request for such report. The report shall be considered
along with other evidence at the hearing.
a. That the occupant, lessee, or other person in possession shall vacate
such building, or that he or she may remain in possession while repairs
are being made; or
b. That any mortgagee, beneficiary under a deed of trust, or any other
person having an interest or estate in such building may, at his own
risk, repair, vacate and repair, or demolish such building.
a. The order to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish shall set forth the
street address of the building or structure and a legal description of the
premises sufficient for identification. Such order shall contain a
statement of the particulars which render the building or structure a
dangerous building or substandard residential building and a statement
of the things required to be done.
b. Such order shall specify the time within which the work required shall
be commenced, which shall be not less than 10 days nor later than 30
§ 14-3.17 COMPTON § 14-3.20
AO:602
§ 14-3.21. Repair, Vacation and Repair, or Demolish: Orders:
Posting: Service. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8151]
A copy of the order to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish any structure
shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the building and shall be
served, in the manner prescribed in the case of the notice of hearing, upon
all persons to whom the notice of hearing is required to be served.
§ 14-3.22. Repair, Vacation and Repair, or Demolish: Orders:
Appeals. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8151.1; amended by Ord. #2224,
§ 14]
Within 10 days after the service of the order, as provided in subsection
14-3.21 of this section, the owner or other person having the charge and
control of any building or structure affected by such order may appeal said
order in accordance with such procedure as may be established by the
respective Board or Hearing Officer. If such an order is not appealed, it shall
become final and unappealable on the eleventh 11th day after service.
Upon such appeal, the Board or Hearing Officer may affirm, modify, or
annul the order appealed from, including any of the terms or conditions
thereof. The order on appeal shall become final upon its approval by a Board
resolution or written order by the Hearing Officer.
No order to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish any structure shall be
enforced if annulled by the Board or Hearing Officer on appeal or enforced
contrary to any modification of such order made by the Board or Hearing
Officer on appeal. The Building Official shall order a public hearing by the
Housing Advisory and Appeals Board or Hearing Officer, or the City Council
to adopt a resolution.
§ 14-3.23. Repair, Vacation and Repair, or Demolish: Orders:
Violations. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8152; amended by Ord. #2224,
§ 15]
days after the issuance of the order, and shall further specify a
reasonable time within which the work shall be completed.
c. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs a and b above, upon a
written application by an interested party for good cause shown and
where no imminent risk to life or property is present, the Building
Official, the Board, or Hearing Officer (in case an appeal is made to it
pursuant to the provisions of subsection 14-3.22 of this section) may
grant a reasonable extension of time, not to exceed 120 days, within
which the work required shall be commenced.
d. The time for completion may be extended for cause by the Building
Official, the Board or Hearing Officer, in case an appeal is made to it
pursuant to the provisions of said subsection 14-3.22.
§ 14-3.20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-3.23
AO:603
§ 14-3.24. Repair, Vacation and Repair, or Demolish: Orders: Failure
to Comply: Action of the Department. [Added by Ord. #1450,
§ 8153; amended by Ord. #2224, § 16]
Whenever an order to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish any building or
structure has not been complied with within the time set by the Department,
including such additional time as the Department (or the Board or Hearing
Officer upon appeal) may for good cause have extended, the Department
shall have the power, in addition to any other remedy provided, to:
a. The owner or other person having the charge and control of any
building or structure determined by the Department, or by the Board or
Hearing Officer upon appeal, to be a dangerous building or substandard
residential building who shall fail to comply with any order to repair,
vacate and repair, or demolish such building shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
b. The occupant or lessee in possession of such building or structure who
fails to comply with any order to vacate such building in accordance
with any order given as provided for in this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
c. Any person who removes any notice or order posted as required in this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
d. No utility company or supplier shall service the owner or occupants of
any apartment, dwelling, building, or structure which is posted until
notified by the Building Official.
a. Cause the material of any such building or structure to be sold in any
manner which the Department may determine; provided, however, any
such sale shall be upon the condition that the building or structure be
forthwith demolished, the wreckage and debris thereof be removed,
and the lot be cleaned. The Department may sell any such building
singly or otherwise, as the Department may find desirable, in order to
insure that the consideration obtained from one or any number of such
buildings shall be adequate to pay the costs of demolition and of
cleaning the sites. Any surplus from the sale of any such building or
structure, or group or buildings or structures, over and above the costs
of demolition and of cleaning the sites, shall be retained to be
distributed to the parties or persons lawfully entitled thereto; or
b. Cause the building or structure to be repaired or demolished by such
means as the Department may deem advisable. The costs therefor shall
be paid from the Repair and Demolition Fund and assessed against the
property upon which the particular building or structure is located.
§ 14-3.23 COMPTON § 14-3.24
AO:604
§ 14-3.25. Repair, Vacation and Repair, or Demolish: Orders: Failure
to Comply: Action of the Department: Effect on Owner. [Added by
Ord. #1450, § 8153.1]
§ 14-3.26. Repair, Vacation and Repair, or Demolish: Costs: Repair
and Demolition Fund. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8154]
Any work to be accomplished pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall
be performed in accordance with established practices of City procedures.
When the Department determines to cause the repair or removal of the building
or structure, the Department shall notify the owner or other person in charge
or control thereof its intention so to do and shall specify a date certain upon
which it shall solicit bids to accomplish the necessary work, which date shall be
not sooner than 10 days after the date such notice is given.
a. Whenever the Department has undertaken action to sell, repair, or
demolish any building or structure pursuant to the provisions of
subsection 14-3.24 of this section following the failure of the owner or
other interested party to comply with an order thereof, and has caused
the solicitation of bids to accomplish such work, the owner or other
persons having the charge or control of such building or structure shall
be deemed to have forfeited all further rights and privileges to do such
work and shall be thereafter prohibited from doing any such work on
such building or structure, except as the Department may otherwise
allow.
b. In the event the owner or other persons having the charge or control of
the building or structure proceed to perform the work of repairing or
demolishing a building or structure without a permit and in violation of
the provisions of paragraph a above, the Department shall charge the
person who caused such work to be performed the sum of $50 as partial
reimbursement to the City for those expenses incurred in the
preparation of the bid and administering the invitation to bid.
a. The Council shall establish a special revolving fund to be designated as
the Repair and Demolition Fund. Payments shall be made out of said
fund upon the demand of the Building Official to defray the costs and
expenses which may be incurred by the Department in causing the
necessary work of repair or demolition of dangerous buildings and
substandard residential buildings.
b. The Council may at any time transfer to such special fund, out of any
money in the General Fund of the City, such sums as the Council may
deem necessary in order to expedite the performance of the work of
demolition or repair, and the sums so transferred shall be deemed a
loan to the special fund and shall be repaid out of the proceeds of the
assessments provided for, either upon voluntary payments or as the
result of the sale of property after delinquency, and shall be paid when
collected to the City Treasurer, who shall place the same in the Repair
§ 14-3.24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-3.26
AO:605
§ 14-3.27. Repair, Vacation and Repair, or Demolish: Costs:
Departmental Assessments. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8155]
Whenever the owners, lessees, encumbrances, and others having any estate
or interest in any dangerous building have failed within the time fixed to
repair or demolish the building as ordered, and whenever the Department
has not sold the building or structure for the purposes of demolition as set
forth in subsection 14-3.24 of this section, the Department may proceed to
have the costs of such repairs or demolition assessed against the property
upon which the particular building or structure is located and recover from
the sale of such property as hereinafter provided.
Such costs shall include, in addition to the costs, to complete the work or
demolish the building, an amount not exceeding 30% of such costs but not
less than the sum of $100 to cover the costs of the City administering the
contract and supervising the work required.
§ 14-3.28. Repair, Vacation and Repair, or Demolish: Costs: Reports:
Hearings: Assessments: Liens. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8156]
and Demolition Fund. All liens shall become a credit to the Repair and
Demolition Fund.
a. Reports: Filing: Contents. The Department shall keep an itemized
account of the net expenses involved in the repairing or demolishing of
such buildings. Upon the completion of the repair or demolition, the
Department shall prepare and file with the City Clerk, in duplicate, a
report stating the work done, the net cost of the work, a description of
the real property upon which the building or structure was located, the
names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to the
provisions of subsection 14-3.10 of this section, and the assessment
against each lot or parcel of land proposed to be levied to pay the costs
thereof. Any such report may include repair or demolition work on any
number of buildings or structures on any number of parcels of property,
whether contiguous to each other or not.
b. Reports: Hearings: Notices. Upon the receipt of the report, the City
Clerk shall present it to the Council for consideration. The City Clerk
shall cause a notice of the costs of the repair or demolition to be posted
upon the property, or published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City, and served by registered or certified mail,
postage prepaid, addressed to the owner of the property as his name
and address appear on the last equalized assessment roll of the County,
if such so appears, or as known to the City Clerk. Such notice shall be
given at least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing and shall
specify the day, hour, and place when and where the Council will hear
and pass upon the report of the Department, together with any
objections or protests which may be filed by any person interested in
and affected by the proposed assessment.
§ 14-3.26 COMPTON § 14-3.28
AO:606
c. Reports: Protests and Objections. Any person interested and affected by
the proposed assessment may file written protests or objections with
the City Clerk at any time prior to the time set for the hearing on the
report of the Department. Each such protest or objection shall contain a
description of the property in which the signer thereof is interested and
the ground of such protest or objection. The City Clerk shall endorse on
every such protest or objection the date it was received by him. He shall
present such protests or objections to the Council at the time set for the
hearing.
d. Reports: Hearings: Protests. Upon the day and hour fixed for the
hearing the Council shall hear and pass upon the report of the
Department, together with any objections or protests. The Council may
make such revisions, corrections, or modifications in the report on the
assessment as the Council may deem just, and, when the Council is
satisfied with the correctness of the assessment, the report, as
submitted or as revised, corrected, or modified, together with the
assessment, shall be confirmed. The decision of the Council on the
report and the assessment and all protests or objections shall be final
and conclusive. The Council may adjourn the hearings from time to
time.
e. Assessments: Contest. The validity of any assessment made under the
provisions of this subsection shall not be contested in any action or
proceeding unless the same is commenced within 30 days after the
assessment is recorded. Any appeal from a final judgment in such
action or proceeding shall be perfected within 30 days after the entry of
such judgment.
f. Assessments: Payment in Installments. The Council, in its discretion,
may determine that assessments in amounts of $50 or more shall be
payable in not to exceed five equal annual installments and may also
determine that after 30 days after the recording of the assessment all
sums then unpaid shall bear interest. Such interest shall be at a rate not
to exceed 6% per annum and shall accrue in monthly amounts on the
first day of each month after 30 days after the recording of the notice of
lien. The Council's determination to allow the payment of such
assessments in installments, the number of installments, whether they
shall bear interest, and the rate thereof shall be by resolution adopted
prior to the confirmation of the assessment.
g. Assessments: Recording. Upon the confirmation of the assessment, the
City Clerk shall transmit the notice of lien to the office of the County
Recorder. From the date of such recording all persons shall be deemed
to have notice of the contents of such assessments. All unpaid recorded
liens shall be transmitted to the County Auditor-Controller, in
accordance with established procedures, to be added to the regular tax
bill.
h. Assessments: Liens. Immediately upon its recording in the assessment
roll of the County Tax Assessor, the assessment shall be deemed to be
§ 14-3.28 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-3.28
AO:607
§ 14-3.29. Prior Notices. [Added by Ord. #1450, § 8157]
Notices served pursuant to the provisions of subsections 14-3.1 through
14-3.28 of this section shall be deemed to include times and notifications
served in accordance with other ordinances in force or repealed whereby
the occupants, owners, or others were notified in accordance with such
other ordinances.
§ 14-4. SECURITY SYSTEMS FOR RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCIES.
§ 14-4.1. Requirements for Installation of Security Devices. [Added
by Ord. #1519, § 8158; Ord. #1548; Ord. #1556]
Metal bars, grills, grates, or similar devices which are installed on operable
windows or exterior doors and which would impede emergency rescue may
be installed provided such metal bars, grills, grates, or similar devices are
equipped with a quick-release latch openable from the inside without the
use of a key or special knowledge or special effort.
§ 14-4.2. Existing: Conversion: Time Limits. [Added by Ord. #1519,
§ 8159; Ord. #1548; Ord. #1556]
Security systems, as specified in subsection 14-4.1 of this section, installed
prior to January 17, 1978, shall be modified to conform to the requirements
of said subsection 14-4.1, or shall be removed, or an approved early warning
system shall be provided. Such corrections or installations of alarm devices
shall be made on or before July 17, 1978.
§ 14-4.3. Building Permits. [Added by Ord. #1519, § 8160; Ord.
#1556]
A building permit shall be obtained from the Building and Safety
Department prior to installing any device set forth in subsection 14-4.1 of
this section.
§ 14-5. HOUSE NUMBERING.
complete, the several amounts assessed shall be payable and the
assessment shall be a lien against the lots or parcels or land assessed,
respectively. The lien shall be subordinate to all existing special
assessment liens previously imposed upon the same property and shall
be paramount to all other liens, except for State, County, and municipal
taxes, with which such lien shall be upon a parity. The lien shall
continue until the assessment and all interest and costs due and
payable thereon are paid, or until the property is sold and deeded to the
purchaser or assignee.
§ 14-3.28 COMPTON § 14-5.1
AO:608
§ 14-5.1. Frontage to be Numbered. [Ord. #856, § 8400; Ord.
#1805, § 1; Ord. #1822, § 3]
All lands and lots within the City now platted or which may hereafter be
platted shall have numbers assigned to each space of 12 1/2 feet frontage
on any street within or bordering upon the same and such number shall be
affixed to all buildings thereon, or which may hereafter be erected thereon,
in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. It shall be the duty of
the City Engineer to designate the respective block numbers and the Chief
Building Inspector shall assign numbers for buildings fronting on streets
heretofore laid out or hereafter to be laid out or extended.
§ 14-5.2. Numbering System. [Ord. #856, § 8401]
Compton Boulevard, running easterly and westerly from the easterly
boundary line to the westerly boundary line of said City, shall be the
dividing line or starting point for numbers on buildings fronting on streets
heretofore laid out, or hereafter to be laid out, extending in a northerly and
southerly direction. Willowbrook Avenue, running northerly and southerly
from the northerly boundary line to the southerly boundary line of said City,
shall be the dividing line or starting point for numbers on buildings fronting
on streets heretofore laid out, or hereafter to be laid out, extending in an
easterly or westerly direction. Numbers shall begin at the above named
dividing lines or starting points and shall continue to the termini of the
respective streets. One hundred numbers, or as many thereof as may be
necessary, shall be allotted to each block, or equivalent. Number 100 shall
be the first number used at the respective beginning points on the sides
of the streets that are to contain the even numbers; and number 101 for
the sides that are to contain the odd numbers, and all buildings in the rear,
occupying the same lot corresponding with the front number, shall be given
the front or entrance number, designated with a letter from the alphabet,
such as A, B, C, etc. At the beginning of the second block from the starting
point, the first number shall be 200 and 201 respectively, and so continuing
throughout the system. Twelve and one-half feet, or fraction thereof, of
frontage shall be allowed for each number, the same to be calculated from
the end or center of block from which the number begins in any business
section. On all streets the numbering shall be done as if the streets began
at or extended to the dividing lines as defined in this subsection.
§ 14-5.3. Odd and Even Numbers. [Ord. #856, § 8402]
The numbers on the northerly and westerly sides of streets shall be odd
numbers and the numbers on the southerly and easterly sides thereof shall
be even numbers.
§ 14-5.4. Block. [Ord. #856, § 8403]
A block, within the meaning of this section, shall be that portion of any
street between two cross or intersecting streets, or between a cross and
intersecting street and an abutting street, or between two abutting streets.
§ 14-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.4
AO:609
In the case of an abutting street, the prolonged center line of the abutting
street shall be the dividing line of the block; provided that every block
exceeding 200 feet, or the equivalent of the abutting blocks, in length shall
be considered, for the purpose of this section as two blocks.
§ 14-5.5. Proper Number Required. [Ord. #856, § 8404]
No person shall display upon, over or near any entrance to any building any
number other than the number designated for such building, as provided in
this section.
§ 14-6. HOUSE MOVING.
§ 14-6.1. House Movers — Classified. [Ord. #856, § 8500]
For the purposes of this Chapter, buildings or structures to be moved will
be classified as follows:
Class "A." Any building moved on motor truck or any vehicle propelled by
its own power.
Class "B." Any building which, when loaded on house moving dollies or
rollers, does not exceed 22 feet in height or 30 feet in width.
Class "C." Any building which, when loaded on house moving dollies or
rollers, is more than 22 feet in height, but does not exceed 28 feet in height,
or is more than 30 feet in width, but does not exceed 40 feet in width.
Class "D." Any building which, when loaded on house moving dollies or
rollers, exceeds 28 feet in height or exceeds 40 feet in width.
Class "E." Any building, the walls of which are constructed of brick or
concrete which, when loaded on house moving dollies or rollers, exceeds 22
feet in height or exceeds 30 feet in width.
§ 14-6.2. Housemovers Permits — Permission Required. [Ord. #856,
§ 8501]
No person shall move any building or structure, or any portion thereof, over,
upon, along or across any street without a written permit therefor from
the Building Department. Such permit may be referred to as "Housemovers
Permit."
§ 14-6.3. Housemovers Permit — Issuance. [Ord. #856, § 8502]
All Housemovers Permits shall be issued by the Building Department,
subject to the following conditions:
a. If any building or structure or portion thereof is to be relocated in the
City, the Building Department shall not issue a Housemovers Permit
until a Relocation Permit and Building Permit has been first obtained
from the Building Department as hereinafter required.
§ 14-5.4 COMPTON § 14-6.3
AO:610
§ 14-6.4. Time Limit. [Ord. #856, § 8503]
Any Housemovers Permit shall become void unless such removal shall be
completed within the time specified in the application for such permit;
provided, however, that the Building Department may extend such time
when the moving of any building or structure or any portion thereof is
rendered impracticable by reason of inclemency of the weather, strikes or
other causes not within the control of the housemover.
§ 14-6.5. Interference With Utility Property. [Ord. #856, § 8504]
No housemover shall interfere in any manner whatsoever with any property
of any public utility.
§ 14-6.6. License. [Ord. #856, § 8505]
No Housemovers Permit shall be issued to any housemover pursuant to the
terms hereof unless such housemover shall have taken out the necessary
business license as provided by the licensing provisions of this Code.
§ 14-6.7. Deposit. [Ord. #856, § 8506]
No permit shall be issued to any housemover, pursuant to the terms hereof,
until the applicant therefor shall have deposited the following amounts for
the following classes of buildings, as said buildings are classified in this
section.
For Class "A" permit, $10;
b. A separate application upon a form furnished by the Building
Department must be filed and a separate permit obtained for the
moving of each separate building or structure or portion of a building or
structure.
c. Each application for a Housemovers Permit shall show:
1. The kind of building or structure to be moved;
2. Street location or other description of the property to which it is
proposed to be moved if relocated in the City;
3. The route proposed to be followed in moving the building or
structure;
4. The number of sections in which it will be moved;
5. The time when it is to be moved and the time limit within which the
removal will be completed;
6. That each public utility which may be affected by the granting of
such permit has received notice of the filing, or intention to file the
application.
§ 14-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-6.7
AO:611
For Class "B" permit, $25;
For Class "C" permit, $50;
For Class "D" permit, $100;
For Class "E" permit, $250.
§ 14-6.8. Permit — Fees. [Ord. #856, § 8507]
No Housemovers Permit shall be issued until the applicant therefor shall
have paid the following amounts for the following classes of buildings as
classified in this section:
Class "A" permit, $2;
Class "B" permit, $5;
Class "C" permit, $10;
Class "D" permit, $15;
Class "E" permit, $100.
§ 14-6.9. Inspection. [Ord. #856, § 8508]
Every building or structure, or section or portion thereof, moved over, upon,
along or across any street may, at the option of the Street Superintendent,
be moved under his inspection and supervision. Where the Street
Superintendent requires inspection he shall appoint an inspector for the
moving of any building or structure and of each section or portion thereof,
at a salary of $10 per day; provided, that in case two or more buildings
or structures, or two or more sections or portions thereof are being moved
at the same time along a route or routes so situated that one person can
inspect the same, only one inspector shall be appointed therefor.
§ 14-6.10. Methods of Moving. [Ord. #856, § 8509]
It shall be the duty of any housemover when required by the Street
Superintendent to cause boards of sufficient strength to carry the load
without breaking to be placed under all of the rolls or wheels to serve as
a runway for such rolls or wheels during the removal of any building or
structure, or section or portion thereof along every street improved in any
other manner than by asphalt, concrete or brick, and at no time shall such
rolls or wheels be permitted to revolve except upon such board runway
when the same is required by the Street Superintendent.
Any Class "A" building may be moved on truck or trailer with rubber tired
wheels.
Any Class "B" building shall be loaded on rubber-tired dollies if in excess of
30 tons weight.
§ 14-6.7 COMPTON § 14-6.10
AO:612
Any Class "C", "D", and "E" building shall be loaded on rubber-tired dollies.
The Street Superintendent may direct that steel or rubber-tired dollies may
be used where any building or structure is moved on any unimproved or oil
graveled street.
In the event that the equipment of the housemover is not sufficient for the
work required, or if a street or the use thereof or the property of any public
utility will be at any time endangered or damaged by such removal, or if
such housemover, or his servants or employees at any time violate any of
the terms, conditions or restrictions of the permit required by this section,
either as to the size of dimensions of the building or structure being moved,
or the route of such removal or otherwise, the Inspector shall report such
fact to the Street Superintendent who shall have power to stop the progress
of such removal.
§ 14-6.11. Damage to Streets. [Ord. #856, § 8510]
In case of damage to any street by reason of the moving of any building
or structure, or section or portion thereof, the Street Superintendent shall
cause to be done such work as may be necessary to restore the street to as
good a condition as the same was in prior to such damage and shall charge
the cost thereof to the housemover to whom the permit was issued for the
moving of such building or structure, or section or portion thereof.
§ 14-6.12. Deposit Deductions. [Ord. #856, § 8511]
Unless the permittee shall pay the following charges in cash upon demand
by the City, there shall be deducted from the deposits provided for herein,
the cost of the service of the Inspector above provided for, the cost of
repairs, if any, made by the Street Superintendent; and $10 for each day
that such building or structure or section or portion thereof shall have
occupied any portion of any street, when the same is not being actually
moved thereon. The remainder of such deposit, if any, shall be refunded to
the person making such deposit, or to his assigns. In case the deposit made
as herein provided shall not be sufficient to pay the cost of the service of the
Inspector and the cost of the repairs, if any, the person making such deposit
shall, upon demand, pay to the City a sufficient sum to cover all such costs.
Upon failure to pay such sum, it may be recovered by the City in any Court
of competent jurisdiction.
§ 14-6.13. Red Light Required. [Ord. #856, § 8512]
No person moving any building, or structure, or section, or portion thereof
over, upon, along or across any street shall fail, neglect or refuse to keep a
red light burning at all times between sunset and sunrise at each corner of
such building or structure, or section or portion thereof and at the end of
any projection thereof, while the same or any part thereof is located in or
upon any street.
§ 14-6.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-6.14
AO:613
§ 14-6.14. Protection of Sidewalks. [Ord. #856, § 8513]
No person shall drive any truck or other vehicle over, along or across
any cement or other improved sidewalk or curb, unless planking is laid
thereon in such a manner as to protect such sidewalk or curb. No person
shall remove any such planking, except the person by, or for whom it was
laid, unless permission therefor is granted by the Street Superintendent.
Provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
the driving of vehicles over sidewalks and curbs at places where cement or
asphalt crossings are constructed across such sidewalks or curbs.
§ 14-6.15. Relocation — Permit — Application — Fee. [Ord. #856,
§ 8514; Ord. #939; Ord. #1799, § 1; Ord. #1816, § 2; Ord. #1896,
§ 1]
a. No building shall be relocated in the City until a Relocation Permit has
first been obtained therefor from the Building Department, under
authority granted by the Planning Commission as hereinafter provided.
b. Every application for a Relocation Permit shall be in writing upon a
form furnished by the City and shall set forth such information as the
Building Department may reasonably require in order to carry out the
purposes of this section. The applicant shall furnish, at his own
expense, a report on the condition of the building as regards termites,
signed by a termite control operator licensed by the State. If the
building for which application is made is located outside the Compton
City limits, the application shall be accompanied by a clear photograph
of the building, and a floor plan showing all dimensions.
c. No permit shall be issued to relocate any building or structure which is
so constructed or in such condition as to be dangerous; or which is
infested with pests, or unsanitary; or which, if it be a dwelling or
habitation, is unfit for human habitation; or which is so dilapidated,
defective, unsightly or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair
that its relocation at the proposed site would cause appreciable harm to
or be materially detrimental to the property or improvement in the
district within a radius of 500 feet from the proposed site; or if the
proposed use is prohibited by the Zoning Chapter of this Code; or if the
structure is of a type prohibited by the Zoning Chapter of this Code; or
if the structure is of a type prohibited at the proposed location by the
Building Code or any other law or ordinance. Provided, however, that if
the condition of the building or structure, in the judgment of the
Building Department, permits of practicable and effective repair, the
permit may be issued upon conditions as hereinafter provided.
d. If the unlawful, dangerous or defective condition of the building or
structure proposed to be relocated is such that remedy or correction
cannot practicably and effectively be made, the permit shall be denied.
e. In order to determine any of the matters presented by the application,
the Building Department may make any investigation it deems
§ 14-6.14 COMPTON § 14-6.15
AO:614
§ 14-6.16. Public Hearing — Conditions — Appeal. [Ord. #856,
§ 8515; Ord. #983]
necessary, and may require complete plans and specifications,
including elevations, of any work proposed or necessary to be done.
f. Before any application for a relocation permit is accepted, a fee of $300
shall be paid by the applicant to cover the cost to the City of the
investigation of the condition of the building to be moved and the
inspection of the proposed new location. The application fee shall be in
addition to the regular building permit fee required. The Building
Inspector shall make a written report on the structural condition of the
building.
a. Before any Relocation Permit is issued, the Building Department shall
attach its report, any required photographs, and the termite inspection
report, to the application, and refer them to the Secretary of the
Planning Commission, who shall set the matter for public hearing
before the Planning Commission.
b. Notices of said public hearing shall be posted by the Secretary of the
Planning Commission, not more than 100 feet apart on each side of the
street, and for a distance of not less than 500 feet in each direction,
from the lot on which the building is to be relocated. Notices must be
posted at least five days before the date and hour of the hearing.
c. The Planning Commission may make such investigation of the facts
bearing upon such application as it deems necessary and hear
testimony from such witnesses as may be affected by the proposed
relocation. If for any reason testimony on any application cannot be
completed on the day set for hearing, or the Planning Commission
wishes to make any further investigation, the Commissioner presiding
may, before adjournment thereof, publicly announce the time and place
to, and at which, said hearing will be continued, and such
announcement shall serve as sufficient notice of such continuance
without further notice as provided for in the first instance in this
subsection.
d. The Planning Commission may, in authorizing any Relocation Permit,
impose thereon such terms and conditions as it may deem reasonable
and proper, including but not limited to the requirement of changes,
alterations, additions or repairs to be made to or upon the building or
structure to the end that the relocation thereof will not be materially
detrimental or injurious to public safety or to public welfare or to the
property and improvements of either, in the district as hereinbefore
limited, to which it is to be moved. Further terms and conditions may be
imposed by the Building Department in accordance with the Building
Code and Fire Zone regulations of this Code. The terms and conditions
upon which a permit is granted shall be written upon the permit or
appended thereto.
§ 14-6.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-6.16
AO:615
§ 14-6.17. Bond Required — Conditions. [Ord. #856, § 8516]
e. Not later than 15 days after completion of the said public hearing, the
Planning Commission shall render its decision on the matter. The
decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless an appeal in
writing therefrom is filed with the City Clerk within five days after the
decision is rendered. Appeal may be made by the applicant, or by any
person owning or in possession of property within 500 feet of the
property on which the structure is proposed to be relocated. The
Building Department shall issue no permits within the five day appeal
period, and the filing of such appeal within such time limit shall
suspend the action of the Planning Commission until the determination
of the appeal by the City Council or its dismissal by the appellant. If the
application is approved and no appeal is filed, the Secretary of the
Planning Commission shall return the file on the application to the
Building Department for issuance of the permit at the expiration of the
five day appeal period. If appeal is filed, the Secretary of the Planning
Commission shall return the file on the application to the Building
Department for issuance of the permit in the event the City Council
approves the application after hearing.
f. If an appeal is filed with the City Council within the time prescribed, the
City Council shall set the matter for public hearing in not less than five
days nor more than 14 days, by public announcement in open Council
session, of the time and place when and where such hearing will be
held. Following study of the facts presented and such testimony as may
be pertinent, the Council shall, within 15 days, render its decision on
the appeal, which decision shall be final.
g. Every Relocation Permit shall become void after 60 days from the date
of its issuance or within 60 days from the final decision on appeal,
whichever is later, unless a Building Permit has been obtained as herein
provided.
a. No Relocation Permit shall be issued unless the applicant therefor shall
first post with the Building Department, a bond executed by the owner
of the premises where the building or structure is to be located, as
principal, and by a surety company authorized to do business in this
State as surety.
b. The bond, which shall be in form, joint and several, shall name the City
as obligee and shall be in an amount equal to the cost, plus 10% of the
work required to be done in order to comply with all the conditions of
such Relocation Permit as estimated by the Building Department. In
lieu of a surety bond the applicant may deposit a cash bond in an
amount determined as above.
c. Every bond posted pursuant to this subsection shall be conditioned as
follows:
§ 14-6.16 COMPTON § 14-6.17
AO:616
§ 14-6.18. Default in Performance of Conditions. [Ord. #856,
§ 8517]
§ 14-6.19. Cash Bond. [Ord. #856, § 8518]
1. That each and all of the terms and conditions of the Relocation
Permit shall be complied with to the satisfaction of the Building
Department.
2. That all of the work required to be done pursuant to the conditions
of the Relocation Permit shall be fully performed and completed
within the time limit specified in the Relocation Permit; or, if no
time limit is specified, within 90 days after the date of the issuance
of said Relocation Permit elsewhere provided for. The time limit
herein specified, or the time limit specified in any permit, may be
extended for good and sufficient cause by the Building Department.
No such extension of time shall be valid unless written, and no such
extension shall release any surety upon any bond.
a. Whenever the Building Department shall find that a default has
occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any permit,
written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and to the surety
on the bond.
b. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof,
and the period of time deemed by the Building Department to be
reasonably necessary for the completion of such work.
c. After receipt of such notice the surety must, within the time therein
specified, either cause the required work to be performed or, failing
therein, must pay over to the Building Department the estimated cost of
doing the work, as set forth in the notice, plus an additional sum equal
to 10% of the said estimated cost. Upon the receipt of such monies the
Building Department shall proceed, by such mode as it deems
convenient, to cause the required work to be performed and completed,
but no liability shall be incurred therein other than for the expenditure
of the said sum in hand therefor.
a. If a cash bond has been posted, notice of default, as provided above,
shall be given to the principal, and if compliance is not had within the
time specified, the Chief Building Inspector shall proceed without delay,
and without further notice of proceedings whatever, to use the cash
deposit or any portion of such deposit to cause the required work to be
done, by contract or otherwise, in his discretion. The balance, if any, of
such cash deposit shall, upon the completion of the work, be returned to
the depositor, or to his successors or assigns, after deducting the cost of
the work plus 10% thereof.
b. When any default has occurred, on the part of the principal under the
preceding provisions, the surety shall have the option, in lieu of
completing the work required, to remove or demolish the building or
§ 14-6.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-6.19
AO:617
§ 14-6.20. Period and Termination of Bond. [Ord. #856, § 8519]
The term of each bond posted pursuant to this section shall begin upon
the date of the posting thereof and shall end upon the completion, to the
satisfaction of the Building Department, of the performance of all the terms
and conditions of the Relocation Permit. Such completion shall be evidenced
by a statement thereof, signed by the Chief Building Inspector, a copy of
which will be sent to any surety or principal upon request. When a cash
bond has been posted, the cash shall be returned to the depositor, or to his
successors or assigns, upon the termination of the bond, except any portion
thereof that may have been used or deducted as elsewhere in this section
provided.
§ 14-6.21. Entry Upon Premises. [Ord. #856, § 8520]
§ 14-6.22. Exceptions. [Ord. #856, § 8521]
The foregoing provisions pertaining to Relocation Permits shall not apply
where the building or structure is to be moved to a point outside the limits
of the City. In such cases, if the Building Department finds that the building
or structure is so constructed and in such condition that it may be removed
with safety, the permit shall be issued.
§ 14-7. HOUSING CODE.68
structure, and to clear, clean and restore the site. If the surety defaults
the City shall have the same option.
a. The Chief Building Inspector, the surety and duly authorized
representative of either, shall have access to the premises described in
the Relocation Permit for the purpose of inspecting the progress of the
work.
b. In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition
of the Relocation Permit, the surety or any person employed or engaged
on its behalf, or the City, or any person employed or engaged on its
behalf, shall have the right to go upon the premises to complete the
required work or to remove or demolish the building or structure.
c. No owner, or his representatives, successors or assigns, or any other
person, shall interfere with or obstruct the ingress or egress to or from
any such premises of any authorized representative or agent of any
surety or of the City engaged in the work of completing, demolishing or
removing any building or structure for which a Relocation Permit has
been issued, after a default has occurred in the performance of the
terms or conditions thereof.
68.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1257, 1275,
1348, 1414, 1473, 1530, 1544, 1607, 1801, 1818, 1897.
§ 14-6.19 COMPTON § 14-7.1
AO:618
§ 14-7.1. Adoption of Uniform Housing Code. [Ord. #1957, § 1; Ord.
#2013, § 1]
That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of
the City Clerk, being marked and designated as the "1997 Edition of the
Uniform Housing Code" (hereafter the "Housing Code"), published by the
International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted as the
Code of the City of Compton for providing minimum requirements for the
protection of life, limb, health, property, safety and welfare of the general
public and all owners and occupants of residential buildings; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such Housing
Code and supplements thereto hereinafter published are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Chapter, except as
the same may hereafter be modified or amended.
§ 14-7.2. Building Official. [Ord. #1957, § 1; Ord. #2224, § 17]
Wherever the term Building Official is used in said Housing Code, it shall
mean the Chief Building Inspector, who is charged with the administration
and enforcement of its provisions. In the absence of the Chief Building
Inspector, the Senior Building Inspector will assume the administration and
enforcement duties of the Chief Building Inspector.
§ 14-7.3. Amendment: Section 203 - BOARD OF APPEALS. [Ord.
#1957, § 1; Ord. #1991, § 1; Ord. #2224, § 18]
Section 203 of the Housing Code is replaced in its entirety by the following:
SECTION 203 - HOUSING ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD (HAAB) OR
HEARING OFFICER
Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official
relative to the application and interpretation of the Housing Code shall be
administered by either of the following means:
a. Housing Advisory and Appeals Board (HAAB).
There is hereby created a Housing Advisory and Appeals Board
(hereinafter the "HAAB" or the "Board") consisting of five voting
members who are not employees of the City of Compton and who
are qualified and specifically knowledgeable in the California Building
Standards Codes and applicable local ordinances. The Board is
authorized by the City Council to hear appeals regarding the
requirements of the City relating to the use, maintenance and change
of occupancy of buildings and structures, including requirements
governing alteration, additions, repair, demolition and moving. The
Building Official shall be an ex officio member of the Board and shall
act as Secretary to said Board, but shall have no vote on any matter
before the Board. The Board shall be appointed by the City Council and
shall hold office at its pleasure. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules
of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions
§ 14-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-7.3
AO:619
§ 14-7.4. Amendment: Section 204 - VIOLATIONS. [Ord. #1957, § 1]
Section 204 of said Housing Code is replaced in its entirety by the following:
SECTION 204 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or cause
or permit the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate building
permit for each such building or structure from the Building Official.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of said
Housing Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person,
firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the
provisions of said Housing Code is committed, continued or permitted, and,
upon the conviction of any such violation, such person, firm or corporation
shall be punishable as provided for violations of the Compton Municipal
Code.
§ 14-7.5. Amendment: Section 303 - INSPECTION. [Ord. #1957, § 1]
Section 303 of said Housing Code is amended by adding the following
sentence thereto:
The Building Official may require existing buildings or structures to be
upgraded to minimum standards as defined by the Building Official.
and findings in writing to the Building Official, with a duplicate copy to
the appellant, and may recommend to the City Council new legislation
as is consistent therewith. The Board shall have no authority relative to
interpretation of the administrative provisions of the Housing Code nor
shall it be empowered to waive requirements of the Code.
Members of the Board shall receive compensation at a rate set by
resolution of the City Council for attendance at meetings.
A majority of the membership of the Board shall constitute a quorum to
perform the duties of the Board. In the absence of a quorum, a Hearing
Officer may perform the duties of the Board.
b. Hearing Officer.
Provided that the Board is unable to constitute a quorum, the City
Council hereby authorizes the City Manager to appoint a Hearing
Officer who is not an employee of the City and who is qualified and
specifically knowledgeable in the California Building Standards Codes
and applicable local ordinances to perform the same duties of the
Board. The same rights, rules and procedures that apply to the
administration of duties by the Board shall also apply to the
administration of duties by the Hearing Officer as well.
§ 14-7.3 COMPTON § 14-7.6
AO:620
§ 14-7.6. Amendment: Section 503 - ROOM DIMENSIONS. [Ord.
#1957, § 1]
Section 503 of said Housing Code is amended by adding the following
Section 503.4 thereto:
503.4 Storage Rooms. A storage room of not less than 50 square feet shall
be provided when a dwelling unit does not have a garage. Storage rooms
of 50 square feet or less may be constructed on a concrete slab six inches
minimum above grade without footing or electrical requirements.
§ 14-7.7. Amendment: Section 505 - SANITATION. [Ord. #1957, § 1]
Section 505 of said Housing Code is amended by adding the following
Section 505.8 thereto:
505.8 Toilet Facilities. Toilet facilities shall not be installed in residential
garages or detached accessory buildings or structures.
§ 14-8. EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION IN EXISTING
BUILDINGS.69
§ 14-8.1. Scope. [Added by Ord. #1829, §§ 1, 2]
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all buildings constructed or
under construction prior to March 10, 1933, or for which a building permit
was issued prior to March 10, 1933, which on the effective date of this
section have unreinforced masonry bearing walls as defined herein.
EXCEPTION: This Chapter shall not apply to detached one or two family
dwellings and detached apartment houses containing fewer than five
dwelling units and used solely for residential purposes.
§ 14-8.2. Definitions. [Added by Ord. #1829, §§ 1, 2]
For purposes of this Chapter, the applicable definitions in Section 2302 and
2312 of the Uniform Building Code and the following shall apply:
ESSENTIAL BUILDING — Shall mean any building housing a hospital or
other medical facility having surgery or emergency treatment areas, fire
or police stations, municipal government disaster operation and
communication centers.
HIGH-RISK BUILDING — Shall mean any building not classified as essential
having an occupant load as determined by Section 302 of the Uniform
Building Code of 100 occupants or more.
EXCEPTION: A high-risk building shall not include the following:
Any building having exterior walls braced with masonry cross walls or
wood frame cross walls spaced less than 40 feet apart in each story.
a.
69.Tables A-J referred to herein are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 14-7.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-8.2
AO:621
HISTORICAL BUILDING — Shall mean any building designated as a
historical building by an appropriate Federal, State or City jurisdiction.
LOW-RISK BUILDING — Shall mean any building not classified an essential
building having an occupant load as determined by Section 3302 of the
Uniform Building Code of less than 20 occupants.
MEDIUM-RISK BUILDING — Shall mean any building not classified as
a high-risk building or an essential building having an occupant load as
determined by Subsection 3302(a) of the Uniform Building Code of 20
occupants or more.
UNREINFORCED MASONRY BEARING WALL — Shall mean a masonry wall
having all of the following characteristics:
§ 14-8.3. Rating Classification. [Added by Ord. #1829, §§ 1, 2]
The rating classifications as exhibited in Table No. 14-A are hereby
established and each building within the scope of this Chapter shall be
placed in one such rating classification by the City. The total occupant load
of the entire building as determined by Subsection 3302(a) of the Uniform
Building Code shall be used to determine the rating classifications.
EXCEPTION: For the purpose of this Chapter, portions of buildings
constructed to act independently when resisting seismic forces may be
placed in separate rating classifications.
§ 14-8.4. General Requirements. [Added by Ord. #1829, §§ 1, 2]
The owner of each building within the scope of this Chapter shall cause
a structural analysis to be made of the building by a civil or structural
engineer or architect licensed by the State of California, and if the building
does not meet the minimum earthquake standards specified in this Chapter,
the owner shall cause it to be structurally altered to conform to such
standards or cause the building to be demolished.
The owner of a building within the scope of this Chapter shall comply with
the requirements set forth above by submitting to the City for review within
the stated time limits:
Cross walls shall be full story height with a minimum length of 1 1/2
times the story height.
Any building used for its intended purpose as determined by the
department for less than 20 hours per week.
b.
a. Provides the vertical support for a floor or roof.
b. The total superimposed loan is over 100 pounds per linear foot.
The area of reinforcing steel is less than 50% of that required Chapter
24, of the Uniform Building Code.
c.
§ 14-8.2 COMPTON § 14-8.4
AO:622
§ 14-8.5. Administration. [Added by Ord. #1829, §§ 1, 2; amended
by Ord. #2224, § 19]
a. Within 270 days after the service of the order, a structural analysis.
Such analysis, which is subject to approval by the City, shall
demonstrate that the building meets the minimum requirements of this
Chapter; or
b. Within 270 days after the service of the order, a structural analysis and
plans for the proposed structural alterations of the building necessary
to comply to the minimum requirements of this Chapter; or
c. Within 120 days after service of the order, plans for the installation of
wall anchors in accordance with the requirements specified in
subsection 14-8.8; or
d. Within 270 days after the service of the order, plans for the demolition
of the building.
After plans are submitted and approved by the City, the owner shall obtain
a building permit, commence and complete the required construction or
demolition within the time limits set forth in Table No. 14-B. These time
limits shall begin to run from the date the order is served in accordance with
subsection 14-8.6.
Owners electing to comply with paragraph c of this subsection, are also
required to comply with paragraphs b or d of this subsection, provided,
however, that the 270-day period provided for in such paragraphs b and d
and the time limits for obtaining a building permit, commencing construction
and completing construction for complete structural alterations or building
demolition set forth in Table No. 14-B shall be extended in accordance with
Table No. 14-C. Each such extended time limit, except the time limit for
commencing construction, shall begin to run from the date the order is served
in accordance with subsection 14-8.6. The time limit for commencing
construction shall run from the date the building permit is issued.
a. Service of Order. The City shall issue an order, as provided in paragraph
b below, to the owner of each building within the scope of this Chapter
in accordance with the minimum time periods for service of such orders
set forth in Table Nos. 14-B and C. The City shall, upon receipt of a
written request from the owner, order a building to comply with this
Chapter prior to the normal service date for such building set forth in
this section.
b. Contents of Order. The order shall be in writing and shall be served
either personally or by certified or registered mail upon the owner as
shown on the last equalized assessment, and upon the order shall
specify that the building has been determined by the City to be within
the scope of this Chapter and, therefore, is required to meet the
minimum seismic standards of this Chapter. The order shall specify the
rating classification of the building and shall be accompanied by a copy
§ 14-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-8.5
AO:623
of subsection 14-8.5, which sets forth the owner's alternatives and time
limits for compliance.
c. Appeal from Order. The owner or person in charge or control of the
building may appeal, as provided for in this Chapter. Such appeal shall
be filed within 60 days from the service date of the order described in
this subsection 14-8.6. Any such appeal shall be decided by the Board or
Hearing Officer no later than 60 days after the date that the appeal is
filed. Such appeal shall be made in writing upon appropriate forms
provided therefor by the City, and the grounds thereof shall be stated
clearly and concisely. Each appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee
as set forth in paragraph f of this subsection.
Appeals or request for slight modifications from any other
determination, orders or action by the City pursuant to this Chapter
shall be made in accordance with the procedures established in Section
106 of the Uniform Building Code.
d. Recordation. At the time that the City serves the aforementioned order,
the City shall file with the Office of the County Recorder a certificate
stating that the subject building is within the scope of Earthquake
Hazard Reduction in Existing Buildings of the Compton Municipal
Code. The certificate shall also state that the owner thereof has been
ordered to structurally analyze the building and to structurally alter or
demolish it where compliance is not exhibited.
If the building is either demolished, found not to be within the scope
of this Chapter, or is structurally capable of resisting minimum seismic
forces required by this Chapter as a result of structural alterations or
an analysis, the City shall file with the Office of the County Recorder
a certificate terminating the status of the subject building as being
classified within the scope of Earthquake Hazard Reduction in Existing
Buildings of the Compton Municipal Code.
e. Enforcement. If the owner or other person in charge or control of the
subject building fails to comply with any order issued by the City
pursuant to this Chapter within any of the time limits set forth in
subsection 14-8.5, the City shall order that the entire building be
vacated and that the building remain vacated until such order has been
complied with. If compliance with such order has not been
accomplished within 90 days after the date the building has been
ordered vacated or such additional time as may have been granted by
the Board or Hearing Officer, the Building and Safety Director may
order its demolition in accordance with the provision of this Code.
f. Appellate Fee; Building and Safety Director.
1. The fee for an appeal of the Building and Safety Director's action
shall be $75.70
70.Editor's Note: Fees increased/decreased pursuant to subsection 14-8.2f may be set by
Council resolution.
§ 14-8.5 COMPTON § 14-8.5
AO:624
§ 14-8.6. Historical Buildings. [Added by Ord. #1829, §§ 1, 2]
2. The fee for an appeal to the City Council of any action of the Board
or Hearing Officer shall be $250.
a. General. The standards and procedures established by this Chapter
shall apply in all aspects to a historical building except that as a means
to preserve original architectural elements and facilitate restoration, a
historical building may, in addition, comply with the special provisions
set forth in this section.
b. Unburned Clay Masonry or Adobe. Existing or re-erected walls of adobe
construction shall conform to the following:
1. Unreinforced adobe masonry walls shall not exceed a height or
height-to-thickness ratio of five for exterior bearing walls and must
be provided with a reinforced bond beam at the top,
interconnecting all walls. Minimum beam depth shall be six inches
and a minimum width of eight inches less than the wall width.
Minimum wall thickness shall be 18 inches for exterior bearing
walls and 10 inches for adobe partitions. No adobe structure shall
exceed one story in height unless the historic evidence indicates a
two-story height. In such cases, the height-to-thickness ratio shall
be the same as above for the first floor based on the total two-story
height, and the second floor wall thickness shall not exceed the
ratio five by more than 20%. Bond beams shall be provided at the
roof and second floor levels.
2. Foundation footing shall be reinforced concrete under newly
reconstructed walls and shall be 50% wider than the wall above,
soil conditions permitting, except that the foundation wall may be
four inches less in width than the wall above if a rock, burned brick,
or stabilized adobe facing is necessary to provide authenticity.
3. New or existing unstabilized brick and adobe brick masonry shall
have an average compressive strength of 225 pounds per square
inch when tested in accordance with ASTM designation C 67. One
sample out of five may have a compressive strength of not less than
188 pounds per square inch. Unstabilized brick may be used where
existing bricks are unstabilized and where the building is not
susceptible to flooding conditions or direct exposure. Adobe may be
allowed a maximum value of three pounds per square inch for
shear with no increase for lateral forces.
4. Mortar may be of the same soil composition and stabilization as the
brick in lieu of cement mortar.
5. Nominal tension stresses due to seismic forces normal to the wall
may be neglected if the wall meets thickness requirements and
shear values allowed by this subsection.
§ 14-8.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-8.6
AO:625
§ 14-8.7. Analysis and Design. [Added by Ord. #1829, §§ 1, 2]
c. Archaic Materials. Allowable stresses for archaic materials net
specified in this Code shall be based on substantiating research data or
engineering judgment, subject to the Department's satisfaction.
d. Alternative Materials and SHBC Advisory Review. Alternative
materials, design or methods of construction will be considered as set
forth in subsection 14-8.9. In addition, when a request for an alternative
proposed design, material or method of construction is being
considered, the City may file written request for opinion to the State
Historical Building Code Advisory Board for its consideration, advice or
findings in accordance with the SHBC.
a. General. Every structure within the scope of this Chapter shall be
analyzed and constructed to resist minimum total lateral seismic forces
assumed to act nonconcurrently in the direction of each of the main axis
of the structure in accordance with the equation v = IKCSW:
The value of IKCS need not exceed the values set forth in Table No.
14-D based on the applicable rating classification of the building.
b. Lateral Forces on Elements of Structures. Parts or portions of
structures shall be analyzed and designed for lateral loads in
accordance with subsection 14-8.8a and 2312(e) of the Uniform
Building Code but not less than the value from the equation: Fp = ICp
SEp.
For the provisions of this subsection, the product of IS need not exceed
the values as set forth in Table No. 14-E.
EXCEPTION: Unreinforced masonry walls in buildings and having a
Rating Classification of 1 may be analyzed in accordance with
subsection 14-8.9.
The value of Cp need not exceed the values set forth in Table No. 14-F.
c. Anchorage and Interconnection. Anchorage and interconnection of all
parts, portions and elements of the structure shall be analyzed and
designed for lateral forces in accordance with Table No. 14-F of this
Chapter and the equation Fp = ICpSW as modified by Table No. 14-E.
Minimum anchorage of masonry walls to each floor or roof shall resist a
minimum force of 200 pounds per linear foot acting normal to the wall
at the level of the floor or roof.
d. Level of Required Repair. Alteration and repairs required to meet the
provisions of this Chapter shall comply with all other applicable
requirements of this Code unless specifically provided for in this
Chapter.
e. Required Analysis.
§ 14-8.6 COMPTON § 14-8.7
AO:626
1. General. Except as modified herein, the analysis and design
relating to the structural alteration of existing structures within the
scope of this Chapter shall be in accordance with the analysis
specified in Chapter 23 of the Uniform Building Code, 1988 Edition,
or as it may be amended from time to time.
2. Continuous Stress Path. A complete, continuous stress path from
every part or portion of the structure to the ground shall be
provided for the required horizontal forces.
3. Positive Connections. All parts, portions or elements of the
structure shall be interconnected by positive means.
f. Analysis Procedure.
1. General. Stresses in materials and existing construction utilized to
transfer seismic forces from the ground to parts or portions of the
structure shall conform to those permitted by the Uniform Building
Code and those materials and types of construction specified in
subsection 14-8.9.
EXCEPTION: The Building Official has the authority to accept
alternate methods of retrofit in accordance with Section 105 of the
Uniform Building Code.
2. Connection. Materials and connectors used for interconnection of
parts and portions of the structure shall conform to the Uniform
Building Code. Nails may be used as part of an approved connector.
3. Unreinforced Masonry Walls. Except as modified herein,
unreinforced masonry walls shall be analyzed as specified in
Chapter 24 of the Uniform Building Code and to withstand all
vertical loads as specified in Chapter 23 of the Uniform Building
Code in addition to the seismic forces required by this Chapter. The
50% increase in the seismic force factor for shear walls as specified
in Table No. 24-H of the Uniform Building Code may be omitted in
the computation of seismic loads to existing shear walls.
No allowable tension stress will be permitted in unreinforced
masonry walls. Walls not capable of resisting the required design
forces specified in this Chapter shall be strengthened or shall be
removed and replaced.
EXCEPTION:
(a) Unreinforced masonry walls in buildings not classified as a
Rating Classification I pursuant to Table No. 14-A may be
analyzed in accordance with subsection 14-8.9.
(b) Unreinforced masonry walls which carry no design loads other
than their own weight may be considered as veneer if they are
adequately anchored to new supporting elements.
§ 14-8.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-8.7
AO:627
§ 14-8.8. Materials of Construction. [Ord. #1829, §§ 1, 2]
g. Combination of Vertical and Seismic Forces.
1. New Materials. All new materials introduced into the structure to
meet the requirements of this section which are subjected to
combined vertical and horizontal forces shall comply with
subsection 2303(f) of the Uniform Building Code.
2. Existing Materials. When stresses in existing lateral force-resisting
elements are due to a combination of dead loads plus seismic loads,
the allowable working stress specified in the Uniform Building
Code may be increased 100%. However, no increase will be
permitted in the stresses allowed in subsection 14-8.9 and the
stresses in members due only to seismic and dead loads shall not
exceed the values permitted by subsection 2303(d) of the Uniform
Building Code.
3. Allowable Reduction of Bending Stress by Vertical Load. In
calculating tensile fiber stress due to seismic forces required by
this Chapter, the maximum tensile fiber stress may be reduced by
the full direct stress due to vertical dead loads.
a. General. All materials permitted by the Uniform Building Code,
including their appropriate allowable stresses and those existing
configurations of materials specified herein, may be utilized to meet the
requirements of this Chapter.
b. Existing Materials.
1. Unreinforced Masonry Walls. Unreinforced masonry walls analyzed
in accordance with this section may provide vertical support for
roof and floor construction and resistance to lateral loads. The
bonding of such walls shall be as specified in subsection 2411(b)1
of the Uniform Building Code.
Tension stresses due to seismic forces normal to the wall may
be neglected if the wall does not exceed the height for length-tothickness
ratio and the in-plane shear stresses due to seismic loads
as set forth in Table No. 14-G.
If the wall height-thickness ratio exceeds the specified limits, the
wall may be supported by vertical bracing members designed in
accordance with Chapter 23 of the Uniform Building Code. The
deflection of such bracing members at design loads shall not
exceed 1/10 of the wall thickness.
EXCEPTION: The wall may be supported by flexible vertical
bracing members designed in accordance with subsection 14-8.8b,
if the deflection of design load is not less than 1/4 nor more than 1/
3 of the wall thickness.
§ 14-8.7 COMPTON § 14-8.8
AO:628
All vertical bracing members shall be attached to floor and roof
construction for their design loads independently of required wall
anchors. Horizontal spacing of vertical bracing members shall not
exceed 1/2 the unsupported height of the wall nor 10 feet.
The wall height may be measured vertically to bracing elements
other than a floor or roof. Spacing of the bracing elements and
wall anchors shall not exceed six feet. Bracing elements shall be
detailed to minimize the horizontal displacement of the wall by
components of vertical displacement of the floor or roof.
2. Existing Roof, Floors, Walls, Footings and Wood Framing. Existing
materials, including wood shear walls utilized in the described
configuration, may be used as part of the lateral load resisting
system, provided that the stresses in these materials do not exceed
the values shown in Table No. 14-H.
c. Strengthening of Existing Materials. New materials including wood
shear walls, may be utilized to strengthen portions of the existing
seismic resisting system in the described configurations, provided that
the stresses do not exceed the values shown in Table No. 14-I
(attached).
d. Alternate Materials. Alternate materials, designs and methods of
construction may be approved by the City in accordance with the
provision of Section 105 of the Uniform Building Code.
e. Minimum Acceptable Quality of Existing Unreinforced Masonry Walls.
1. General Provisions. All unreinforced masonry walls utilized to carry
vertical loads and seismic forces parallel and perpendicular to the
wall plane shall be tested as specified in this subsection. All
masonry quality shall equal or exceed the minimum standards
established herein or shall be removed and replaced by new
materials. Alternate methods of testing may be approved by the
City. The quality of mortar in all masonry walls shall be determined
by performing in-place shear tests or by testing eight inch diameter
cores. Alternative methods of testing may be approved by the City.
Nothing shall prevent pointing with mortar of all the masonry wall
joints before the tests are first made. Prior to any pointing, the
mortar joints must be raked and cleaned to remove loose and
deteriorated mortar. Mortar for pointing shall be Type S or N
except masonry cement shall not be used. All preparation and
mortar pointing shall be done under the continuous inspection of a
registered deputy building inspector.
At the conclusion of the inspection, the inspector shall submit a
written report to the licensed engineer or architect responsible
for the seismic analysis of the building setting forth the result of
the work inspected. Such report shall be submitted to the City
for approval as part of the structural analysis. All testing shall be
performed in accordance with the requirements specified in this
§ 14-8.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-8.8
AO:629
subsection by testing agency approved by the City. An accurate
record of all such tests and their location in the building shall
be recorded and these results shall be submitted to the City for
approval as part of the structural analysis.
2. Number and Location of Tests. The minimum number of tests shall
be two per wall or line of wall elements resisting a common force,
or one per 1,500 square feet of wall surface, with a minimum of
eight tests in any case. The exact test or core location shall be
determined at the building site by the licensed engineer or
architect responsible for the seismic analysis of the subject
building.
3. In-Place Shear Tests. The bed joints of the outer withe of the
masonry shall be tested in shear by laterally displacing a single
brick relative to the adjacent bricks in that withe. The opposite
head joint of the brick to be tested shall be removed and cleaned
prior to testing. The minimum quality mortar in 80% of the shear
tests shall not be less than the total of 30 psi plus the axial stress in
the wall at the point of the test. The shear stress shall be based on
the gross area of both bed joints and shall be that at which
movement of the brick is first observed.
4. Core Tests. A minimum number of mortar test specimens equal to
the number of required cores shall be prepared from the cores and
leveled as specified herein. The mortar joint of the outer withe of
the masonry core shall be tested in shear by placing the circular
core section in a compression testing machine with the mortar bed
joint rotated 15° from the axis of the applied load. The mortar joint
tested in shear shall have an average ultimate stress of 20 psi
braced on the gross area. The average shall be obtained from the
total number of cores made. If test specimens cannot be made from
cores taken then the shear value shall be reported as zero.
f. Testing of Shear Bolts. One-fourth of all new shear bolts and dowels
embedded in unreinforced masonry walls shall be tested by a registered
deputy building inspector using a torque calibrate wrench to the
following minimum torques:
1/2-inch diameter bolts or dowels - Forty-foot lbs.
5/8-inch diameter bolts or dowels - Fifty-foot lbs.
3/4-inch diameter bolts or dowels - Sixty-foot lbs.
No bolts exceeding 3/4 inch shall be used. All nuts shall be installed
over malleable iron or plate washers when bearing on wood and heavy
cut washers when bearing on steel.
g. Determination of Allowable Stresses for Design Methods Based on Test
Results.
§ 14-8.8 COMPTON § 14-8.8
AO:630
§ 14-8.9. Information Required on Plans. [Added by Ord. #1829,
§§ 1, 2]
1. Design Shear Values. Design seismic in-plane shear stresses shall
be substantiated by tests performed as specified in subsection
14-8.9e3 and 4.
Design stresses shall be related to test results obtaining in
accordance with Table No. 14-J (attached). Intermediate values
between three and 10 psi may be interpolated.
2. Design compression and tension values, compression stresses for
unreinforced masonry having a minimum design shear value of
three psi shall not exceed 100 psi. Design tension values for
unreinforced masonry shall not be permitted.
h. Rod Anchors. 5% of the existing rod anchors utilized as all or part of the
required wall anchors shall be tested in pullout by an approved testing
laboratory. The number tested shall be four per floor, with two tests at
walls with joists framing into the wall and two tests at walls with joists
parallel to the wall. The test apparatus shall be supported on the
masonry wall at a minimum distance of the wall thickness from the
anchor tested. The rod anchor shall be given a preload of 300 pounds
prior to establishing a datum for recording elongation. The tension test
load reported shall be recorded at 1/2 inch relative movement of the
anchor and the adjacent masonry surface. Results of all tests shall be
reported. The report shall include the test results as related to the wall
thickness and joist orientation. The allowable resistance value of the
existing anchors shall be 40% of the average of those tested anchors
having the same wall thickness and joist orientation.
i. Qualification Tests for Devices Used for Wall Anchorage. Qualifications
tests for devices used for wall anchorage shall be tested with the entire
tension load carried on the enlarged head at the exterior face of the
wall. Bond on the part of the device between the enlarged head and the
interior wall face shall be eliminated for the qualification tests. The
resistance value assigned the device shall be 20% of the average of the
ultimate loads.
a. General. In addition to the seismic analysis required elsewhere in this
Chapter, the licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic
analysis of the building shall determine and record the information
required by the section on the approved plans.
b. Construction Details. The following requirements with appropriate
construction details shall be made part of the approved plans:
1. All unreinforced masonry walls shall be anchored at the roof level
by tension bolts through the wall as specified in Table No. I or by
approved equivalent at a maximum anchor spacing of six feet.
§ 14-8.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-8.9
AO:631
Anchors installed in accordance with Section 2310 of the Uniform
Building Code shall be accepted as conforming to this requirement.
All unreinforced masonry walls shall be anchored at all floors with
tension bolts through the wall or by existing rod anchors at a
maximum anchor spacing of six feet. All existing rod anchors shall
be secured to the joists to develop the required forces. The City
may require testing to verify the adequacy of the embedded ends
of the existing rod anchors. Tests when required shall conform to
subsection 14-8.9h.
When access to the exterior face of the masonry wall is prevented
by proximity of an existing building, wall anchors conforming to
items 5 and 6 in Table No. 14-I may be used.
Alternative devices to be used in lieu of tension bolts for masonry
wall anchorage shall be tested as specified in subsection 14-8.9i.
2. Diaphragm cord stresses of horizontal diaphragms shall be
developed in existing materials or by addition of new materials.
3. Where trusses and beams other than rafters or joists are supported
on masonry, ledges or columns shall be installed to support vertical
loads of the roof or floor members.
4. Parapets and exterior wall appendages not capable of resisting the
forces specified in this Chapter shall be removed, stabilized or
braced to ensure that the parapets and appendages remain in their
original position.
5. All deteriorated mortar joints in unreinforced masonry walls shall
be pointed with Type S or N mortar. Prior to any pointing, the wall
surface must be raked and cleaned to remove loose and
deteriorated mortar. All preparation and pointing shall be done
under the continuous inspection of a registered deputy building
inspector certified to inspect masonry or concrete. At the
conclusion of the project, the inspector shall submit a written
report to the City setting forth the portion of work inspected.
6. Repair details of any cracked or damaged unreinforced masonry
wall required to resist forces specified in this Chapter.
c. Existing Construction. The following existing construction information
shall be made part of the approved plans:
1. The type and dimensions of existing walls and the size and spacing
of floor and roof members.
2. The extent and type of existing wall anchorage to floors and roof.
3. The extent and type of parapet corrections which were performed
in accordance with Section 2310 of the Uniform Building Code.
§ 14-8.9 COMPTON § 14-8.9
AO:632
§ 14-9. REGISTRATION OF GROUP HOMES AND HALFWAY
HOUSES. [Ord. #1834, §§ 1 — 3]
§ 14-10. FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.
§ 14-10.1. Applicability. [Ord. #2000, § 1]
These regulations apply to all properties in the area of special flood hazard
within the City of Compton designated by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) as a Flood Control Restoration (AR) Zone.
§ 14-10.2. Purpose. [Ord. #2000, § 1]
It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in the AR Zone as identified by FEMA by establishing provisions
designed to:
4. Accurately dimensioned floor plans and masonry wall elevations
showing dimensioned openings, piers, wall thickness and heights.
5. The location of cracks or damaged portions of unreinforced
masonry walls requiring repairs.
6. The type of interior wall surfaces and if reinstalling or anchoring of
ceiling plaster is necessary.
7. The general condition of the mortar joints and if the joints need
pointing.
a. The City of Compton shall now and hereafter require the State
Department of Social Services and the license of group homes and
halfway houses to register all such facilities located in the City of
Compton with the Planning Department.
b. The City's Fire Marshal shall inspect the facility and ascertain whether
or not it will meet the Fire Code.
c. This action is taken for information purposes only. It is not a licensing
requirement and in no way shall interfere with Section 1566.3 of the
Health and Safety Code of the State of California.
a. Protect human life and health.
b. Minimize expenditures of public money for costly flood control projects.
c. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding,
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
d. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
§ 14-8.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-10.2
AO:633
§ 14-10.3. Definitions. [Ord. #2000, § 1]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
as to give the Flood Plain Management Regulations reasonable application.
100-YEAR FLOOD — See "Base flood."
APPEAL — Shall mean a request for a review of the Floodplain
Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this section.
AR ZONE — Shall mean a special flood hazard area that results from the
decertification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is
determined to be in the process of being restored to provide a 100-year or
greater level of flood protection.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean a designated AR Zone (with
base flood depth) on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood
depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not
exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity
flow may be evident. Such flow is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — See "Special flood hazard area."
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean a flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood
is the term used throughout this section.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
– i.e. below ground level on all sides.
BUILDING — See "Structure."
CITY — Shall mean the City of Compton.
DEVELOPED AREAS — Shall mean an area of a community that is:
e. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges
located in the AR Zone.
f. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of land and properties in the AR Zone so as to minimize
future blighted areas caused by flood damage.
A primarily urbanized, built-up area that is a minimum of 20 contiguous
acres, has basic urban infrastructure, including roads, utilities,
communications, and public facilities, to sustain industrial, residential
and commercial activities, and
Within which 75% or more of the parcels, tracts, or lots contain
commercial, industrial or residential structures or uses; or
1.
Is a single parcel, tract or lot in which 75% of the area contains
existing commercial or industrial structures or uses; or
2.
a.
§ 14-10.2 COMPTON § 14-10.3
AO:634
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings and other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ENCROACHMENT — Shall mean the advance or infringement of uses, plant
growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development
into a flood plain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a flood
plain.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — Shall mean the official map on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Is a subdivision developed at a density of at least two residential
structures per acre in which 75% or more of the lots contain
existing residential structures.
3.
Undeveloped parcels, tracts or lots, the combination of which is less
than 20 acres which is contiguous on at least three sides to areas
meeting the criteria of paragraph a1.
b.
A subdivision that is a minimum of 20 contiguous acres and has
obtained all necessary government approvals, provided that the actual
"start of construction" of structures has occurred on at least:
1. 10% of the lots or remaining lots of the subdivision; or
10% of the maximum building coverage or remaining building
coverage allowed for a single lot subdivision and construction of
structures is underway.
2.
Residential subdivisions must meet the density criteria in
paragraph a3 above.
3.
c.
Per the above definition, all of the land within the corporate limits of
the City of Compton is a "developed area" for the following reasons:
The City of Compton is 6,514 contiguous acres in size and is fully
urbanized and built up, with basic infrastructure, including roads,
utilities, communications and public facilities to sustain industrial,
residential and commercial activities and within which less than
3% of the land is vacant and undeveloped.
1.
There are no undeveloped/vacant parcels, tracts or lots within
the City that are 20 acres or greater in area. Nor are there
undeveloped/vacant parcels, tracts or lots contiguous to each other
that equal or exceed 20 acres in area. In addition, all undeveloped/
vacant parcels, tracts, or lots within the City are contiguous on
at least three sides to areas meeting the criteria of paragraph d1
above.
2.
d.
§ 14-10.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-10.3
AO:635
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — Shall mean the official report provided by
the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean Section 14-10 and
28-5 of the Compton Municipal Code.
FLOOD PLAIN ADMINISTRATOR — Shall mean the Planning Director of the
City of Compton or an appointed designee.
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT — Shall mean the operation of an overall
program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage
and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the
flood plain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans,
flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space
plans.
FLOOD PLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Shall mean any land area
designated Zone AR.
FLOOD PROOFING — Shall mean any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures, which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property,
water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOOD, FLOODING OR FLOOD WATER — Shall mean:
FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION — As related in the Variance Procedure, of
this section, shall mean that the variance granted must not cause fraud on
or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City will
consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government
responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years.
Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood
elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage
from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as
a whole, are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering
that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may
purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage
and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the City Council of the City of Compton.
HARDSHIP — As related in the Variance Procedure, shall mean the
exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested
variance. Said variance shall be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the
property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not
exception. Inconvenience aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps,
personal preferences and the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source; and/or mudslides (i.e. mudflows); and
a.
b. The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.
§ 14-10.3 COMPTON § 14-10.3
AO:636
cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exception hardship. All of these problems
can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if
the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
LEVEE — Shall mean a man-made structure, usually an earthen
embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound
engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to
provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM — Shall mean a flood protection system, which consists of
a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage
devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound
engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area,
including basement (see "Basement").
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one or
more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle."
MEAN SEA LEVEL — Shall mean, for purposes of the National Flood
Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929
or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, shall mean
new freestanding structures for which the "start of construction"
An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that
is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's
lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design
requirements, including, but not limited to:
The wet flood proofing standard in subsections 14-10.8 and
14-10.9.
1.
2. The anchoring standards in subsection 14-10.8a1.
The construction materials and methods standards in subsection
14-10.8a2.
3.
4. The standards for utilities in subsection 14-10.9.
a.
For residential structures, all subgrade-enclosed areas are prohibited
as they are considered basements. This prohibition includes belowgrade
garages and storage areas.
b.
§ 14-10.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-10.3
AO:637
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted herein and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
OBSTRUCTION — Shall mean and include, but is not limited to, any dam,
wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection,
excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence,
rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along,
across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard
or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water or, due to its
location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of
water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.
PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE — As referred to in the Variance
Procedure of this section, shall mean that the granting of a variance shall
not result in anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire
community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or
unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of
any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is:
REMEDY A VIOLATION — Shall mean to bring the structure or other
development into compliance with State or local flood plain management
regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its
noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the
structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing
the enforcement provisions of the regulation or otherwise deterring future
similar violations, or reducing State or Federal financial exposure with
regard to the structure or other development.
RIVERINE — Shall mean relating to, formed by, or resembling a river
(including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SHEET FLOW AREA — See "Area of shallow flooding."
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — Shall mean an area in the flood
plain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is
shown on the FIRM for Compton as Zone AR.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean and include proposed new
development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided
the actual start of construction was within 180 days from the date of the
a. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
b.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
c.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
d.
§ 14-10.3 COMPTON § 14-10.3
AO:638
permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on
a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building that is principally
above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured
home.
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of these
regulations which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise
be prohibited.
VIOLATION — Shall mean the failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with these regulations. A structure or other development
without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in these regulations is presumed to be in violation until
such time as such documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — Shall mean the height, in relation to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where
specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains
of coastal or riverine areas.
WATERCOURSE — Shall mean a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo,
channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least
periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which
substantial flood damage may occur.
§ 14-10.4. General Provisions. [Ord. #2000, § 1]
The following general provisions are applicable to the flood plain
management regulations:
a. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of
special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration
(FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated July 6, 1998, and accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments
and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of these regulations. This FIS and attendant mapping is the
minimum area of applicability of this section and may be supplemented
by studies for other areas which allow implementation and are
§ 14-10.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-10.4
AO:639
§ 14-10.5. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. #2000, § 1]
A Development Permit shall be obtained before any construction or other
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in
subsection 14-10.4a. Application for a Development Permit shall be made
on forms furnished by the Department of Building and Planning and may
include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing
or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the
location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator. The
study and FIRM are on file in the office of the City Clerk and the
Department of Building and Planning.
b. Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed,
located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with
these regulations. Violation of these requirements (including violations
of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions)
shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City
from taking such lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
c. Exemptions. These regulations shall not apply to additions,
modifications, improvements or rehabilitations to legally existing
buildings or structures.
d. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of these
regulations, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
e. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection
required by these regulations is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may
be increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. Adoption of these regulations shall not create liability on the
part of the City of Compton, any officer or employee thereof, the State
of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal
Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result
from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder.
§ 14-10.4 COMPTON § 14-10.5
AO:640
§ 14-10.6. Designation of Flood Plain Administrator. [Ord. #2000,
§ 1]
The Planning Director is hereby appointed to administer, implement and
enforce this section by granting or denying Development Permits in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 14-10.7. Duties and Responsibilities of the Flood Plain
Administrator. [Ord. #2000, § 1]
The duties and responsibilities of the Flood Plain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to the following:
a. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures in Zone AR (with base flood
depth), elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of
lowest floor of all structures; or
b. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be flood proofed, if required by subsection
14-10.8a3(c); and
c. All appropriate certifications listed in subsection 14-10.7d; and
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
a. Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:
1. Permit requirements of this subsection have been satisfied;
2. All other required State and Federal permits have been obtained;
3. The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and
4. The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been
determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes
of these regulations, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
b. Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. When base flood
elevation data has not been provided in accordance with subsection
14-10.4a, the Flood Plain Administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base floor elevation and floodway data available
from a Federal or State agency, or other source, in order to administer
Section 14-10. Any such information shall be submitted to the City
Council for adoption.
c. Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a
watercourse:
§ 14-10.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-10.7
AO:641
§ 14-10.8. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction. [Ord. #2000, § 1]
The following general provisions are applicable for flood hazard reduction:
1. Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of
Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;
2. Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and
3. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
d. Documentation of Flood Plain Development. Obtain and maintain for
public inspection and make available as needed the following:
1. Certification required by subsection 14-10.8a3(a) (Lowest flood
elevations);
2. Certification required by subsection 14-10.8a3(b) (Elevation or
floodproofing of nonresidential structures);
3. Certification required by subsection 14-10.8a3(c) (Wet
floodproofing standard); and
4. Certification of elevation required by Section 28-1 (Subdivision
Standards).
e. Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of these regulations
specified in subsection 14-10.4b.
f. AR Zone Duties. A determination has already been made, pursuant to
subsection 14-10.3 ("Developed Areas") that all areas within Zone AR,
as well as within the corporate boundaries of the City, are "developed
areas." Consequently, only Zone AR regulations pertaining to developed
areas are applicable to development within the City of Compton.
1. Determine the base flood elevation to be used for individual
projects, by referring to subsection 14-10.8a3.
2. Require the applicable standards in subsection 14-10.8.
3. Provide written notification to the permit applicant that the area
has been designated as an AR Zone and the structure must be
elevated or protected as specified in subsection 14-10.8.
a. Standards of Construction. In all areas of special flood hazards the
following standards are required:
1. Anchoring:
(a) All new construction shall be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
§ 14-10.7 COMPTON § 14-10.8
AO:642
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including
the effects of buoyancy.
(b) All manufactured homes and modular structures shall meet the
anchoring standards of subsection 14-10.8.3a3.
2. Construction Materials and Methods: All new construction shall be
constructed as follows:
(a) With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
(b) Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
(c) With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering
or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding; and
(d) So that there are adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from the
proposed structures.
3. Elevation and Flood Proofing. (See definitions for "basement,"
"lowest floor," and "new construction.")
(a) New residential construction, including manufactured homes,
shall meet the standards of subsection 14-10.8 and shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, elevated as follows:
(1) Elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height
equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet
on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the
highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
(2) Elevated using the lower of either the AR base flood
elevation or the elevation that is three feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
(3) New manufactured homes and modular structures shall be
securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement
and be elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home or modular
structure meets the elevation requirements provided
above; or
(ii) The manufactured home or modular structure chassis
shall be supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength
that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade.
§ 14-10.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-10.8
AO:643
§ 14-10.9. Standards for Utilities. [Ord. #2000, § 1]
§ 14-10.10. Recreational Vehicles. [Ord. #2000, § 1]
(b) Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the
lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a
registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by a
City Building Inspector to be properly elevated. Such
certification and verification shall be provided to the Flood
Plain Administrator.
b. New nonresidential construction shall either be elevated to conform
with subsection 14-10.8a3(a) or together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities:
1. Be flood proofed below the elevation recommended under
subsection 14-10.8a3(a) so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
2. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
3. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification
shall be provided to the Flood Plain Administrator.
c. All new construction with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
(excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for
meeting this requirement shall exceed the following minimum criteria:
1. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
2. Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
a. All water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate:
1. Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
2. Discharge from the systems into flood waters.
b. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them, or contamination from them during flooding.
a. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within the AR Zone shall either:
§ 14-10.8 COMPTON § 14-10.10
AO:644
§ 14-10.11. Variance Procedure. [Ord. #2000, § 1]
Variance from the provisions of this section shall be as follows:
1. Be on the site for fewer than 180 days;
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
3. Meet the permit requirements of subsection 14-10.8.
b. A recreational vehicle is considered ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions.
a. Nature of Variance. The Variance criteria set forth in this subsection are
based on the general principle of Zoning Law Variances pertaining to a
piece of property and are not personal in nature. A Variance may be
granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so
unusual that complying with the requirements of these regulations
would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the
surrounding property owners. The unique characteristic must pertain
to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property
owners.
The City Council hereby finds and determines that a Variance should be
granted only where the physical characteristics of a parcel or property
are so unusual that complying with the requirements of these
regulations would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or
the surrounding property owners. Because of the need to protect this
City and its property owners from flooding, and, therefore, granting a
Variance only in an unusual case, the following criteria shall be applied
in determining whether a Variance from the terms and provisions of
these regulations should be granted.
b. Variance Hearing Board. The Planning Commission of the City of
Compton shall hear all applications for a Variance from the terms and
provisions of these regulations. The application shall be on a form
approved by the Planning Director and accompanied by the fee
established by the City Council for Variance applications. The
procedures which shall be followed for considering a Variance shall
conform to subsection 30-27.5 of the Zoning Ordinance.
c. Conditions for Variances. In evaluating requests for Variances, the
Planning Commission shall consider the following:
1. Variances shall only be approved upon a determination that the
Variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with
the least deviation from requirements of these regulations. For
example, in the case of Variances to an elevation requirement, the
Planning Commission need not grant permission for the applicant
§ 14-10.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-10.11
AO:645
to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant
proposes, but only to that elevation which the Planning
Commission believes will both provide relief and preserve the
integrity of the City's standards.
2. Variances shall only be approved upon a finding of:
(a) Good and sufficient cause;
(b) Determination that failure to grant the Variance would result in
exceptional "hardship," as defined herein; and
(c) Determination that the granting of a Variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance, cause fraud
or victimization of the public, as defined in subsection 14-10.3,
or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
3. The following relevant factors shall be considered:
(a) Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(c) Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the existing
individual owner and future owners of the property;
(d) Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(e) Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(f) Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(g) Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and flood plain management program for that area;
(h) Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(i) Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
(j) Costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
system, and streets and bridges.
§ 14-10.11 COMPTON § 14-10.11
AO:646
§ 14-10.12. Appeals. [Ord. #2000, § 1]
The Planning Commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirements, decision or determination made
by the Flood Plain Administrator in enforcement or administration of this
regulation.
§ 14-10.13. Appeal to the City Council. [Ord. #2000, § 1]
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Commission
pertaining to any matter referred to it under this section may appeal said
decision to the City Council for a public hearing pursuant to the same fee
requirements, time requirements and notice requirements provided in the
Zoning Ordinance for appeals to the City Council from the decision of the
Planning Commission.
§ 14-11. (RESERVED)71
Chapter 15
PLUMBING CODE
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance
Nos. 856, 906, 1130, 1252, 1395, 1509, 1606, 1804, 1821, 1899.
§ 15-1. PLUMBING CODE.
4. Any applicant to whom a Variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of the Planning Director which shall
include:
(a) The issue of a Variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. It is recommended that a copy of this notice
shall be recorded by the Flood Plain Administrator in the Office
of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so
that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of
land.
5. In the granting of any variance, the Planning Commission may
impose such additional conditions necessary in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
71.Editor's Note: Former Section 14-11, Enforcement of the Mobilehome Parks Act,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2056 was repealed in
its entirety by Ordinance No. 2092.
§ 14-10.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.1
AO:647
§ 15-1.1. Adoption of the Plumbing Code. [Ord. #1958, § 1; Ord.
#2014, § 1; Ord. #2065, § 1]
That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of
the City Clerk, being marked and designated as the "2001 Edition of the
California Plumbing Code" (hereafter the "Plumbing Code"), published by
the International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted as the
Code of the City of Compton for regulating the design, construction, quality
of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems, and
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor and
penalties for the violation thereof; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of such Plumbing Code and supplements
thereto hereinafter published are hereby referred to, adopted and made
a part hereof as if fully set out in this Chapter, except as the same may
hereafter be modified or amended.
§ 15-1.2. Administrative Authority. [Ord. #1958, § 1]
Wherever the term Administrative Authority is used in said Plumbing Code,
it shall mean the Senior Building Inspector, who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of its provisions.
§ 15-1.3. Amendment: Section 101.4.1.3 Scope, Existing
Construction. [Ord. #1958, § 1]
Section 101.4.1.3 of said Plumbing Code is replaced in its entirety by the
following:
101.4.1.3 Existing Construction.
The Administrative Authority may require existing buildings or structures
to be upgraded to minimum standards as defined by the Administrative
Authority.
§ 15-1.4. Amendment: Section 101.5.3 Application to Existing
Plumbing Systems, Existing Installation. [Ord. #1958, § 1]
Section 101.5.3 of said Plumbing Code is replaced in its entirety by the
following:
101.5.3 Existing Installation.
The Administrative Authority may require existing buildings or structures
to be upgraded to minimum standards as defined by the Administrative
Authority.
§ 15-1.5. Amendment: Section 102.1 Administrative Authority. [Ord.
#1958, § 1]
Section 102.1 of said Plumbing Code is replaced in its entirety by the
following:
§ 15-1.1 COMPTON § 15-1.5
AO:648
102.1 Administrative Authority.
The Senior Building Inspector shall be the Authority duly appointed to
enforce this Code.
§ 15-1.6. Amendment: Section 102.3 Violations and Penalties. [Ord.
#1958, § 1]
Section 102.3 of said Plumbing Code is replaced in its entirety by the
following:
102.3 Violations and Penalties.
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any
plumbing, or cause or permit the same to be done, without first obtaining a
separate plumbing permit for each separate building or structure from the
Administrative Authority.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of said
Plumbing Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person,
firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the
provisions of said Plumbing Code is committed, continued or permitted,
and, upon the conviction of any such violation, such person, firm or
corporation shall be punishable as provided for violations of the Compton
Municipal Code.
§ 15-1.7. Amendment: Section 103.4.2 Fees, Plan Review Fees. [Ord.
#1958, § 1]
Section 103.4.2 of said Plumbing Code is amended to provide that the plan
review fees shall be equal to 85% of the total permit fee as set forth in Table
1-1.
§ 15-1.8. Amendment: Table 1-1 Plumbing Permit Fees. [Ord.
#1958, § 1; Ord. #2295 § 8]
The City Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, from time to time
determine and fix the amount to be assessed as Plumbing Permit Fees.
§ 15-1.9. Amendment: Section 510.0 Protection from Damage. [Ord.
#1958, § 1]
Section 510.0 of said Plumbing Code is amended by adding the following
Section 510.8 thereto:
510.8 Protection from Damage.
Hot water heaters installed in locations outside a building or structure shall
be enclosed or protected from physical damage or natural elements in an
§ 15-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.9
AO:649
approved manner. Fuel-burning water heaters shall be assured a sufficient
supply of fresh air for proper combustion and ventilation.
§ 15-1.10. Amendment: Section 1209.2 Gas Meter Locations. [Ord.
#1958, § 1]
Section 1209.2 of said Plumbing Code is amended by adding the following
sentence thereto:
Only one gas meter shall be permitted per dwelling unit.
§ 15-1.11. Amendment: Section 1211.13 Installation of Gas Piping.
[Ord. #1958, § 1]
Section 1211.13 of said Plumbing Code is amended by adding the following
sentence thereto:
Valves that are installed on domestic appliances shall be of the type that are
capable of being turned off without the use of tools or devices.
Chapter 16
ELECTRICAL CODE
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance
Nos. 1416, 1901 and 2067.
§ 16-1. ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE. [Ord.
#2084, § 2]
That certain documents, three copies of which are on file in the Office of
the City Clerk, being marked and designated as the "2001 Edition of the
California Electrical Code" (hereafter the "Electrical Code"), published by
the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted as the Code for
the City of Compton for regulating the standards, provisions and conditions
to be observed and followed in the installation, arrangement, alteration,
repair, use and operation of electrical wiring, fixtures and other appliances
and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees thereof;
and penalties for the violation thereof; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of such Electrical Code and supplements
thereto hereafter published are hereafter referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this Chapter, except as may hereafter be
modified or amended.
§ 16-2. AMENDMENTS TO THE CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE.
§ 16-2.1. Amendments: Section 90-1. [Ord. #2084, § 2]
Section 90-1 of said Electrical Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
§ 15-1.9 COMPTON § 16-2.1
AO:650
90-1. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Code to provide the basic minimum
provisions considered necessary for the safety, efficiency, adequacy, and
the practical safeguarding of persons and of buildings, structures, and
their contents from hazards arising from the use of electricity for light,
heat, power, radio signaling, and for other purposes, as well as some
provisions for the future expansion of electrical uses.
§ 16-2.2. Amendments: Section 90-2. [Ord. #2084 § 2]
Section 90-2 of said Electrical Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
90-2. Scope. The provisions of this Code shall apply to the construction,
maintenance, alteration, moving, repair, and use of electrical conductors
and equipment installed within or on public and private buildings and
other premises, including yards, carnival and parking lots, and industrial
substations; and including the conductors that connect the installations
to a supply of electricity, and other outside conductors adjacent to the
premises.
Exception: The provisions of this Code shall not apply to a public utility
in the exercise of its function as a utility and located outdoors or in
buildings used exclusively for that purpose; nor to installations in mines,
ships, railway cars, aircraft, automotive equipment, or the installation of
equipment employed by a railway, or where installed primarily in a public
way.
§ 16-2.3. Amendments: Section 90-11. [Ord. #2084, § 2]
Article 90 of said Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding Section
90-11 thereto to read as follows:
90-11. Building Official. The Building Official shall administer the
provisions of this Code. The title Building Official shall be synonymous
with Chief Building Inspector, and the title Electrical Inspector shall be
synonymous with the Inspector. The Building Official may delegate any of
his powers or duties to any of his assistants.
§ 16-2.4. Amendments: Section 90-12. [Ord. #2084, § 2]
Article 90 of said Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding Section
90-12 thereto to read as follows:
90-12. Applications.
(a) Applications for electrical permits, describing the work to be done,
shall be made in writing by a certified electrician or maintenance
electrician or their authorized representative. Where a license is required
by the State of California, a permit shall not be issued unless the applicant
has such a license. In the case of an owner, such application shall be for a
special owner's permit.
§ 16-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-2.4
AO:651
(b) Applications shall give the location where such work is to be done,
either by street and house number, by lot, block, and tract, or by similar
description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed
work. A separate application shall be required for each building.
(c) Exception: Applications for single family dwellings may include all
accessory buildings, such as garages, sheds, guest houses, and the like,
that are located on the same lot, erected at the same time, and supplied
from the same service as the main building.
(d) Each such application shall be accompanied by drawings or blueprints
as required by the Electrical Inspector. Applications may be made by a
firm, partnership, or corporation, any officer or member of which is a
certified electrician, in the event that all construction or work is done
under the direct personal supervision of such officer or member.
§ 16-2.5. Amendments: Section 90-12.1. [Ord. #2084, § 2]
Article 90 of said Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding Section
90-12.1 thereto to read as follows:
90-12.1 Special Owner's Permit.
The Building Official may issue to an individual owner's permit (a
qualifying examination may be required) authorizing such individual to
install, change, or repair electrical equipment in, on, or about a singlefamily
residence of which such individual is the owner and in which he
resides, or intends to reside, but not elsewhere; provided, however, any
electrical work authorized under any such special owner's permit shall be
subject to immediate cancellation by the Director of Building and Safety,
and the holder thereof shall be liable to the penalty hereinafter provided
for violations of this Code.
§ 16-2.6. Amendments: Section 90-12.2. [Ord. #2084, § 2]
Article 90 of said Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding Section
90-12.2 thereto to read as follows:
90-12.2. Permits.
(a) No alteration or addition shall be made to any existing wiring, nor
shall any wiring for the placing or installation of any electric light, power,
or heating device, or any apparatus which generates, transmits,
transforms, or utilizes electricity, operating at a voltage exceeding 25
volts between conductors, or capable of supplying more than 50 watts,
be made without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Department
of Building and Safety, excepting minor repair work, such as repairing
flush and snap switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and
receptacles, taping bare joints, repairing drop cords, and the like.
§ 16-2.4 COMPTON § 16-2.6
AO:652
(b) The application, plans, and specifications filed, as required by this
section, shall be checked by the Electrical Inspector, and, if found to
be in conformity with the requirements of this Code and all other laws
or ordinances applicable thereto, the Department of Building and Safety
shall, upon the receipt of the required fee, issue a permit therefor. Every
permit issued shall be valid only for the location described on the
application therefor.
Exceptions: Permits Not Required:
(a) The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this Section 90-12.2 above
shall not apply to persons doing, installing, altering, reconstructing,
repairing, causing, or permitting work to be done, installed, or altered
under the exception set forth in this section.
(b) No permit shall be required in the following cases, to wit: Where
permits were obtained from the original installation.
(1) Electric wiring expressly declared to be exempt from the provisions
of this part by any other section hereof;
(2) The repair or replacement of any fixed motor of the same rating on
the same machine or the repair or replacement of any fixed electrical
appliance of the same rating in the same location;
(3) The repair or replacement for the current-carrying parts of any
switch, conductor, or control device;
(4) The repair or replacement of any overcurrent device or lamp holder
of the same rating and in the same location;
(5) The repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers for signs or
marquees;
(6) The repair or replacement of cords or cables or cord pendants
allowed by other sections of this Code;
(7) The repair taping of joints in boxes;
(8) The removal of electric wiring; and
(9) Any similar minor repair or replacement determined by the
Department of Building and Safety not to involve any hazard to life or
property.
(c) The foregoing exemptions from permit requirements shall not be
deemed to permit or allow any electric wiring to be done in a manner
contrary to other provisions of this part, nor to permit such work to be
done by unauthorized or unlicensed persons.
Permits: Regulations Concerning:
(a) An electrical permit may be issued only to the following persons:
(1) To one who holds a valid, unsuspended, unrevoked, and unexpired
electrical contractor's license;
(2) To one who holds a valid, unsuspended, unrevoked, and unexpired
electrical maintenance license;
§ 16-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-2.6
AO:653
(3) To an owner of a single-family dwelling for electric wiring in such
dwelling, occupied as his residence, providing such owner holds a valid,
unsuspended, unrevoked, and unexpired journeyman certificate of
competency issued by the Board of Electrical Examiners of the City; and
(4) To the owner of a single-family dwelling provided that he installs the
electrical wiring himself; that he resides, or shall reside, in the home
which is to be wired; that he completes the home owner's electrical
examination papers to the satisfaction of the Department of Building and
Safety; and that the home owner's electrical examination fee of $5 is
paid at the time the examination papers are submitted for approval. The
$5 examination fee shall not constitute a permit fee. Electrical permit
fees shall be collected as required by the provisions of Section 90-14 at
the time the electrical permit is issued.
(b) Every application for an electrical permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the Department of Building and Safety, and such permit
shall be obtained before any work is commenced. A permit issued to an
electrical contracting firm or the holder of a maintenance license shall
not authorize any other person, except the permittee or any employee of
the permittee, to do any electrical wiring.
(c) Every application of an electrical permit shall give the location where
such proposed work is to be done by street and house number, or by
other approved description, the correct name of the person for whom
such work is done, a statement of the proposed use or occupancy of
the building or premises, and such additional information as may be
required by the Electrical Inspector. A separate permit shall be obtained
for each building or structure, except that a permit shall be obtained for
each building or structure, except that a permit shall not be required
for a private garage shed, or similar accessory building located on the
same premises if such building does not contain living quarters provided
with cooking facilities. The foregoing shall not be deemed to prohibit
the holder of a maintenance license from installing electrical wiring or
electrical equipment in any location on his own premises under one
electrical permit; this permit may be issued on a monthly basis.
(d) No permit shall be issued unless the proposed work will conform to
the provisions of this part and is not in violation of any other laws or
ordinances applicable to such work or pertaining to the proposed use or
occupancy of the building or premises.
(e) Every such application shall be accompanied by plans and
specifications when and as required.
(f) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed or construed to
require the Department of Building and Safety to immediately accept or
reject any such application whenever it is necessary to investigate such
proposed wiring and premises as to its compliance with this part.
(g) All electrical records, including applications for electrical permits
and permit books, may be destroyed after five years.
§ 16-2.6 COMPTON § 16-2.7
AO:654
§ 16-2.7. Amendments: Section 90-12.3 [Ord. #2084, § 2]
Article 90 of said Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding Section
90-12.3 thereto to read as follows:
90-12.3. Expiration of Permits. Every permit issued by the Department
of Building and Safety under the provisions of this Code shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by
such permit has not been commenced within 60 days from the date of
such permit or if the building or work authorized by such permit shall be
suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a
period of 120 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit
shall be first obtained to do so.
§ 16-2.8. Amendments: Section 90-12.4. [Ord. #2084, § 2]
Article 90 of said Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding Section
90-12.4 thereto to read as follows:
90-12.4. Cancellation of Permits. If no portion of the work or
construction covered by a permit issued by the Department of Building
and Safety under the provisions of this Code has been commenced, the
person to whom such permit has been issued may deliver such permit to
the Department of Building and Safety with a request that such permit be
cancelled. The Electrical Inspector shall thereupon stamp or write upon the
face of such permit the words "Cancelled at the request of the permittee."
Thereupon such permit shall be null and void and of no effect.
§ 16-2.9. Amendments: Section 90-12.5. [Ord. #2084, § 2]
Article 90 of said Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding Section
90-12.5 thereto to read as follows:
90-12.5. Maintenance Electricians. Any person regularly employing
one or more electricians for the purpose of installations, alterations,
maintenance, or repairs on his or its own premises shall make monthly
reports covering all installation, additions, or alterations and shall pay for
each thereof the permit fees provided for in Section 90-14. All such work
shall be installed and done in accordance with the provisions of this Article,
and such work shall be subject to inspection by the Inspector to the same
extent as all other similar work for which such inspection is provided.
Maintenance Electrician's Licenses. Any person, such as any industrial
establishment, office building, or hotel, regularly employing one or more
journeymen electricians for the purpose of installations, alterations,
maintenance, and/or repairs on his or its own premises shall obtain a
maintenance electrician's license.
Registration of Journeyman Electricians.
§ 16-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-2.9
AO:655
(a) It shall be necessary to register the name, address, and valid
certificate of competency number of a journeyman electrician regularly
in the employ of the person, firm, or corporation before a maintenance
license is issued.
(b) In the event the registered journeyman should leave or be discharged
from the employ of any person, firm, or corporation holding a
maintenance electrician's license notice in writing thereof shall be given
within five days by the employer and employee to the Department of
Building and Safety, and all electrical wiring being carried on shall,
without further order or action, stand suspended until the re-employment
of the same journeyman electrician or the employment of another
journeyman electrician, who shall be registered with the City Tax and
License Department.
§ 16-2.10. Amendments: Section 90-12.6. [Ord. #2084, § 2]
Article 90 of said Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding Section
90-12.6 thereto to read as follows:
90-12.6. Public Utilities Exempted. The provisions of this Article shall
not apply to any electrical work performed by any electrical corporation,
telephone corporation, telegraph corporation, railroad corporation or
street railroad corporation on or with any electrical equipment owned or
controlled and operated or used by, and for the exclusive benefit of, such
corporation in the conduct of its business as a public utility, or to any
other work which any such corporation may be entitled by law to perform
without payment of any local tax; provided, however, all provisions of this
Article shall apply insofar as they may consistently with the above be
applicable to all other electrical work performed by any such corporation.
The terms "electrical corporation", "telephone corporation," "telegraph
corporation," "railroad corporation," and "street railroad corporation" are
used in this section as such terms are respectively defined in the Public
Utility Act of the State of California, and such terms shall also be deemed
to include similar utilities which are municipally or governmentally owned
and operated.
§ 16-2.11. Amendments: Section 90-12.7. [Ord. #2084, § 2]
Article 90 of said Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding Section
90-12.7 thereto to read as follows:
90-12.7. Records of Permits and Inspections. The Electrical Inspector
shall keep complete records of all permits issued and inspections made and
other official work performed under the provisions of this Article.
§ 16-2.9 COMPTON § 16-2.12
AO:656
§ 16-2.12. Amendments: Sections 90-13 and 90-13.1 through
90-13.9. [Ord. #2084, § 2]
Article 90 of said Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding Sections
90-13 and 90-13.1 through 90-13.9 thereto to read as follows:
90-13. Approval. Upon the completion of the electrical wiring in or on
any building or structure of any nature, or any tent or premises, except
as otherwise exempted in this Article, the person, firm, or corporation
installing the same shall notify the Inspector, who shall inspect such
installation, and if it is found by him to be fully in compliance with the
provisions of this Article, he shall issue, as provided for herein, the
certificate of inspection or approval tag authorizing the connection of the
electrical service and the energizing of the installation.
90-13.1. Permission to Cover Work. It shall be unlawful for any person
to lath over, seal, cover, or conceal any electrical wiring or other electrical
equipment for the installation of which a permit is required by Section
90-12.2 until such electric wiring or other electrical equipment shall have
been inspected and approved by the Inspector. The Inspector shall have
the power to remove, or to require the removal of, any obstruction which
prevents the proper inspection of any electrical equipment.
Inspection and Approval Required.
(a) All electric wiring, as defined in this part, for which a permit is
required shall be inspected and approved by the Department of Building
and Safety before being energized or used.
(b) No person shall use, operate, or maintain, or cause or permit to
be used, operated, or maintained, any such electric wiring until such
inspection and approval.
(c) No serving agency shall furnish or supply, or cause or permit to be
furnished or supplied, electric energy to any such electric wiring until
such inspection and approval.
(d) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
temporary use of electric energy when and as specifically provided in
Section 90-14.
(e) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
inspection of any electric wiring even though no permit is required
therefor.
(f) If approval is withheld, a written notification showing the date and the
location of the defect in the work, with the signature of the inspector,
shall be sent to the permittee. Failure of the permittee to make such
corrections within 10 days after notification thereof shall be sufficient
cause for refusal to issue any further permits to such permittee until such
corrections have been made to the satisfaction of the Electrical Inspector.
Requests for reinspection shall be made promptly after corrections have
been completed.
(g) Approval of rough wiring shall be withheld until the rough plumbing
has been inspected and approved.
§ 16-2.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-2.12
AO:657
Inspection of New Work.
(a) No person shall conceal, enclose, or cover, or cause or permit to be
concealed, enclosed, or covered, any portion of any electric wiring in any
manner which will interfere with or prevent the inspection and approval
thereof.
(b) Any portion of any floor, ceiling, wall, partition, roof, finish, or other
obstruction whatsoever which renders impracticable the making of a
complete and thorough inspection of electric wiring shall be removed
upon notice (either verbal or in writing) so to do and shall be kept
removed until such electric wiring has been inspected and approved by
the Electrical Inspector.
(c) The provisions of this section shall not apply to finished work nor to
conductors inserted in conduit or other wiring enclosures.
(d) Before the final inspection of any electrical wiring, all plaster,
concrete, or other foreign material shall be thoroughly removed from
every box and wiring enclosure, and not less than six inches of jointless
conductors shall extend out of each lighting outlet box for future
connections thereto, except when conductors are intended to loop
through the lamp holder.
(e) In any case where one or more taped joints are found not soldered
at the time of their inspection, the inspector may require every joint for
such electric wiring to be left untapped until the inspection and approval
thereof.
(f) Fixtures of appliances shall not be connected to electric wiring until
the rough wiring has been inspected and approved, except as otherwise
satisfactory to the Department of Building and Safety.
(g) All such wiring shall be free from grounds, shorts, or other defects
before the approval thereof.
(h) Whenever any electric wiring has been inspected and found to comply
with the provisions of this part, the inspector of the Department of
Building and Safety shall leave a notice at the service switch or other
suitable place so stating, and the Inspector shall issue a certificate of
inspection, when requested, or service permit authorizing the connection
to the electrical service and the energizing of the installation.
90-13.2. Corrections. All defects shall be corrected within 10 days after
their inspection and notification or within such other reasonable time as is
permitted by the Inspector. Failure to comply shall be sufficient cause for
refusal to issue any further permit to such permittee until such corrections
have been made.
§ 16-2.12 COMPTON § 16-2.12
AO:658
90-13.3. Connections. It shall be unlawful to energize, or cause or permit
to be energized, any electrical wiring coming under provisions of this
Article until such electrical wiring shall have been inspected and approved
by the Inspector; provided, however, the Electrical Inspector may give
written temporary permission to furnish electric current to, or the use
of electric current through, any electrical wiring for a length of time
not exceeding 30 days if it appears to the Electrical Inspector that such
electrical wiring may be used safely for such purposes and that there exists
in urgent necessity for such use.
90-13.4. Right of Entry. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection
to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever the Building
Official, or his authorized representative, has reasonable cause to believe
that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition
which makes such building or premises unsafe, the Building Official, or
his authorized representative, may enter such building or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon
the Building Official by this Code; provided, however, if such building or
premises shall be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and
demand entry, and if entry of the building or premises is refused him, he
shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons
having the charge or control of the building or premises and demand
entry. If such entry is refused, the Building Official, or his authorized
representative, shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to
secure entry.
No owner or occupant or any other person having the charge, care, or
control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper
demand is made as provided in this section, to properly permit entry
therein by the Building Official, or his authorized representative, for the
purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the provisions of this
Code. The Building Official, or his representative, shall inspect each
building or parcel for Code compliance periodically as required by City,
State, or Federal Laws.
90-13.5. Reinspections.
(a) The Department of Building and Safety is hereby authorized and
empowered to make, at such times and as often as in its discretion it
may seem necessary, a thorough reinspection of the installation in or
on any building, structure, or premises of all electrical wiring, electric
devices, and electrical materials now installed or that may hereafter be
installed within the City of Compton, and when the installation of any
such wiring, device, or material is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe
condition, the person, firm, corporation, or governmental agency owning,
using, or operating the same shall be notified in writing and shall make
the necessary repairs or changes required to place such wiring, device, or
material in a safe condition to have such work completed within a period
of 10 days after such notice, or within such other reasonable period
specified by the Inspector in such notice, and shall pay such fees as are
required by the provisions of this Article.
§ 16-2.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-2.12
AO:659
(b) The Department of Building and Safety is hereby empowered to
disconnect or to order the discontinuance of electrical service to wiring,
devices, or materials found to be defective until the installation of such
wiring, device, or material has been made safe as directed by the
Inspector, and any person, firm, corporation, political subdivision, or
governmental agency ordered to discontinue such electrical service shall
do so within 24 hours after the receipt of such notice and shall not
reconnect such service or allow the same to be reconnected until notified
so to do by the Electrical Inspector.
90-13.6. Power to Stop Work. (a) The Building Official, or his duly
authorized electrical inspectors, are hereby authorized to stop the
installation of electric wiring, or the concealment thereof, whenever such
installation or concealment is being done in violation of this part, until such
violation has been corrected.
(a) The Building Official, or his duly authorized electrical inspectors,
are hereby authorized to stop the installation of electric wiring, or the
concealment thereof, whenever such installation or concealment is being
done in violation of this part, until such violation has been corrected.
(b) Any such notice to stop work shall be in writing and shall be served
either in person or by mail upon the person violating or responsible for
the violation of this part to the last known address.
(c) No person shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with such notice.
90-13.7. Certificates of Completion.
(a) Whenever any electric wiring has been inspected and approved, a
certificate of completion therefor shall be issued on request provided all
fees required by this part have been paid in full.
(b) Any certificate of completion may, upon notice, be revoked and
canceled by the Department of Building and Safety if the Electrical
Inspector finds that the electric wiring fails in any respect to comply with
the requirements of this part or that the installation is unsafe, dangerous,
or a hazard to life or property.
(c) No person shall use, operate, or energize, or cause or permit to
be used, operated, or energized, any installation, after the certificate
therefor has been revoked, until a new certificate of completion has been
issued therefor by the Department of Building and Safety.
90-13.8. Interpretation of Language.
The language used in this part is intended to convey the common and
accepted meaning familiar to the electrical industry. Whenever any section,
or portion thereof, of this part appears to be in conflict with any other
section, or portion thereof, the Electrical Inspector is hereby authorized to
interpret and determine the meaning and intent of such provisions.
90-13.9. General Safety Provisions.
(a) It is the intent and purpose of this part to provide for safe, durable,
and reasonable nonhazardous electric installations and to establish the
minimum standards therefor.
§ 16-2.12 COMPTON § 16-2.12
AO:660
(b) Irrespective of the specific provisions contained in this part, or the
omission of specific provisions regulating any electric installation, or
portion thereof, the Electrical Inspector is hereby authorized and
empowered to refuse to approve any electric wiring which, in his opinion,
will manifestly fail to carry out the intents and purposes of this part.
§ 16-2.13. Amendment, Fees Required. [Ord. #2084, § 2; Ord. #2295
§ 9]
§ 16-2.14. Amendment: Section 90-15. [Ord. #2084, § 2]
Article 90 of said Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding Section
90-15 thereto to read as follows:
90-15. Materials.
(a) New Materials. All electrical materials, devices, appliances, and
equipment installed or used in the City shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this Code. Conformity with the standards of Underwriter's
Laboratories, Inc., as approved by the American Standards Association,
or other approved testing laboratories shall be primafacie evidence of
conformity with approved standards for safety to life and property.
(b) Used Materials. Previously used materials shall not be reused in
any work without the written approval obtained in advance from the
Department of Building and Safety.
§ 16-2.15. Amendments: Section 90-16. [Ord. #2084, § 2]
Article 90 of said Code is hereby amended by adding Section 90-16 thereto
to read as follows:
90-16. Existing Installations.
Nothing contained in this Code shall be construed to restrict the use of, nor
to require any person to reinstall, reconstruct, alter, change, or remove any
electrical wiring or equipment which complies with the laws in effect prior
to August 22, 1972, unless the same is dangerous, unsafe, or a hazard to
life or property. Additions or alterations to, and alterations and renewals
of, existing installations shall be made in compliance with the provisions of
this Code.
a. Any person desiring an electrical permit shall, at the time of filing an
application therefor, pay to the City of Compton a permit issuance fee
plus the fee for installations, which fees shall established by ordinance
or resolution of the City Council. Electrical permits may be obtained by
an owner of a single family residence or a licensed electrician.
§ 16-2.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-2.15
AO:661
Exception: In locations where the existing electrical system was of some
other type of approved wiring, an existing circuit may be increased to
its maximum safe carrying capacity or with the addition of not to exceed
five lights, receptacles or switch outlets. Not more than 10 such outlets
may be added to an existing electrical system unless all new wiring is in
conformity with the provisions of this Code.
90-17. Residential wiring.
This provision relative to electrical wiring methods in residential
properties is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this Chapter.
(a) Garage wiring. All electrical wiring inside garages must be enclosed
in metal conduit or concealed behind wallboard.
(b) Garbage Disposal Units. A switched plug outlet shall be provided in
each new dwelling occupancy. The disposal unit shall be connected by
grounded cord assembly.
Chapter 17
MECHANICAL CODE
§ 17-1. MECHANICAL CODE.72
§ 17-1.1. Adoption of the Mechanical Code. [Ord. #1959, § 1; Ord.
#2015, § 1; Ord. #2068, § 1]
That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of
the City Clerk, being marked and designated as the "2001 Edition of the
California Mechanical Code" (hereafter the "Mechanical Code"), published
by the International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted as
the Code of the City of Compton for regulating the design, construction,
quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of heating,
ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators, or other
miscellaneous heat-producing appliances, and providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor and penalties for the violation
thereof; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of such Mechanical Code and supplements thereto hereinafter
published are hereafter referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this Chapter, except as the same may hereafter be modified
or amended.
72.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1311, 1415,
1516, 1608, 1802, 1819, 1900.
§ 16-2.15 COMPTON § 17-1.2
AO:662
§ 17-1.2. Building Official. [Ord. #1959, § 1]
Wherever the term Building Official is used in said Mechanical Code, it shall
mean the Senior Building Inspector, who is charged with the administration
and enforcement of its provisions.
§ 17-1.3. Amendment: Section 104.2 Application to Existing
Mechanical Systems, Existing Installations. [Ord. #1959, § 1]
Section 104.2 of said Mechanical Code is replaced in its entirety by the
following:
104.2 Existing Installations.
The Building Official may require existing buildings or structures to be
upgraded to minimum standards as defined by the Building Official.
§ 17-1.4. Amendment: Section 110 - Board of Appeals. [Ord. #1959,
§ 1; Ord. #1992, § 1; Ord. #2224, § 20]
Section 110 of the Mechanical Code is replaced in its entirety by the
following:
SECTION 110 - HOUSING ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD (HAAB)
OR HEARING OFFICER.
Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official
relative to the application and interpretation of the Mechanical Code shall
be administered by either of the following means:
a. Housing Advisory and Appeals Board (HAAB).
There is hereby created a Housing Advisory and Appeals Board
(hereinafter the "HAAB" or the "Board") consisting of five voting
members who are not employees and who are qualified and specifically
knowledgeable in the California Building Standards Codes and
applicable local ordinances. The Board is authorized by the City Council
to hear appeals regarding the requirements of the City relating to the
use, maintenance and change of occupancy of buildings and structures,
including requirements governing alteration, additions, repair,
demolition and moving. The Building Official shall be an ex officio
member of the Board and shall act as Secretary to said Board, but
shall have no vote on any matter before the Board. The Board shall
be appointed by the City Council and shall hold office at is pleasure.
The Board shall adopt reasonable rules of procedure for conducting
its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to
the Building Official, with a duplicate copy to the appellant, and may
recommend to the City Council new legislation as is consistent
therewith. The Board shall have no authority relative to interpretation
of the administration provisions of the Mechanical Code nor shall it be
empowered to waive requirements of the Code.
§ 17-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-1.4
AO:663
§ 17-1.5. Amendment: Section 111 - Violations. [Ord. #1959, § 1]
Section 111 of said Mechanical Code is replaced in its entirety by the
following:
SECTION 111 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, improve, remove, or convert or demolish, equip, use or maintain
mechanical systems or equipment, or cause or permit the same to be done,
without first obtaining a separate mechanical permit for each such building
or structure from the Building Official.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of said
Mechanical Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person,
firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the
provisions of said Mechanical Code is committed, continued or permitted,
and, upon the conviction of any such violation, such person, firm or
corporation shall be punishable as provided for violations of the Compton
Municipal Code.
§ 17-1.6. Amendment: Section 115.3 Fees, Plan Review Fees. [Ord.
#1959, § 1]
Section 115.3 of said Mechanical Code is amended to provide that the plan
review fees shall be equal to 85% of the total permit fee as set forth in Table
1-A.
§ 17-1.7. Amendment: Table 1-A - Mechanical Permit Fees. [Ord.
#1959, § 1; Ord. #2295 § 10]
The City Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, from time to time
determine and fix the amount to be assessed as Mechanical Permit Fees.
Members of the Board shall receive compensation at a rate set by
resolution of the City Council for attendance at meetings.
A majority of the membership of the Board shall constitute a quorum to
perform the duties of the Board. In the absence of a quorum, a Hearing
Officer may perform the duties of the Board.
b. Hearing Officer. Provided that the Board is unable to constitute a
quorum, the City Council hereby authorizes the City Manager to
appoint a Hearing Officer who is not an employee of the City and who is
qualified and specifically knowledgeable in the California Building
Standards Codes and applicable local ordinances to perform the same
duties of the Board. The same rights, rules and procedures that apply to
the administration of duties by the Board shall also apply to the
administration of duties by the Hearing Officer as well.
§ 17-1.4 COMPTON § 17-1.8
AO:664
§ 17-1.8. Amendment: Section 304 - Installation. [Ord. #1959, § 1]
Section 304 of said Mechanical Code is amended by adding the following
Section 304.8 thereto:
304.8 Equipment Screening.
Equipment installed on roofs shall be screened from the view of the public
by parapets, penthouses or other screens approved by the Building Official.
Chapter 18
PUBLIC PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
§ 18-1. DEFINITION. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4800]
PUBLIC PARKS — Shall mean and include all dedicated parks, playgrounds
and planted parkways maintained by the City, except parkway strips
between curbs and sidewalks along the several streets and highways of the
City.
§ 18-2. PROHIBITED CONDUCT. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801]
No person shall do any of the following acts within the limits of any public
park or recreation center:
§ 18-2.1. Animals. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.1]
No person shall bring, or cause to be brought in, any horse, goat, cat,
fowl, or any other animal, excepting dogs which shall be permitted only
when secured by a leash of not more than six feet in length and excepting
such animals which are brought into any park or recreation center for the
purposes of exhibition or otherwise, pursuant to a special permit granted as
hereinafter set forth.
§ 18-2.2. Camping. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.2]
No person shall camp or lodge therein without a permit granted as
hereinafter set forth.
§ 18-2.3. Damaging Plants. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.3]
No person shall cut, remove, or damage any tree, shrub, plant, wood, turf,
rock, sand, gravel or earth, or pick any flowers without a special permit
granted as hereinafter set forth.
§ 18-2.4. Fireworks. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.4]
No person shall bring therein, or set off any firecrackers or other fireworks
without a special permit granted as set forth in Chapter 22, Fire Prevention
and Protection.
§ 17-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-2.5
AO:665
§ 18-2.5. Games. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.5]
No person shall play or engage in any games, except at such places as shall
be set apart especially for that purpose.
§ 18-2.6. Handbills or Circulars. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.6]
No person shall distribute any handbills or circulars or post, place or erect
any bills, notices, paper, or advertising device or matter of any kind.
§ 18-2.7. Intoxicating Liquor. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.7; Ord.
#1669, § 1]
No person shall do any of the following acts within the limits of any public
park or recreation center: carry, sell or consume any intoxicating liquor
except as may be approved by the Parks and Recreation Commission or
by the City Council upon the recommendation of the City Manager. The
applicant shall complete any and all application forms required by the City
and provide proof of any required insurance coverage prior to the approval
of the appropriate permit.
§ 18-2.8. Killing Animals. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.8]
No person shall wound, kill or catch or attempt to wound, kill or catch any
bird, fowl, fish or other animal.
§ 18-2.9. Loitering After Closing Time. [Added by Ord. #887,
§ 4801.9; Ord. #1680, § 1; Ord. #2301]
No person shall enter, loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or remain in any
public park or recreation center at any time between 8:00 p.m. of any one
day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day without a special permit granted as
hereinafter set forth or as a participant in a City sponsored event.
§ 18-2.10. Loud, Boisterous Conduct. [Added by Ord. #887,
§ 4801.10]
No person shall indulge in any loud, boisterous conduct or use profane,
vulgar, obscene or indecent language.
§ 18-2.11. Parking. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.11]
No person shall park automobiles or other vehicles except at such places as
shall be set apart especially for that purpose.
§ 18-2.12. Rubbish. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.12]
No person shall throw or deposit any bottles, tin cans, broken glass, paper,
rubbish, refuse or waste material of any land any place except in containers
provided for such purpose.
§ 18-2.5 COMPTON § 18-2.13
AO:666
§ 18-2.13. Selling. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.13]
No person shall sell any goods or anything whatsoever, excepting only upon
special permit granted as hereinafter set forth.
§ 18-2.14. Soliciting Business. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.14]
No person shall practice, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation,
business or profession, charitable or religious association or organization
without a special permit granted as hereinafter set forth.
§ 18-2.15. Speed Limit. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.15]
No person shall drive or operate any vehicle in excess of 15 miles per hour
in any park.
§ 18-2.16. Swimming. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.16]
No person shall swim, bathe, wade in or pollute the waters of any fountain,
pond, lake or stream. Wading shall be permitted in wading pools provided
for the use of children.
§ 18-2.17. Vehicles. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.17]
No person shall propel any bicycle, automobile or other vehicle on any foot
path or elsewhere than on the roads or drives provided for such purposes,
or upon any drive or road when closed by chains or other barriers.
§ 18-2.18. Picnic Permit. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.18]
No company, society, organization or group of 20 or more persons shall hold
or conduct any picnic in any public park without a special permit granted as
hereinafter set forth.
§ 18-2.19. Loitering, Disturbances. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4801.19]
No person shall loiter in the approaches adjacent to any auditorium or
community building within any park, or disturb in any manner whatsoever
any meeting, service, concert or exhibition while the same is in progress.
§ 18-3. PARADES, PUBLIC MEETINGS, PERMITS. [Added by Ord.
#887, § 4802]
No person shall hold, conduct or address any assemblage, meeting or
gathering of persons, or make or deliver any public speech, lecture or
discourse, or take part in any public debate or discussion, or hold a parade
in any public park in the City without a written permit granted as set forth
in Chapter 7, Section 7-14 of this Code.
§ 18-2.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-4
AO:667
§ 18-4. PUBLIC TOILETS. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4803]
No male person over eight years of age shall enter or use any toilet or water
closet designated "FOR WOMEN", and no female person over eight years
of age shall enter or use any toilet or water closet designated "FOR MEN"
in any public park or recreation center. There shall be no loitering in any
public toilet or water closet.
§ 18-5. SWIMMING POOL. [Added by Ord. #887, § 4804]
No person shall enter any plunge maintained by the City without, prior to
his entrance therein, having had a shower bath, and unless in all respects
such person complies with all rules and regulations established by the City
relative to the use of such plunge; and no person, after having been in any
such plunge and leaving the same, shall reenter such plunge without again
taking a shower bath; and no person having a communicable disease of any
kind shall enter into any such plunge, nor shall any person enter into such
plunge when afflicted with an infectious disease or when suffering from a
cough, cold, fever or sores, nor while wearing any bandage of any kind.
§ 18-6. AUDITORIUMS, COMMUNITY BUILDINGS, ETC. [Added by
Ord. #827, § 4805]
No person shall do any of the following acts within any community building
or municipal auditorium within any public park.
§ 18-7. BASEBALL DIAMONDS, SPORTS, RECREATIONAL
FACILITIES, PERMITS FOR. [Added by Ord. #827, § 4806]
Special permits for the use of the baseball diamonds, courts and other
recreational facilities for scheduled games and contests may be issued by
the Department of Parks and Recreation upon application duly made and
approved.
§ 18-8. SPECIAL PERMITS. [Added by Ord. #827, § 4807]
Special permits, as provided for herein, may be issued by the Department of
Parks and Recreation upon application duly made and approved when in the
opinion of the head of such department the issuance of such permit will not
a. No person shall enter any municipal swimming pool or dressing room
therein at any time when an employee of the Department of Parks and
Recreation is not in attendance therein.
a. No person shall hold any meeting, service, concert, exercise or
exhibition without first obtaining permission from the Department of
Parks and Recreation to do so.
b. No person shall charge an admission fee or take up any collection at
any such meeting, service, concert, exercise or exhibition without first
obtaining permission from Department of Parks and Recreation to do
so.
§ 18-4 COMPTON § 18-8
AO:668
cause undue interference with the use of any park by the public, nor create
any condition inimical to the public peace, safety and welfare of the citizens
of this City.
§ 18-9. RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR USE OF FACILITIES.
[Added by Ord. #827, § 4808]
The Rules and Regulations for Use of Facilities as adopted by the Park and
Recreation Commission shall govern the use of all park and recreational
facilities.
§ 18-10. FEES FOR THE PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT.
[Ord. #1796, § 1; Ord. #1813, § 3; Ord. #2295 § 11]
The City Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, from time to time
determine and fix the amount to be assessed as fees for the Parks and
Recreation Department.
§ 18-11. CLEANING FEE FOR PARKS AND RECREATION
FACILITIES. [Ord. #1859, § 1; Ord. #2295 § 12]
The City Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, from time to time
determine and fix the amount to be assessed as fees for the cleaning of
Parks and Recreation facilities.
§ 18-12. PUBLIC SKATE PARK REGULATIONS.
§ 18-12.1. Public Skate Park Designated; Use Regulation. [Ord.
#2180, § 1]
The City of Compton may designate, maintain and/or operate a skate park
facility(s), which shall be open to the public for the purpose of riding
skateboards, and/or in-line skates and/or roller skates. Any designated
public skate park facility may or may not be supervised and shall be for use
by persons using skateboards, in-line skates and/or roller skates only. All
other uses are prohibited.
§ 18-12.2. Required Riding Equipment in Public Skate Parks. [Ord.
#2180, § 1]
It is unlawful for a person to ride or use a skateboard, in-line skates or
roller skates in a designated public skate park facility unless that person is
wearing a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads.
§ 18-12.3. Hazardous Recreational Activity. [Ord. #2180, § 1]
Skateboarding, in-line skating and/or roller skating at a designated public
skate park facility represents a hazardous recreational activity for
participants, and the City of Compton will not be liable for any injuries
incurred by persons participating in the hazardous recreational activity at a
§ 18-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-12.3
AO:669
designated public skate park facility owned and/or operated by the City of
Compton.
§ 18-12.4. Skate Park Facility Sign Posting. [Ord. #2180, § 1]
The Department of Parks and Recreation, or any other department so
directed by the City Manager, shall cause a sign or signs to be posted at
designated public skate park facilities providing reasonable notice of the
requirements of this section and stating that any person failing to comply
will be guilty of an infraction and subject to citation. Such signs shall at
least afford reasonable notice of the following:
§ 18-12.5. Penalty. [Ord. #2180, § 1]
Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter is an infraction, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50 for a first
violation; a fine not exceeding $100 for a second violation in the same
calendar year; and a fine not exceeding $200 for each additional violation
in the same calendar year. Each day that such violation is committed shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
Chapter 19
SIGNS AND ADVERTISING STRUCTURES
§ 19-1. DEFINITIONS. [Added by Ord. #884, §§ 8600 — 8600.22;
Ord. #2211, § 3; Ord. No. 2215]
As used in this section:
ADVERTISING STRUCTURE — Shall mean any ground sign, or other
structure and all parts thereof which is erected or used for advertising
purposes or upon which any poster, bill, bulletin, printing, painting, device
or other advertising matter of any kind whatsoever is placed, posted,
tacked, nailed, pasted, or otherwise fastened, including also glass tube
outlining for advertising and electric signs; but, shall not include any board,
sign, or surface used exclusively to display official notices issued by any
court or public office, or posted by any public officer in the performance of
a public duty, or a private person giving a legal notice; nor shall it include a
sign 12 square feet or less in area and the highest portion thereof less than
a. Skate park facility hours of operation;
b. Identify the particular type of activity allowed at that public skate park
facility; such as, skateboarding, and/or roller skating and/or in-line
skating only;
c. Skateboarding, roller skating and in-line skating are hazardous
activities, skate at your own risk; and
d. Failure to wear helmets, kneepads and elbow pads will subject persons
to citation.
§ 18-12.3 COMPTON § 19-1
AO:670
six feet in height above grade when such sign is located on private property
and used to advertise the carrying on of any business or any profession
conducted on the premises on which such sign is located; nor shall it include
any real estate sign advertising the property on which it stands, providing
the advertising surface of such sign is 12 square feet or less and the highest
portion thereof is not more than six feet above grade; nor shall it include
any sign painted on the permanent part of any building when such sign
advertises only the business conducted or carried on within such building.
ALLEY — Shall mean any public space, public park or thoroughfare less
than 20 feet, but not less than 10 feet in width which has been dedicated or
deeded to the public for public use.
APPROVAL OR APPROVED — Shall mean the approval of methods or
material by the Building Official.
ARCHITECT — Shall mean one who holds a certificate to practice
architecture, issued by the California State Board of Architectural
Examiners.
BILLBOARD — Shall mean an advertising structure which advertises goods,
products, services or facilities not sold, produced, manufactured or
furnished on the premises on which the sign is located (also known as
outdoor advertising, off-premises sign or off-site sign).
BUILDING LINE — Shall mean a setback line established by ordinance
in accordance with Chapter 29, Setback Lines; provided, however, if all
buildings in a block are set back from the front property line, the building
line shall be a line parallel to the front property line and the same distance
therefrom as the face of the building nearest to such front property line,
unless such a setback line has been established at a greater distance from
the front property line.
CURB LINE — Shall mean the top face of a curb or, when the curb is not in
place, the curb line as it has been established by the City.
ELECTRIC SIGN — Shall mean an advertising structure served or energized
with electric current.
ENGINEER — Shall mean one who holds a certificate of registration as a
civil engineer from the State Board of Registration for Civil and Professional
Engineers, or a structural engineer who holds such a certificate and also
has been authorized by said Board to use the title of Structural Engineer.
FACE OF BUILDING — Shall mean the general outer surface of any main
exterior wall of a building or structure, not including cornices, bay windows,
balconies, porches, or other ornamental trim.
FRONT PROPERTY LINE — Shall mean the dividing line between any
private property and any street or sidewalk.
GRADE — Shall mean the elevation of the public sidewalk nearest to the
property upon which any advertising structure is erected, or the natural
surface of the ground supporting an advertising structure, whichever is
lower.
§ 19-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1
AO:671
GROUND SIGN — Shall mean an advertising structure supported by a
single pole placed in the ground the advertising surface of which does not
exceed 50 square feet in area and the highest portion of which sign is not
more than 25 feet above grade.
PARAPET WALL — Shall mean that part of any wall entirely above the roof
or eave line.
PERSON — In addition to those included in the term by Section 1314, shall
mean any municipal or quasi-municipal corporation or governmental agency
other than the City.
PROJECTING SIGN — Shall mean a sign other than a wall sign suspended
from or supported by a building or other structure and projecting outwardly
therefrom.
PROJECTION — Shall mean the distance an advertising structure extends
beyond the building line or front property line.
PROPERTY LINE — Shall mean the dividing line, except a front property
line, between any parcels of land under different ownership.
ROOF SIGN — Shall mean a sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet
wall of a building or structure.
SIGN — Shall mean any name, figure, character outline, spectacle, display,
delineation, announcement, advertising device, appliance, or anything of
a similar nature to attract attention and include all parts, portions, units
and materials composing the same, together with the frame, background,
structure and support and anchorage therefore, as the case may be.
STREET — Shall mean any thoroughfare or public park not less than 20 feet
in width which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use.
STREET BANNER — Shall mean an object that both (i) is made of durable
cloth, plastic or similar nonrigid material; and (ii) is suspended or otherwise
displayed over, along, across or upon a street or other public way. Any street
banner erected, placed, suspended, attached or maintained over any public
street or other public way shall conform to the provisions of Section 19-10
of this Chapter.
WALL SIGN — Shall mean any sign attached to or erected against the wall
of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane
approximately parallel to the plane of said wall.
§ 19-2. BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED TO CONSTRUCT OR REPAIR
SIGNS.
§ 19-2.1. Permit Required. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8601]
No person shall erect, move, alter, change, repair, place, suspend, attach
or maintain any advertising structure, cloth or banner sign, or bracket
or flange sign without first obtaining a building permit from the Building
Official in the manner provided in this section, and in the event any
advertising structure is energized or serviced by electricity a separate
§ 19-1 COMPTON § 19-2.1
AO:672
electrical permit shall be obtained as required by Chapter 16, Electrical
Code.
Repainting of an advertising structure or the changing of copy thereon
while such structure remains in place shall not require the issuance of a
permit.
§ 19-2.2. Application for Permit. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8601.1]
Any person desiring a permit as required hereby shall file with the Building
Official an application therefor in writing on a blank form to be furnished
for that purpose. Every such application for such permit shall describe the
land or the building upon which the advertising structure is erected or
located, or upon which the proposed advertising structure is to be erected
or located, by lot and block, or by street number, or other means which
readily will identify the existing or proposed location of the advertising
structure for which the permit is sought. Accompanying every application
for such a permit, except for a billboard to be erected in accordance with
the detailed specifications contained in this section, there shall be filed
the plans, drawn to scale and of sufficient clarity to indicate the location,
dimensions and engineering design of such structure. All plans for roof
signs having an area of 100 square feet or more, and all other advertising
structures having an area of 50 square feet or more, and other signs
subject to excessive stresses shall be signed by an engineer or architect
and calculations and stress diagrams shall be furnished, except when in
the opinion of the Building Official the structural nature of the proposed
advertising structure does not require such certified plans.
§ 19-2.3. Approval of Plans. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8601.2]
If the plans and specifications are found to be in conformity with the
provisions of this section, the Building Official upon receipt of the required
fee shall issue a permit.
When the permit is issued the plan submitted with the application shall
be stamped "Approved" and a set of the approved plans shall be kept on
the work at all times and no changes, alterations, or modifications shall be
made thereon and the advertising structure shall be erected or the work
done thereon in conformity therewith, unless authorization to the contrary
is obtained from the Building Official.
§ 19-2.4. Permit Fees. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8601.3]
Before a permit is issued under this section, a permit fee therefore shall be
paid to the Building Official, according to the table set forth in subsection
14-1.5 of Chapter 14, Building and Housing.
Whenever any work, for which a permit is required under the provisions of
this section, has been commenced without a permit therefor having been
issued, the fees above specified shall be doubled, in order to cover the
cost of investigation of the work. The payment of such double fee shall not
§ 19-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-2.4
AO:673
relieve any person from compliance with the provisions of this Code or from
any penalty prescribed by law.
§ 19-2.5. Expiration of Permit. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8601.4]
If the work authorized to be done under any permit issued pursuant to this
section is not commenced within 60 days from the date of issuance of such
permit, such permit shall become null and void and the fee paid therefor by
the applicant shall be forfeited.
§ 19-2.6. Issuance of Permit Shall Not Authorize Violations of Law.
[Added by Ord. #884, § 8601.5]
The issuance or granting of a permit pursuant to this section shall not
authorize nor be an approval of any violation of any of the provisions of this
Code, and the Building Official is hereby authorized to stop the work on any
advertising structure which is being carried on in violation of this Code.
§ 19-3. ADVERTISING STRUCTURES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN
PLACES.
§ 19-3.1. Permitted Projections. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8602; Ord.
#976; Ord. #1170]
No person shall erect, construct, place or maintain any advertising
structure in the following locations except as projections may be permitted
by subsection 19-3.2:
§ 19-3.2. Projection of Advertising Structures. [Added by Ord. #884,
§ 8603]
No advertising structure or portion thereof shall extend or project over any
building line, public sidewalk, street, alley, or other public property, or any
private property used or intended to be used by the general public as a
sidewalk or street, a greater distance than permitted on Diagram 86A as
the same was approved by the Council on the 4th day of March, 1952, and
which such diagram is on file in the office of the City Clerk, nor at a height
above grade less than as shown on said Diagram 86A.
§ 19-4. BILLBOARDS.73 [Added by Ord. #884, § 8604; Ord. No.
2215]
a. Upon or above an alley which is less than 16 feet in width; nor upon or
above any alley 16 feet or wider, except as may be permitted by
subsection 19-3.2 of this Code;
b. Upon or over any public sidewalk, street, alley or other public places;
c. So that any portion of such advertising structure will not interfere in
any way with the free use of any fire escape, exit, standpipe, ventilator,
door or window.
§ 19-2.4 COMPTON § 19-5
AO:674
§ 19-5. WALL SIGNS, ROOF SIGNS, PROJECTING SIGNS. [Added by
Ord. #884, § 8605]
Wall signs, roof signs and projecting signs shall be constructed in
accordance with subsection 19-5.1 through subsection 19-5.4.
§ 19-5.1. Design and Construction. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8605.1]
Frames for wall signs, roof signs and projecting signs and supporting
construction shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 14,
Building and Housing, with the following exceptions:
§ 19-5.2. Projecting Signs. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8605.2]
Projecting signs attached to a building shall be of incombustible material or
of not less than one hour fire resistance construction. The thickness of any
such sign shall not exceed the following:
For a maximum projection of five feet, a thickness of two feet.
For a maximum projection of four feet, a thickness of 2.6 feet.
For a maximum projection of three feet, a thickness of three feet.
a. All portions of such signs less than 60 feet above grade shall be
designed for wind pressure of not less than 20 pounds per square foot.
All portions of such structure more than 60 feet above grade shall be
designed for a wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot.
b. Structural steel members shall be not less than 1/4 inch thick if
ungalvanized, and 3/16 inch thick if all members, including bolts and
fastenings, are galvanized. Bolts and rivets used in sign structures
supporting signs 100 square feet in area or more shall not be less than
1/2 inch in diameter if galvanized. Bolts and rivets used in sign
structures supporting signs less than 100 square feet in area shall not
be less than 3/8 inch in diameter if galvanized. Supports shall be
designed so that all loads and reactions shall be transmitted to the
ground, through the structural framework and walls of supporting
buildings and structures. Signs erected on buildings or structures shall
be attached securely by means of adequate metal brackets, expansion
bolts, through bolts, or lag screws. No material or equipment shall be
used which may become dangerous because of vibration, corrosion,
disintegration or for any other reason whatsoever. Wire, other than
stranded cable, shall not be considered as adequate fastenings, except
for cloth and banner signs. If supports of an existing structure are found
to be inadequate, such inadequacies shall be corrected upon the order
of the Building Official.
73.Editor's Note: See subsection 30-22.9 of the Compton Municipal Code.
§ 19-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-5.3
AO:675
§ 19-5.3. Wall Signs. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8605.3]
Wall signs extending a height of 15 feet above grade shall have a surface
of incombustible material but may have ornamental moldings and lattice
work of combustible material. Such signs may project not more than six feet
above the roof or parapet immediately adjacent thereto and may project
over the same only if a six-foot wide unobstructed passageway to the roof
is maintained at each end of the sign; provided, however, no wall sign shall
project above a roof or parapet wall when within three feet of a standpipe,
fire escape, or fire escape ladder.
§ 19-5.4. Roof Signs. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8605.4]
Roof signs shall be of incombustible material except that wood moldings
and two-inch thick plank walkways may be used. Blocks, angles or supports
fastened to the roof shall be located so as not to interfere with the drainage
of the roof, and when necessary, flashing or counter flashing shall be used.
Passages clear of all obstructions shall be left under or around all such signs
exceeding a height of four feet, immediately thereunder or adjacent thereto.
No roof sign on a type II, III, IV, or V building or structure, as the same
are defined in Chapter 14, Building and Housing, shall exceed a height of
30 feet above the top of the parapet nearest the sign, or above the highest
point of the roof directly thereunder in case there is no parapet. On a Type
I building, as the same is defined in Chapter 14, no roof sign shall extend
more than 30 feet above the top of the parapet nearest the sign, or above
the highest point of the roof directly under the sign, unless the height of the
building is more than 30 feet, in which case the height of the sign may be 50
feet; provided, however, that letters, figures, characters, or representations
in cut-out, or irregular form may be maintained in conjunction with,
attached to, or imposed upon any solid roof sign, but shall not exceed more
than 15 feet above the height limit of the sign; provided, further, that the
total surface area of the solid portion of such letters, figures, characters,
or representations in cut-out, or irregular form extending above the top
molding of the solid roof sign shall not exceed 30% of the total area of
the surface sign space of such sign, and the total surface area of the solid
portion of any one individual letter, figure, character, or representation in
cut-out, or irregular form extending above the top molding of such sign shall
not exceed 10% of the total area of the surface of such sign.
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing in this subsection, roof signs on one
story buildings may be constructed of wood not less than 3/4 inch thick, or
plywood not less than 1/2 inch thick, provided:
a. No portion of the sign extends more than four feet above the roof
directly thereunder; and
b. If any portion of the sign is within four feet of the street side of the
building a six-foot unobstructed passage must be maintained at each
end of the sign and at least every 50 feet in the length of the sign.
§ 19-5.3 COMPTON § 19-5.4
AO:676
§ 19-6. TYPES OF SIGNS REGULATED.
§ 19-6.1. Marquee Signs. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8606]
Signs may be placed or attached to, or constructed on a marquee, and for
the purpose of determining projection, clearance, height and material shall
be considered a part of and shall meet the requirements for a marquee as
provided in Chapter 14, Building and Housing. Projecting signs attached to
a building also may be attached to a marquee.
§ 19-6.2. Cloth and Banner Sign. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8607]
Cloth and banner signs shall be of strong construction and securely
attached flat against the building. All such signs shall be removed within
60 days after erection. Cloth signs and banners shall be flame proofed as
required by the Fire Chief if the area exceeds 100 square feet on the face of
the building.
§ 19-6.3. (Reserved)74
§ 19-6.4. Ground Sign. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8609]
Any standard which supports a ground sign shall be of structural steel or
iron pipe and shall be set in the ground in concrete to a depth of not less
than seven feet, and such concrete shall extend outward from such standard
in all directions for a distance of not less than 18 inches. The maximum
height of a ground sign may be increased to 30 feet upon approval of the
Building Official. A sign made of any material and erected upon a wooden
pole shall be considered to meet the requirements of this subsection when
such post is at least six inches by six inches and has been treated with
an approved wood preservative and the advertising surface of the sign
supported thereby does not exceed 25 square feet, and the highest portion
thereof is not more than 15 feet above grade; provided further that such a
sign upon a wooden standard shall be at least 15 feet from every property
line.
§ 19-6.5. Flange or Bracket Type Signs. [Added by Ord. #884,
§ 8610]
No person shall erect, construct, repair or maintain a flange or bracket type
sign unless the same first is approved by the Building Official and unless
such sign meets the following requirements: Such sign shall not have an
area greater than three square feet and shall not extend more than two feet
over public property or any building line and shall be maintained at least
Roof signs may project beyond the face of a building at right angles thereto if
such projection complies with the provisions of this section for projecting signs.
74.Editor's Note: Former subsection 19-6.3, Street Banners, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 884, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
2211. See Section 19-10 for street banners.
§ 19-5.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-6.5
AO:677
eight feet above grade. No such sign shall be erected or maintained on that
portion of any building which faces an alley.
§ 19-6.6. Portable Signs. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8611]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to moveable or portable poster
boards, portable A-boards, folding signs and similar moveable signs with
no advertising surface thereon larger than 24 square feet when such signs
do not exceed six feet in height and when such signs are used to advertise
goods, wares, or merchandise, or the carrying on of a business or profession
and are located on the premises where such goods, wares, or merchandise
is sold or such business or profession is carried on. All such signs shall be
anchored or weighted to hold them substantially erect.
Notwithstanding anything in Section 29-7 of this Code to the contrary,
portable signs of less than 12 square feet in surface area may be placed
between the front property line and any setback line established pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 29, Setback Lines, when the location of the same
has been approved by the Building Official and for such length of time as
may be determined reasonable by said Official, when in the opinion of said
Official the placing of such sign would not in any way be detrimental to the
public health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the City.
§ 19-6.7. Combination Advertising Structures. [Added by Ord. #884,
§ 8612]
Each portion of an advertising structure which is subject to more than one
classification shall meet the requirements for the classification to which
such portion is subject.
§ 19-7. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
§ 19-7.1. Identification. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8613]
Every advertising structure shall have placed thereon the name of the
person erecting, constructing, owning, or controlling the same and such
identification shall be plainly and prominently marked, painted, or outlined
in a location on such structure where such information shall be readily
visible after installation and erection of such structure.
§ 19-7.2. Maintenance. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8614]
Advertising structures shall be maintained at all times in a state of good
repair with all braces, bolts, supporting frame and fastenings free from
deterioration, termite infestation, rot, rust, or loosening. They shall be able
at all times to withstand safely the wind pressure for which they originally
were designed, and which in no case should be less than 15 pounds per
square foot.
§ 19-6.5 COMPTON § 19-7.3
AO:678
§ 19-7.3. Removal of Weeds and Rubbish. [Added by Ord. #884,
§ 8615]
No person erecting, constructing, maintaining or having control of any
advertising structure shall fail, refuse, or neglect to remove or cause to be
removed all weeds, rubbish, or any flammable waste or material from the
base of any such structure built or constructed of wood or other flammable
materials.
§ 19-7.4. Public Morals. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8616]
No person shall exhibit, post or display upon any advertising structure or
sign any statement, words or signs of an obscene, indecent or immoral
nature, or any picture, illustration or delineation of any human figure in
such detail as to offend public morality or decency; or any lewd or lascivious
act, or any other matter or thing of an obscene, indecent or immoral nature,
or offensive to the moral sense; or any murder, suicide, robbery, holdup,
shooting, stabbing, clubbing or beating of any human being, wherein any
such act is shown in gruesome detail, or in a revolting manner, or in any
manner objectionable to the moral sense.
§ 19-7.5. Interference With Traffic. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8617]
No person shall erect, construct, or maintain any advertising structure or
sign the design of which has features which might cause undue distraction
to pedestrians or motorists, or which might result in the creation of a
hazardous condition, or in any way simulate in size, color, lettering or
design any traffic sign.
§ 19-8. ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTIONS.
§ 19-8.1. Building Official's Powers. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8618]
The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the
provisions of this section and may enter any building or upon any premises
for the purpose of inspection to determine whether work being carried on
is in compliance with the provisions of this section and, in the event he
finds any violation of the provisions of this section, or that the same is
dangerous or unsafe or a menace to life or property, the Building Official
shall have the power to order any dangerous, unsafe, or menacing condition
to be corrected and in order to effect the same may stop the work on such
advertising structure.
No person shall continue to proceed with any work on any advertising
structure in violation of a stop order of the Building Official.
§ 19-8.2. Final Inspection. [Added by Ord. #884, § 8619]
Any person erecting, constructing, enlarging, altering, or moving any
advertising structure, or doing any work thereon for which a permit is
required by this section shall call for a final inspection by the Building
§ 19-7.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-8.2
AO:679
Official within 48 hours after the work authorized to be completed by
said permit is completed. If after inspection such advertising structure,
or any portion thereof, is found to be in violation of any provision of this
section, correction shall be made promptly and the structure shall be made
to conform in all respects and another call for final inspection shall be
made. No advertising structure shall be considered complete until the final
inspection or inspections required by the Building Official have been made.
§ 19-9. PROTECTION OF THE PUBLIC. [Added by Ord. #884,
§ 8620]
No person shall erect, install, alter, repair, or remove any advertising
structure which projects over or above any public property, nor do any work
preparatory thereto unless a suitable barricade of heavy rope attached to
moveable structures or standards or a board fence not less than four feet
in height is erected and maintained to keep pedestrian or other traffic from
underneath such advertising structure for a distance not less than 25 feet
on all sides of such structure during the period in which the work is being
performed, except that a suitable space on the sidewalk next to the curb
may be left for passage, and, in addition, between sunrise and sunset there
shall be installed and kept burning not less than two lighted red lanterns if
such work is to be performed at night.
§ 19-10. STREET BANNERS.
§ 19-10.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2211]
The purpose of this section is to prescribe standards by which the City will
provide limited availability for community-based service organizations and
educational institutions to advertise their events or a series of events that
are of general public interest utilizing City of Compton designated street
banner spaces according to the criteria set forth herein. It is not the intent
of the City of Compton to provide street banner space as a forum for the
unlimited expression by the general public or to allow non-City entities or
persons to post messages on City designated street banner spaces by use
of street banners. The City shall not discriminate based on the content of
the requested event banner, nor based on the nature of the event, provided
that the requested banner meets the requirements of this section. These
standards are intended to preserve the limited public forum status of the
street banner spaces.
This section does not apply to street banners that advertise events
conducted, sponsored or funded by the City. Such street banners instead
are prepared by the City or under its supervision, or are governed by the
terms of the City's sponsorship or funding requirements. In no way shall
this section be construed to limit the City's inherent right to hang City
sponsored street banners from any street banner space.
§ 19-8.2 COMPTON § 19-10.2
AO:680
§ 19-10.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2211]
For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future; words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directive.
COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICE ORGANIZATION — Shall mean a nonprofit
organization or corporation organized exclusively for veterans, social
welfare, civic league, religious or charitable purposes, which has been
issued a determination of exempt status by the Franchise Tax Board as
required under Sections 23701d, 23701f, or 23701w of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State of California or a group which is a local chapter
of a recognized national organization having such a tax exempt status.
Each such nonprofit organization must have a permanent meeting place in
the City and must have been organized and established in the City for a
minimum of one year continuously preceding the filing of the application for
the banner permit.
DESIGNATED LOCATION — Shall mean the City-designated street banner
space at the following locations: (1) Long Beach Boulevard at Rosecrans
Avenue; (2) Long Beach Boulevard at Alondra Boulevard; (3) Central Avenue
at Greenleaf Boulevard; (4) Central Avenue at Alondra Boulevard; (5)
Central Avenue at Rosecrans Avenue; and (6) Alameda Street at Compton
Boulevard; (7) Alondra Boulevard at Long Beach Boulevard; (8) Alondra
Boulevard at Central Avenue; (9) Rosecrans Avenue at Central Avenue.
ELIGIBLE ORGANIZATION — Shall mean a community-based service
organization or a local school district.
ERECT — Shall mean and includes suspend, display, install, construct, place
and maintain.
EVENT — Shall mean something that takes place within the City of
Compton at a venue of general interest that is open for attendance to the
public regardless of their age, gender, race, religion or physical disability.
LOCAL SCHOOL DISTRICT — Shall mean the Compton Unified School
District and the El Camino College, Compton Center (Compton Community
College District).
STREET BANNER — Shall mean an object that both (i) is made of durable
cloth, plastic or similar nonrigid material; and (ii) is suspended or otherwise
displayed over, along, across or upon a public street or other public way.
§ 19-10.3. Permit Required. [Ord. #2211]
No person shall erect or cause to be erected over, along, across or upon any
public street or other public way any street banner without a street banner
permit first being approved by the City Manager, or his or her designee.
§ 19-10.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-10.4
AO:681
§ 19-10.4. Application Processing. [Ord. #2211]
Street banner permit applications shall be processed in accordance with
this section:
§ 19-10.5. Banner Specifications. [Ord. #2211]
Street banners displayed pursuant to an approved street banner permit
shall conform to the specifications in this section:
a. Applications shall be filed with the City Clerk's Office on a City provided
form and submitted no more than 60 days and no less than 21 days
prior to the event sought to be advertised. Applications received by the
City outside of this period shall not be processed.
b. Applications filed by eligible organizations shall include a
nonrefundable application fee in an amount set by City Council
resolution. If a permit is granted by the City Manager or his or her
designee, prior to installation of any street banner, the permittee shall
remit to the City a nonrefundable banner permit processing fee in an
amount set by City council resolution, in addition to proof of compliance
with subsection 19-10.7 (Insurance).
c. Applications shall be reviewed solely according to the following criteria:
1. Whether the application is complete.
2. Whether the applicant is an eligible organization.
3. Whether the requested street banner space is an available
designated location.
4. Whether the applicant has submitted proof of general liability
insurance that satisfies the insurance requirements of this section.
d. The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall process applications in
the order received. An application shall be approved if there are no
grounds for denial based on the review criteria.
e. Reasonable efforts shall be made to provide written notice of the
approval or denial of an application to the applicant no later than seven
days after the application date. If the application is denied, the notice
shall include an explanation of the reason(s) for the denial and the
decision shall be final.
a. Street banners shall be 40 feet long by three feet wide, shall be
constructed of 16 ounce canvas, and shall contain two rows of eight
inch diameter wind holes set 24 inches apart. Street banners must be
professionally made and must be designed as specified in the
application.
b. Street banners shall have metal grommets that are 5/8 inch in diameter
placed at all corners and at both the top and bottom of the banner,
§ 19-10.4 COMPTON § 19-10.5
AO:682
§ 19-10.6. Installation and Removal. [Ord. #2211]
Street banners shall be installed and removed by the City in accordance
with this section:
§ 19-10.7. Insurance. [Ord. #2211]
Upon approval of a street banner permit, but prior to installation,
permittees shall provide proof of issuance of a general liability insurance
policy that shall remain in full force and effect throughout the display period
that satisfies the insurance requirements of this section:
spaced 24 inches apart. Corner grommets shall have reinforced
backing.
c. Street banners shall contain 100 feet of 3/8 nylon rope sewn into top,
center and the bottom of the banner.
d. Street banners shall contain the name, date, time (if applicable) and
location of the event and the name of the organization who is the permit
applicant that is conducting the event. Additionally, if desired by the
applicant and space allows, the street banner may also contain the
telephone number and/or web address for persons to obtain additional
information concerning the event.
a. The permittee shall deliver its street banner to the City of Compton
Public Works Street Department Corporate Yard at least 14 days prior
to the approved display period. Any street banner that is unsafe, or that
does not satisfy the banner specifications of this chapter, shall not be
installed until such time as necessary corrections have been completed.
b. The priority of street banner installations shall be based on event dates
and not on the order in which applications were received or permits
were issued.
c. No street banner shall be displayed for more than 30 days.
d. Each street banner shall be removed upon expiration of the approved
display period, or at any earlier time that the street banner has been
damaged by wind or other elements. Each permittee must retrieve its
street banner from the Public Works Street Department within one
week after it has been removed. Street banners not retrieved before the
deadline shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the City.
a. The policy shall be issued by an insurer that is authorized to do business
in California and has a Best's rating of no less than A-:VII.
b. The policy shall provide coverage in an amount no less than $1,000,000
per occurrence and shall name the City as an additional named insured
on the evidence of insurance and endorsement pages.
c. The coverage shall contain no special limitations on the scope of
protection afforded to the City.
§ 19-10.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-10.7
AO:683
§ 19-10.8. Displacement. [Ord. #2211]
Approval of a street banner permit shall not preclude the City from
displacing the permittee's street banner to accommodate a street banner
for a subsequently scheduled event conducted, sponsored or funded by the
City. In that situation, the eligible organization may be entitled to receive a
prorated refund of the banner permit processing fee.
§ 19-10.9. Revocation of Permit. [Ord. #2211]
Permits may be revoked by the City Manager and/or his or her designee in
whole or in part for one or more of the following grounds:
§ 19-10.10. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #2211]
With the City Manager's approval, the Director of Public Works may adopt
such rules and regulations as may be necessary or convenient to implement
this section. Such rules and regulations shall be kept on file in the Public
Works Department and the City Clerk's Office and shall be available for the
use and examination of the public.
Chapter 20
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 20-1. DATUM PLANE.
d. The coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the City.
e. Any failure to comply with reporting or other provisions of the policy,
including breaches of warranties, shall not affect coverage provided to
the City.
f. The insurance shall apply separately to each insured against whom
claim is made or suit is brought, except with respect to the limits of the
insurer's liability.
g. The policy shall be endorsed to state that coverage shall not be
suspended, voided, cancelled by either party, or reduced in coverage or
in limits unless the City has been given 30 days' prior written notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
a. The maintenance of any street banner endangers public welfare, safety
or property;
b. Failure or refusal to observe any provisions of this section or any rule
promulgated by the Public Works Department; or
c. A material misrepresentation in the permit application.
§ 19-10.7 COMPTON § 20-1.1
AO:684
§ 20-1.1. Establishment of Datum Plane. [Ord. #856, § 7100]
For the purpose of establishing and designating the official grades of the
streets and alleys of the City, sea level is hereby declared to be the datum
plane of the City, and as the permanent bench mark within the City, whose
altitude above the sea level has been ascertained, and the following is
hereby adopted as the official bench mark of the City: the top of a three
inch pipe with metal cap and having been set by the United States Geodetic
Survey and known to be solid and set opposite the Southern Pacific depot on
the easterly line thereof and within the right-of-way of the Southern Pacific
Railroad, the bench mark being the elevation of 67.0 feet above datum
plane.
§ 20-2. STREETS AND STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
§ 20-2.1. Permit to Do Street Work. [Added by Ord. #1173, § 7200]
No person shall lay, construct, reconstruct, or repair in any street or other
place in the City, or in, over, or through any property or right-of-way owned
by the City, and curb, sidewalk, gutter, driveway, graded and oiled roadway,
macadamized roadway, pavement, sanitary sewer, storm drain, or culvert,
or put upon, maintain, or leave therein any obstruction or impediment
to travel, or pile or place thereon any material without first obtaining a
permit in writing so to do from the Street Superintendent and without first
obtaining the lines and grades therefor from the City Engineer.
§ 20-2.2. Definitions. [Added by Ord. #1238, § 7200.1]
As used in this Chapter:
DRIVEWAY — Shall mean a roadway for the purpose of providing vehicular
access from a public street or roadway into private property.
Construction. Where curbs exist along the street, no person shall
construct, maintain, or permit to exist any driveway unless such
driveway is paved with Portland cement concrete between the curb
and property line. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any driveway in
existence on March 5, 1964, which is paved with asphaltic concrete
paving material and which is in good condition need not be
reconstructed and paved with Portland cement concrete until the
condition of the asphaltic concrete pavement has deteriorated to the
point where repairs are necessary, at which time such driveway must
be repaved with Portland cement concrete.
a.
Prohibited Driveways. No driveway shall be permitted to exist unless it
is possible for a vehicle entering such driveway to be parked entirely
upon the private property served by such driveway with no part of the
vehicle encroaching upon the public right-of-way. Where a portion of a
driveway is in violation of this section, such portion shall be subject to
the provisions of paragraph c of this subsection.
b.
§ 20-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2.2
AO:685
§ 20-2.3. Application for Permits. [Added by Ord. #1173, § 7201;
Ord. #1700, § 1]
§ 20-2.4. Permits; Fees. [Added by Ord. #1173, § 7202; Ord. #1700,
§ 2; Ord. #2229]
A fee shall be charged for all aforesaid street work, except that no fee shall
be charged to any governmental agency providing the work is being done by
the agency. The City Council shall from time to time establish, by resolution,
a fee for public works permits in addition to any other deposits required
for each public works permit issued. The fees shall not be refundable. In
the case of a new subdivision or major improvement in any street or other
public place within the City, or work performed under an improvement act
of the State Legislature, the City Engineer may, in lieu of such permit fees,
require the permittee to pay to the City an amount equal to 1/2% of the
involved construction costs.
Notice to Construct. Where a driveway exists which is not paved in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph a of this subsection, the
Street Superintendent may notify the owner or person in possession
of the property served by said driveway to pave such driveway with
Portland cement concrete in accordance with the standards adopted by
resolution of the Council. When the Street Superintendent finds that a
driveway exists in violation of paragraph b of this subsection, he may
notify the owner or person in possession of the property served by such
driveway to close such driveway by reconstructing the curb, removing
the paving, and, where the sloping portion of such driveway is joined
on either end by sidewalk, to reconstruct the sidewalk in that portion
formerly occupied by the driveway.
c.
a. Permits; Applications. Any person desiring a permit to perform any
work mentioned in this section shall file a written application therefor
with the City Engineer on forms furnished by the City Engineer, which
application shall state the location, nature, and extent of the work to be
performed and such other information as the City Engineer may
require. The City Engineer may make such changes as to the location,
and extent of the work as are in his judgment necessary to prevent
undue interference with traffic or danger to the safety of persons using
same.
A permit shall be void after a period not to exceed 60 days. However,
if circumstances warrant, the City Engineer may grant more time for
work completion.
b. Permits; Denial. The City Engineer may deny any person a permit to do
any work mentioned in this section, if that person has exhibited
unsatisfactory compliance with City codes, City ordinances, the City
Charter, or City regulations in the past.
a. Prior to the issuance of any permit to perform any work mentioned in
this section, the applicant shall also agree to indemnify, defend and hold
§ 20-2.2 COMPTON § 20-2.4
AO:686
harmless, to the maximum extent permitted by law, the City and its
officials, officers, agents, employees and representatives, from and
against any and all liability, suits, actions, proceedings, judgments,
claims, losses, liens, damages, injuries (whether in contract or in tort,
including personal injury, accidental death or property damage, and
regardless of whether the allegations are false, fraudulent or
groundless), costs and expenses (including reasonable attorney's fees,
litigation, arbitration, mediation, appeal expenses) which in whole or
in part arise out of or are connected with, or which are alleged to
have arisen out of or to have been connected with, the permittee's
use, operation, and activity under its permit. City may, in its sole and
absolute discretion, select counsel of its choosing to defend against
any asserted liability, suit, action, proceeding, judgment, claim, loss,
lien, damage, injury, cost or expense which is subject to indemnification
obligations set forth herein. Permittee shall be required to fully
reimburse City for the legal fees and all related litigation and expert
costs of such defense.
b. Each permittee shall obtain, pay for and maintain in full force and effect
throughout the term of the permit, an insurance policy or policies that
fully protects the City from claims and suits for bodily injury and
property damage. The insurance must be issued by an insurance carrier
which is duly qualified to engage in such insurance business under the
laws of the State of California, insuring the City, as additionally insured,
against any liability for loss resulting from the prosecution of the work
for which an application for a permit has been made and be in the
amount or amounts which the City Council shall from time to time
establish by resolution. The policy or policies must include a signed
endorsement naming the City and its officials, officers, agents and
employees as additional insured's; provide that the permittee's
insurance is primary and that no other insurance available to the City
will be called on to contribute to a loss covered under the policy;
provide that permittee's insurance applies separately to each insured or
additional insured who is seeking coverage, or against whom a claim is
made or suit is brought; and, provide at least 30 days' advance written
notice of cancellation (other than for nonpayment of premium),
termination or reduction of coverage. The insurance must afford
coverage for the permittee's use, operation and activity, vehicles,
equipment, facility representatives, agents and employees as follows:
1. Commercial General Liability Insurance with separate per
occurrence limits for bodily injury and property damage, and
including coverage for contractual liability; personal injury;
explosion, collapse and underground; products; and completed
operations in an amount determined by City Council resolution.
2. Business Automobile Liability Insurance with separate per
occurrence limits for bodily injury and property damage, including
rented, leased, hired, scheduled, owned and non-owned auto
§ 20-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2.4
AO:687
§ 20-2.4A. (Reserved)75
§ 20-2.5. Plans; Estimates. [Added by Ord. #1173, § 7203]
When, in the opinion of the Street Superintendent, the work requires the
making of special plans therefor, the Street Superintendent shall require
such plans to be prepared and submitted by the applicant. If, in the opinion
of the Street Superintendent, the proposed work does not require the
making of special plans therefor, the Street Superintendent shall estimate
the total expense which will be incurred by the City in connection therewith
and may estimate the cost of the proposed work. The applicant shall then
be required to deposit the estimated amount of the total expense with the
Street Superintendent.
The Street Superintendent may, in his discretion, require that the applicant,
before any permit is issued, file with the Street Superintendent a good
and sufficient bond, approved by the City Attorney and payable to the City,
in an amount equal to not less than 50% of the estimated cost of the
proposed work, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the work
for which such permit is issued in accordance with such permit and the
specifications, or plans and specifications, prepared therefor and referred
to in such permit. Such bond shall be either a cash bond, or a bond executed
by the permittee and a responsible surety company, or a bond executed by
the permittee and at least two personal sureties. In the latter case, each
coverage, as applicable, or in a combined single limit in an amount
determined by City Council resolution.
3. Workers' Compensation Insurance in compliance with the laws of
the State of California, and employer's liability insurance in an
amount not less than $1,000,000 per claimant.
The insurance required herein in no way relieves or decreases the
permittee's or its agent's obligation to indemnify and defend the City under
this section. Prior to issuance of a permit, the permittee shall furnish the
City, or have on file with the City Engineer, certificates of insurance and
endorsements, in the form and amount(s) required, evidencing all of the
coverage's above.
c. To the extent street work is performed pursuant to a valid franchise or
agreement, which was entered into prior to the adoption of this section
and which grants the franchise holder or party to the agreement a
specific right to perform such street work within the City without being
subject to fee requirements, indemnity requirements or insurance
requirements such as those set forth herein, the street work shall not be
subject to the fee requirement, indemnity requirement or insurance
requirement set forth herein.
75.Editor's Note: Former subsection 20-2.4A, Schedule of Street Work Permit Fees, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1792 and 1809, was repealed in
its entirety by Ord. No. 2229.
§ 20-2.4 COMPTON § 20-2.5
AO:688
personal surety shall justify before any person competent to administer
an oath in double the amount specified in the bond over and above all
statutory exemptions. The Street Superintendent may also, at his discretion,
in addition to such bond, or in lieu thereof, require a faithful performance
bond in the amount of $1,000, conditioned upon the replacement and
cleaning of the street, sidewalk, or curb to its original or better condition
after the completion of the work covered by the permit. Upon the deposit
of the estimated amount of the expense to be incurred by the City with the
Street Superintendent and upon the filing and approval of such bond and/or
bonds, the Street Superintendent shall issue the permit.
§ 20-2.6. Compliance with Specifications. [Added by Ord. #1173,
§ 7204]
All work mentioned for which a permit shall have been issued as provided
in this section shall be performed in accordance with the specifications or
standard plans adopted by the City for such class of work, or the special
plans and specifications approved therefor by the City Engineer and
referred to in the permit, and shall be performed to the satisfaction of the
Street Superintendent and under the supervision of an inspector appointed
by the Street Superintendent for such work.
§ 20-2.7. Inspections. [Added by Ord. #1173, § 7205]
No person shall commence any work mentioned in this section for which
a permit has been issued unless such person has made an application in
writing to the Street Superintendent for an inspection therefor at least 24
hours before commencing such work, specifying in such application the day
and hour when, and the location at which the work will be commenced, and
until approval for commencing the work has been given by the Inspector.
§ 20-2.8. Acceptance of Work. [Added by Ord. #1173, § 7206]
Whenever any permittee has completed any work under this section the
permittee shall so notify the Street Superintendent in writing. If, after
the Street Superintendent or his duly authorized representative, has by
survey or inspection, or both, found that the work has been completed in
accordance with the requirements of the permit issued therefor and all the
provisions of this section, he shall issue, if requested by the permittee, a
certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location,
nature and total amount of the work performed under the permit.
§ 20-2.9. Return of Excess Deposit. [Added by Ord. #1173, § 7207]
After acceptance of any work done under a permit issued pursuant to
this section, the Street Superintendent shall deduct from the deposit
hereinbefore provided for, the amount of the total expense incurred by
the City in connection therewith and shall return the unexpended portion
thereof to the permittee. The decision of the Street Superintendent as to the
§ 20-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2.9
AO:689
amount of expense incurred by the City in connection with any work done
under a permit pursuant to this section shall be final and conclusive.
§ 20-2.10. Refund. [Added by Ord. #1173, § 7208]
Any unused permit issued under the provisions of this section shall be
cancelled and the deposit made in connection therewith including the
permit fee, less the amount of any expenses already incurred by the City on
account thereof, shall be returned to the permittee upon surrender of the
permit.
No permit issued under the provisions of this section shall be transferable
except that an owner of premises in front of which work is to be done may
take a permit and do work and transfer the right granted by said permit to
a contractor engaged by him to do the work, or to his employees working
directly for him, and except that a permit taken out by a contractor for
the performance of work shall be deemed to have been issued to any or all
subcontractors working as his agents and in performance of portions of the
work covered by the permit. Each permit shall become and be void unless
the work to be done is completed within the time specified therein or any
extension granted therefor.
§ 20-2.11. Unauthorized Work. [Added by Ord. #1173, § 7209]
No person to whom a permit has been granted under the provisions of this
section shall perform any of the work mentioned herein in excess of that
specified in the permit issued therefor.
§ 20-2.12. Debris; Cleanup. [Added by Ord. #1173, § 7210]
No person performing any work under the provisions of this section shall
fail, refuse or neglect to remove all materials and debris within three days
after the completion of the work; provided, however, that where new work
is covered with earth the terms of the specifications of the City governing
such work shall control.
§ 20-2.13. Public Safety. [Added by Ord. #1173, § 7211]
Whenever the permittees operations create a condition hazardous to traffic
or to the public, he shall furnish at his expense adequate warning to
the public of any dangerous conditions to be encountered and he shall
furnish, erect, and maintain such fences, barricades, lights, signs and other
devices as are necessary to prevent accidents and avoid damage or injury
to the public. Signs, lights, flags and other warning and safety devices
shall conform to the requirements of the Street Superintendent as to size,
type, amount used and the placing thereof. The permittee shall assume
full responsibility for all accidents which may occur due to vehicles or
pedestrians crossing or entering the area for which the permit was issued
until all improvements have been completed and all surfaces restored and
accepted by the Street Superintendent.
§ 20-2.9 COMPTON § 20-2.14
AO:690
§ 20-2.14. Damage to Streets. [Added by Ord. #1177, § 7212]
No person shall do any of the following acts:
§ 20-3. STREET EXCAVATIONS.
§ 20-3.1. Definitions. [Added by Ord. #1286, § 7300]
As used in this section:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Street Superintendent.
EXCAVATION — Shall mean any opening in the surface of a public place
made in any manner whatsoever, except an opening into a lawful structure
below the surface of a public place, the top of which is flush with the
adjoining surface and so constructed as to permit frequent openings
without injury or damage to the public place.
FACILITY — Shall mean pipe, pipeline, tube, main, service, trap, vent,
vault, manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole,
pole line, anchor, cable, junction box, transformer, or any other material,
structure, or object of any kind or character, whether enumerated herein or
not, which is or may be lawfully constructed, left, placed, or maintained in,
upon, along, across, under, or over any public place.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any public place, street, way, alley, sidewalk,
park, square, plaza, or any other similar public property owned or
controlled by the Administrative Authority and dedicated to public use.
a. Drain water or permit water to be drained from his lands onto any
street or alley by any means which result in damage to the street or
alley or a hazard to public travel;
b. Obstruct any natural watercourse so as to:
1. Prevent, impede, or restrict the natural flow of water from any
street or alley into and through such watercourse, unless other
adequate and proper drainage is provided;
2. Cause water to be impounded within any street or alley to the
damage of such street or alley;
3. Cause interference with, or damage or hazard to, public travel;
c. Store or distribute water for any purpose so as to permit it to overflow
onto, to saturate by seepage, or to obstruct any street to the damage of
such street, or so as to constitute a hazard to public travel;
d. Flush any water hydrant or water main to the extent of causing damage
to any street; or
e. Flush any water hydrant or water main to the extent of causing a
hazard to public travel without first erecting adequate traffic signs or
barricades warning the public of the existing hazard.
§ 20-2.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-3.1
AO:691
SUBSTRUCTURE — Shall mean any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole,
vault, buried cable, wire, or any other similar structure located below the
surface of any public place.
UTILITY — Shall mean a private company and/or corporation or municipal
department engaged in providing a particular service to the general public.
§ 20-3.2. Excavation Permit. [Added by Ord. #1286, § 7300.1]
No person shall make any excavation in, along, or under the surface of any
street, or other public place in the City, or dig in, plow up, tear up, fill, cover,
disturb, or change any portion of the same, or permit to be constructed, put
upon, maintained, or left therein any obstruction or impediment to travel, or
pile or place thereon any material without first obtaining a written permit
therefor, which permit shall be issued by the Street Superintendent upon
compliance by the applicant for the same with the requirements therefor set
forth in this section.
§ 20-3.3. Application. [Added by Ord. #1286, § 7300.2]
No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application (on a form
provided by the Administrative Authority) for the issuance of an excavation
permit is submitted to the Administrative Authority. The written application
shall state the name and address and principal place of business of the
applicant, the authority of the applicant to occupy the public place for which
the permit is sought, the location and dimensions of the installation or
removal, the approximate size of the excavation to be made, the purpose of
the facility, and the approximate time which will be required to complete
such work, including backfilling such excavation and removing all
obstructions, material, and debris. An extension of time may be granted
by the Administrative Authority for good and sufficient reasons. The
application, when approved and signed by the Administrative Authority,
shall constitute a permit. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection,
the Administrative Authority may, at his discretion, issue a blanket permit
to:
§ 20-3.4. Excavation Permit Fees. [Added by Ord. #1286, § 7300.3]
A permit fee shall be charged by the Administrative Authority for the
issuance of an excavation permit. Such fees shall be in accordance with a
a. Public utilities regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the
State;
b. A person holding a franchise from the City; or
c. The Water Department of the City to make excavations not exceeding
two feet in width by four feet in length prior to the filing of the
application referred to in this subsection; provided, however, an
application for such permit shall be filed for each such excavation in not
more than 10 days after such excavation.
§ 20-3.1 COMPTON § 20-3.4
AO:692
schedule thereof from time to time in effect as established by resolution of
the Council.
§ 20-3.4A. Street Excavation Permit Fees. [Ord. #1792, § 2; Ord.
#1809, § 3]
Basic fee $20
Plus $1 per square yard
§ 20-3.5. Liability Insurance. [Added by Ord. #1286, § 7300.4;
Amended by Ord. #1402]
Prior to the issuance of any permit to perform any work mentioned in
this section, the applicant shall also file with the Street Superintendent
a certificate of insurance, issued by an insurance carrier which is duly
qualified to engage in such insurance business under the laws of the State,
insuring the City, as coinsured, against any liability for loss resulting from
the prosecution of the work for which an application for a permit has
been made in the following amounts: $1,000,000 for injury to any one
person arising out of any one occurrence and $1,000,000 for injury to more
than one person arising out of any one occurrence and $1,000,000 for
property damage arising out of any one occurrence; provided however, such
certificate of insurance may be waived by the Administrative Authority for
work to be done between the curb and the property line of any street upon
satisfactory evidence that the work can be performed without constituting
a hazard to the public; and provided, further, that public utilities operating
under the supervision of the Public Utilities Commission, public utilities
holding a franchise from the City, City departments, and other
governmental agencies may be relieved of the obligation of submitting such
a certificate of insurance by the Administrative Authority.
§ 20-3.6. Cash Deposits or Surety Bonds. [Added by Ord. #1286,
§ 7300.6]
a. Special Deposits. The application for an excavation permit to perform
excavation work under this section shall be accompanied by a cash
deposit, made to the Administrative Authority for deposit with the City
Treasurer, in accordance with the adopted rate schedule of the
Administrative Authority. In lieu of such cash deposit, the applicant may
file with the Administrative Authority a surety bond in such amount as
shall be determined by the Administrative Authority and conditioned
upon the permittee's compliance with all of the terms and conditions of
this section.
b. Purposes. Any special deposit made hereunder shall serve as security
for the repair and performance of the work necessary to put the public
place in as good a condition as it was prior to the excavation if the
permittee fails to make the necessary repairs or to complete the proper
refilling of the opening and the excavation work under the excavation
permit.
§ 20-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-3.6
AO:693
c. Refunds of Special Deposits. Upon the permittee's completion of the
work covered by such permit in conformity with this section as
determined by the Administrative Authority, 2/3 of such special deposit
shall be promptly refunded by the City to the permittee, and the
balance shall be refunded by the City to the permittee upon the
expiration of a 24 months' period.
d. Use of Deposits. The Administrative Authority may use any or all of any
such deposits to pay the cost of any work the Administrative Authority
performs to restore or maintain the public place as herein provided in
the event the permittee fails to perform such work, in which event the
amount refunded to the permittee shall be reduced by the amount thus
expended by the Administrative Authority.
e. Public Utility Companies. Where excavations are made by public utility
companies operating under a franchise issued by the City, or under the
supervision of the Public Utilities Commission, or utilities operated by
governmental agencies, a permit may be granted without making such
deposit. In such cases the utilities shall be liable for the actual cost of
any work required to be done by the Administrative Authority in
restoring the area covered by such excavation to as good condition as
the same was in before such work was done; provided, however, the
Administrative Authority may, in the future, require such deposit from
any such utility if a bill rendered in accordance with this subsection
remains unpaid 30 days after the date of billing.
f. Protective Measures and Routing of Traffic. It shall be the duty of every
person cutting or making an excavation in or upon any public place to
place and maintain barriers and warning devices necessary for the
safety of the general public.
Barriers, warning signs, lights, etc., shall conform to the requirements
of the Administrative Authority. Warning lights shall be electrical
markers or flashers used to indicate a hazard to traffic from sunset of
each day to sunrise of the next day.
Electrical markers or flashers shall emit light at sufficient intensity and
frequency to be visible at a reasonable distance for safety. Reflectors or
reflecting material may be used to supplement, but not replace, light
sources. The Administrative Authority may restrict the use of lanterns
or open flame devices.
The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that, during
the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as near
normal as possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize
inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and to the
general public.
When traffic conditions permit, the Administrative Authority may, by
written approval, permit the closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for
a period of time prescribed by him if, in his opinion, it is necessary. The
written approval of the Administrative Authority may require that the
§ 20-3.6 COMPTON § 20-3.6
AO:694
§ 20-3.7. Clearance for Vital Structures. [Added by Ord. #1286,
§ 7300.7]
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water
gates, underground vaults, valve housing structures, and all other vital
equipment as designated by the Administrative Authority.
§ 20-3.8. Protection of Traffic. [Added by Ord. #1286, § 7300.8]
The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two lanes of vehicle traffic
at all street intersections where possible and safe crossings for pedestrians
at intervals of not more than 300 feet. If any excavation is made across
any public street, alley, or sidewalk, adequate crossings shall be maintained
for vehicles and for pedestrians. If the street is not wide enough to hold
the excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, a
passageway at least 1/2 of the sidewalk width shall be maintained along
such sidewalk.
§ 20-3.9. Relocation and Protection of Utilities. [Added by Ord.
#1286, § 7300.9]
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing facility without the
written consent of the Administrative Authority and the owner of the facility.
If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done
by its owner. No facility owned by the City shall be moved to accommodate
the permittee unless the cost of such work shall be borne by the permittee.
The cost of moving privately-owned facilities shall be similarly borne by the
permittee unless he makes other arrangements with the person owning the
facility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise
all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus which may be in any
way affected by the excavation work and shall do everything necessary to
support, sustain, and protect them under, over, along, or across such work.
The permittee shall secure approval of the method of support and protection
from the owner of the facility. In the event any of such pipes, conduits, poles,
wires, or apparatus should be damaged, and for this purpose pipe coating or
other encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a substructure,
the permittee shall promptly notify the owner thereof. All damaged facilities
shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them, and the expense
of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee. It is the intent of this
subsection that the permittee shall assume all liability for damages to
permittee give notification to various public agencies and to the general
public. In such cases such written approval shall not be valid until such
notice is given.
Warning signs shall be placed far enough in advance of the construction
operation to alert traffic within a public street, and cones or other
approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic in accordance with
the instructions of the Administrative Authority.
§ 20-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-3.9
AO:695
facilities and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such
facility damage, and such assumption of liability is a contractual obligation
of the permittee. The only exception will be such instances where damage is
exclusively due to the negligence of the owning utility. The City shall not be
made a party to any action because of this subsection. The permittee shall
inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground facilities
and protect the same against damage.
§ 20-3.10. Abandonment of Substructures. [Added by Ord. #1286,
§ 7300.10]
Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned, except the abandonment
of service lines designed to serve single properties, the person owning,
using, controlling, or having an interest therein shall, within 30 days after
such abandonment, file with the Administrative Authority a statement in
writing giving in detail the location of the substructure so abandoned. If
such abandoned substructure is in the way, or subsequently becomes in
the way, of an installation of the City or any other public body, which
installation is pursuant to a governmental function, the owner shall remove
such abandoned substructure or pay the cost of its removal during the
course of the excavation for the construction of the facility by the City or
any other public body.
§ 20-3.11. Protection of Adjoining Property. [Added by Ord. #1286,
§ 7300.11]
The permittee shall at all times, and at his own expense, preserve and
protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations
and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where, in the
protection of such property, it is necessary to enter upon private property
for the purpose of taking appropriate protecting measures, the permittee
shall obtain a license from the owner of such private property for such
purpose. The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all
buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during the
progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damages
to public or private property or highways resulting from his failure to
properly protect and carry out such work. Whenever it may be necessary
for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, such area shall be
reseeded or the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after
ditches have been backfilled as required in this section. All construction and
maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn
area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as nearly as possible to
that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove,
even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas
without first obtaining the consent of the appropriate City department or
City official having control of such property.
§ 20-3.9 COMPTON § 20-3.12
AO:696
§ 20-3.12. Care of Excavated Material. [Added by Ord. #1286,
§ 7300.12]
Any material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in
any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger
those working in the trench, pedestrians, or users of the streets and so
that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and
adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are
too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench,
the Administrative Authority shall have the authority to require that the
permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul
it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee's
responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all necessary
arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites.
All trench and tunnel excavations and construction shall conform with
the safety requirements for shoring, bracing, and ladders in trenches in
accordance with the "Trench and Tunnel Construction Safety Orders" of the
State as they now or may hereafter exist.
All materials excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench
and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as reasonably
possible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or as specified by the
Administrative Authority. Whenever necessary, in order to expedite the flow
of traffic or to abate the dirt or dust nuisance, toe boards or bins may be
required by the Administrative Authority to prevent the spreading of dirt
into traffic lanes.
§ 20-3.13. Cleanup. [Added by Ord. #1286, § 7300.13]
As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned
of all rubbish, excess earth, rock, and other debris resulting from such
work. All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be
accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the
satisfaction of the Administrative Authority. From time to time, as may be
ordered by the Administrative Authority and in any event immediately after
completion of such work, the permittee shall, at his own expense, clean up
and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from such
work, and, upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified
to do so by the Administrative Authority, such work may be done by the
Administrative Authority and the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and
the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond
provided hereunder.
§ 20-3.14. Protection of Watercourses. [Added by Ord. #1286,
§ 7300.14]
The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed for the full
depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot in width from the face
of such curb at the gutter line. Whenever a gutter crosses an intersecting
street, an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained.
§ 20-3.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-3.14
AO:697
The permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water,
muck, silt, slickings, or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting
from sluicing or other operations and shall be responsible for any damage
resulting from his failure to so provide.
§ 20-3.15. Breaking Through Pavement. [Added by Ord. #1286,
§ 7300.15]
§ 20-3.16. Depth of Structures. [Added by Ord. #1286, § 7300.16]
No person shall, without written permission of the Administrative Authority,
install any substructure, except manholes, vaults, valve casings, culverts,
and catch basins, at a vertical distance less than:
a. Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the Administrative
Authority when the use endangers existing substructures or other
property.
b. Saw cutting of Portland cement concrete may be required by the
Administrative Authority when the nature of the work or the condition
of the street warrants. When required, the depth of cut shall be not less
than one inch in depth; however, depths greater than one inch may be
required by the Administrative Authority when circumstances warrant.
Saw cutting may be required by the Administrative Authority outside
the limits of the excavation over cave-outs, over breaks, and small
floating sections.
c. Approved cutting of bituminous pavement surface ahead of excavation
may be required by the Administrative Authority to confine pavement
damage to the limits of the trench.
d. Sections of sidewalks shall be removed to the nearest score line or joint.
e. Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and overbreaks,
and subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.
f. Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned
with the center line of the trench.
g. Cutouts outside the trench lines shall be normal or parallel to the
trench line.
h. Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new pavement may be
required by the Administrative Authority.
i. The permittee shall not be required to repair pavement damage existing
prior to the excavation unless his cut results in small floating sections
that may be unstable, in which case the permittee shall remove and
pave the area.
a. Streets. Twenty-four inches below the established flow line of the
nearest gutter. If such flow line is not established, the depth shall be at
§ 20-3.14 COMPTON § 20-3.16
AO:698
§ 20-3.17. Backfilling. [Added by Ord. #1286, § 7300.17]
Backfilling shall be done and performed in accordance with the
requirements entitled "Specifications for Backfill" from time to time in effect
as provided by resolution of the Council. The Administrative Authority may
require soil tests to be furnished by a recognized soil testing laboratory or
registered professional engineer specializing in soil mechanics when, in his
opinion, backfill for any excavation is not being adequately compacted. In
order for the resurfacing to be permitted, such tests shall show that the
backfill material meets the minimum requirements as prescribed by the
Administrative Authority. All expenses of such tests shall be borne by the
permittee.
§ 20-3.18. Restoration of Surface. [Added by Ord. #1286, § 7300.18]
Permanent resurfacing or excavations shall be made by the Administrative
Authority except that he may instruct the permittee to cause the surface to
be restored. After the restoration is made by the Administrative Authority,
the total cost of such restoration shall be determined, and the permittee
shall be required to pay such cost. In either event the permittee shall, upon
approval of backfill, cause the excavation to be resurfaced with a temporary
paving material of a type and to such thickness as shall be determined by
the Administrative Authority and shall maintain such temporary pavement
in a safe and satisfactory condition until such time as permanent
resurfacing has been completed.
Should the Administrative Authority instruct the permittee to accomplish
the permanent resurfacing, the work of such resurfacing shall be done to
the satisfaction of the Administrative Authority and under his inspection.
§ 20-3.19. Trenches. [Added by Ord. #1286, § 7300.19]
The maximum length of open trench permissible at any time shall be in
accordance with existing laws or regulations or as may be specified by the
a minimum of 24 inches below the surface of the nearest outermost
edge of the travelled portion of the street.
b. Parkways. The minimum depth of any substructure shall be 16 inches
below the established gutter grade when such substructure parallels
with the parkway. The minimum depth of any substructure shall be 12
inches below the top of the established sidewalk or curb when such
substructure is at right angles to the parkway.
c. Other Public Places. The minimum depth of any substructure in any
other public place shall be 12 inches below the surface; provided,
however, the Administrative Authority may permit a lesser depth in
special cases.
d. In all cases set forth in this section the Administrative Authority may
require a greater depth than the prescribed minimum.
§ 20-3.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-3.19
AO:699
Administrative Authority, and no greater length shall be open for pavement
removal, excavation, construction, backfilling, patching, and all other
operations without the written permission of the Administrative Authority.
§ 20-3.20. Prompt Completion of Work. [Added by Ord. #1286,
§ 7300.20]
After an excavation is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with
diligence and expedition all work covered by the excavation permit and
shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original
condition, or as near as may be, so as not to obstruct the public place or
travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary.
§ 20-3.21. Urgent Work. [Added by Ord. #1286, § 7300.21]
When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public,
or the public interest require that the excavation work be performed as
emergency work, the Administrative Authority shall have full power to
order, at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate
facilities be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day to the end that such
excavation work may be completed as soon as possible, or impose such
other requirements as may be deemed reasonably required in interests of
public health or safety.
§ 20-3.22. Emergency Action. [Added by Ord. #1286, § 7300.22]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the making of such
excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property,
or for the location of trouble in conduits or pipes, or for making repairs
provided the person making such excavation shall apply to the
Administrative Authority for such a permit on the first working day after
such work is commenced.
§ 20-3.23. Noise, Dust, and Debris. [Added by Ord. #1286,
§ 7300.23]
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out excavation work in such manner
as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public
and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take
appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the
performance of the excavation work noise, dust, and unsightly debris and,
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., shall not use, except
with the express written permission of the Administrative Authority or in
case of an emergency as herein otherwise provided, any tool, appliance,
or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or
repose of occupants of the neighboring property.
§ 20-3.19 COMPTON § 20-3.24
AO:700
§ 20-3.24. Preservation of Monuments. [Added by Ord. #1286,
§ 7300.24]
Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of
any street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point, or
a permanent survey bench mark within the City shall not be removed or
disturbed, or caused to be removed or disturbed, without first obtaining
permission in writing from the Administrative Authority so to do. Permission
to remove or disturb such monuments, reference points or bench marks
shall only be granted upon the condition that the person applying for such
permission shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of this
monument by the Administrative Authority.
§ 20-3.25. Inspections. [Added by Ord. #1286, § 7300.25]
The Administrative Authority shall make such inspections as are reasonably
necessary in the enforcement of this section. The Administrative Authority
shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules
and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out
the intent of this section.
§ 20-3.26. Maintenance of Drawings. [Added by Ord. #1286,
§ 7300.26]
Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in
substructures under the surface of any public place used for the purpose
of supplying or conveying gas, electricity, communication impulse, water,
steam, ammonia or oil in the City shall, when requested, file with the
Administrative Authority within 120 days after February 7, 1967, a map
or set of maps, each drawn to a scale of not less than one inch to 200
feet, showing in detail the plan, location, size and kind of installation, if
known, of all substructures, except service lines designed to serve single
properties beneath the surface of the public place belonging to, used by, or
under the control of such person having any interest, and shall file with the
Administrative Authority annually, at a time specified by the Administrative
Authority, a corrected map or set of maps each drawn to said scale,
including all installations made during the previous year to and including
the last day of such year; provided however, a public utility owner may, at
its option, provide corrected atlas sheets at more frequent intervals.
§ 20-3.27. Liability of City. [Added by Ord. #1286, § 7300.27]
The provisions of this section shall not be construed as imposing upon the
City or any official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages
to any person injured by the performance of any excavation work for which
an excavation permit is issued hereunder, nor shall the City or any official
or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or
responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance
of any permit, or the approval of any excavation work.
§ 20-3.24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-3.27
AO:701
None of the provisions of this section shall apply to any work done along or
under any street or other public place pursuant to any law of the State or of
the City providing for the improvement thereof, or pursuant to any contract
for street improvement authorized by the Council.
§ 20-3.28. One-Call Notification System. [Added by Ord. #1621,
§ 7300.28]
One-call notification system means an association providing for mutual
receipt of notification of construction activities in the unincorporated
territory of Compton.
§ 20-3.29. Search Requirement. [Added by Ord. #1621, § 7300.29]
Except in emergency work to protect the public and property, any permittee
proposing to excavate in any highway shall make a search of available
records of underground facilities and shall notify owners or operators
known to have such facilities in the vicinity of the proposed excavation
by telephone and other acceptable means of communication at least 48
hours prior to time of proposed excavation, exclusive of weekends or legal
holidays. At such time as a one-call notification system is operational in
Compton, permittee shall notify those owners or operators who are
members of the system by notifying the system by telephone at least 48
hours prior to time of proposed excavation, exclusive of weekends or legal
holidays. The permit shall not be valid until the permittee receives a ticket
number from the system acknowledging the notification, which number
the permittee shall enter upon the face of the permit. The notification
is an additional method to be used in determining underground facilities
and does not relieve the permittee from the responsibility to assure that
owners or operators of such facilities are notified. Any permittee shall
likewise notify nonmembers of the system who are owners or operators of
facilities in the vicinity of the proposed excavation. Any person receiving
notice pursuant to this section shall, not less than one working day in
advance of proposed construction unless otherwise agreed between the
person and permittee, inform the permittee of or field mark the location of
any underground facility in the proposed area of excavation.
§ 20-3.30. Permit Requirements. [Added by Ord. #1621, § 7300.30]
The provisions of this section apply to permits for the making, or causing to
be made, in any highway, of excavations, and for the placing, constructing,
testing, repairing, changing, monitoring, removing or abandoning of
facilities or encroachments. The provisions of this chapter also apply to
written emergency plans for owners or operators of pipelines used to
convey toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids and mandatory membership in
a one-call notification system.
§ 20-3.27 COMPTON § 20-3.31
AO:702
§ 20-3.31. Membership Requirement. [Added by Ord. #1621,
§ 7300.31]
When a one-call notification system is operational in Compton, no person
shall maintain and operate a pipeline designed to carry hazardous
substances below the surface of a highway unless that person is a member
of the system. That person shall provide to the City Manager such proof
as required that said person is a member of the system in Compton. For
the purpose of this subsection, electrical facilities shall not be considered
hazardous.
§ 20-3.32. Hydrostatic Pressure Testing. [Added by Ord. #1621,
§ 7300.32]
After initial installation under this section of any pipeline used or to be
used to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids, such pipeline shall be
subject to a hydrostatic pressure test as provided herein before it is placed
in operation. The duration of the hydrostatic test for this purpose shall not
be less than 24 hours.
After repair or replacement of any pipeline used or to be used to carry
toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids, made necessary for changes required
by improvements within the roadway, the affected portion of the pipeline
shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure test as provided herein before
placing in operation. The duration of the hydrostatic test for this purpose
shall be not less than 24 hours. However, no such test is required for a
minor repair which does not require removal of the pipeline from operation.
If the affected section is isolated and tested hydrostatically, pressure test of
the tie-in welds is not required; however, tie-in welds shall be examined by
radiographic means.
No pipeline subject to this section used to be used to carry toxic, corrosive
or flammable liquids, and over 10 years of age, shall be operated beyond the
successive ensuing twelve-month period of time unless retested annually
by a hydrostatic pressure test or other test means acceptable to the City
Manager. The duration of the periodic test for this purpose shall not be less
than four hours.
Each pressure test, either initial or retest, shall be in accordance with the
American National Standard Institute's Code for Pressure Piping Systems
(ANSI B 31.4) in its latest revision. The City Manager may authorize the use
of a liquid petroleum that does not vaporize rapidly (i.e., flash point over
150° F. or 66° C.) as a test medium. Pressure tests after initial installation of
pipelines and before they are placed in operation shall show no unexplained
loss. Annual or retest pressure tests shall not show an hourly loss, for each
section of the pipeline under test at the time, in excess of either 10 gallons,
or the sum of one gallon and an amount computed at a rate in gallons per
mile equivalent to 1/10 of the nominal internal diameter of the pipe. The
City Manager may grant administrative waiver or other relief to an owner
or operator under this section as to the periodic pressure testing of any
pipelines as herein provided if the owner or operator can demonstrate that
§ 20-3.31 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-3.32
AO:703
such testing will cause the unreasonable unscheduled shutdown of plants,
terminals, refineries or other facilities of which such pipelines constitute an
integral part.
In addition to the foregoing requirements, any pipeline authorized by this
section and subject to pressure testing shall be subjected to a pressure
test by the owner or operator at any time as may be required by the City
Manager in the interest of public safety.
Within 30 days after completion of any test made pursuant to the provisions
of this section, the owner or operator shall submit a certified report of
such test for the City Manager's review. The report shall show the date
of test, description of portion of pipeline tested identified with respect to
Compton highways, and the test data. The report shall be sufficient in detail
to permit analysis of test results and determination of compliance with the
applicable provisions of this section or any other applicable ordinance, rule
or regulation. The report shall also contain any other test information as
may be specifically requested by the City Manager.
§ 20-3.33. Block Valve Installation. [Added by Ord. #1621,
§ 7300.33]
Block valves shall be installed on each new main line at locations along
the pipeline system that will minimize damage from accidental product
discharge. This location shall be appropriate for the terrain and the
population density of the area.
§ 20-3.34. Cathodic Protection System. [Added by Ord. #1621,
§ 7300.34]
As provided in the American National Standard Institute's Code for
Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B
31.4) in its latest revision, a cathodic protection system shall be installed for
all new ferrous pipelines to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable substances
other than utility gases in order to mitigate corrosion deterioration that
might result in structural failure. The cathodic protection system for all new
ferrous pipelines carrying utility gases shall be installed in accordance with
General Order No. 112-C of the Public Utilities Commission of the State of
California. A test procedure shall be developed by the owner or operator
to determine whether adequate cathodic protection has been achieved and
submitted to the City Manager for approval. Reports of cathodic protection
evaluation in accordance with the approved procedure shall be made
available annually for review by the City Manager.
§ 20-3.35. Written Emergency Plan. [Added by Ord. #1621,
§ 7300.35]
Each owner or operator of a pipeline used or to be used to convey toxic,
corrosive or flammable liquids shall have a written emergency plan
approved and on file with the City Fire Prevention Division. The plan shall
be in accordance with the American National Standard Institute's Code for
§ 20-3.32 COMPTON § 20-3.35
AO:704
Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B
314) in its latest revision.
The plan shall include but not be limited to the following elements:
§ 20-3.36. Abandoned Pipelines. [Added by Ord. #1621, § 7300.36]
Each applicant for a permit to abandon in place or remove any facility or
encroachment in the highway shall do so under the terms and conditions
prescribed by the City Manager. The permit application shall include a
plat or other suitable means describing the facility or encroachment to
be abandoned or removed and indicating its exact location. Permission to
abandon a facility or encroachment without removing shall be subject to
removal within one year after the effective date of the abandonment if
the facility or encroachment may interfere with a present or future public
improvement. If it is determined that the facility or encroachment should
be removed, the permittee or its successor in interest shall remove it at its
expense or pay Compton for the cost of such removal. The permittee shall
leave any abandoned facility or encroachment in a safe condition.
In addition to the foregoing, abandonment in place of a pipeline used to
convey toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids will be subject to the following
requirements. The pipeline shall be thoroughly purged of liquids and vapors
and filled with an inert material that will remain in a solid or semisolid state
if any portion of the pipeline is cut or removed in the future. The permittee
shall file a certificate with the City Manager that said requirements have
been complied with and the abandoned pipeline has been left in a safe
condition.
§ 20-4. STREET TREES.
a. A liaison element for intercommunications between public agencies and
pipeline owners or operators to provide for prompt coordinated
remedial action, and the dissemination of information as to the location
and ownership identification of pipelines based on the best available
records and plans.
b. A spill contingency element to limit the extent of accidental product
discharge by which pipeline owners or operators shall involve
themselves in a cooperative pipeline leak notification emergency action
system.
c. A leak detection element by which the pipeline owners or operators can
monitor the flow of their product and can divert, reduce or stop the flow
of said product at the first indication of a product leak.
d. A first-on-the-scene emergency containment element in cooperation
with other pipeline owners or operators to be utilized until arrival of the
affected pipeline owners' or operators' personnel. First-on-the-scene
costs shall be borne by the organization effecting the emergency
containment.
§ 20-3.35 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-4.1
AO:705
§ 20-4.1. Definitions. [Added by Ord. #1655, § 7800]
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them by this subsection unless otherwise specifically provided
and as defined per the Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction:
DIRECTOR — Shall mean the Director of Public Works or his designee.
PARKWAY STRIP — Shall mean that area within the public right-of-way lying
between the curb and the sidewalk.
PERSON — Shall mean individuals, corporations, associations, partnerships
and to the extent of the City's jurisdiction, public entities.
STREET TREE — Shall mean that plant and arborescent form planted and
maintained within the public right-of-way.
§ 20-4.2. Prohibitions. [Added by Ord. #1655, § 7801]
It shall be unlawful, a public nuisance, and an infraction punishable by
a $100 fine for any person to plant, remove, prune, injure or destroy
any street trees, as hereinafter defined, except in conformance with the
provisions of this section.
§ 20-4.3. Street Trees Property of City. [Added by Ord. #1655,
§ 7802]
All street trees within the City of Compton are the property of the City. The
Director shall have exclusive authority, except as hereinafter provided, to
plant, remove, prune, inspect, maintain, root prune or otherwise alter such
street trees.
§ 20-4.4. Requests for Removal, Pruning. [Added by Ord. #1655,
§ 7803]
Any person may request the removal, spraying, pruning, root pruning or
replacement of a street tree on or adjacent to his property. Upon such
request, the Director may inspect such tree, and in his sole and exclusive
determination, cause the removal, spraying, pruning, root pruning or
replacement of such street tree.
§ 20-4.5. Private Works. [Added by Ord. #1655, § 7804]
Upon written approval of the Director, any person requesting street tree
service pursuant to subsection 20-4.4 may undertake such work privately
or by agreement with a private nursery or tree service if, in the sole and
exclusive determination of the Director:
a. There is sufficient assurance that such work will be properly
undertaken and, except in cases of removal, will not irrevocably
damage the street tree; and
§ 20-4.1 COMPTON § 20-4.5
AO:706
§ 20-4.6. Removal of Trees; Protest. [Added by Ord. #1655, § 7805]
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 20-4.4 and 20-4.5 herein to
the contrary, the Director shall not remove or permit to be removed any
live street tree, except instances of immediate public danger, without first
posting such tree with a conspicuous notice stating in general that the tree
is to be removed 10 days after the date of posting. The notice shall state that
any person may protest the removal of such tree by notifying the Director.
Upon receipt of such a protest, the Director shall reconsider his decision to
remove or permit removal of such tree. If the tree poses no threat to public
safety, public or private property (including utilities and sewer laterals) or
if removal is not required to allow the construction of public or private
improvements, or if such threat may be mitigated by pruning, root pruning,
irrigation, feeding or other maintenance, the Director shall not remove or
permit removal of the tree. Any person aggrieved by the final determination
of the Director may appeal to the City Manager. Any person aggrieved by
the determination of the City Manager may appeal to the City Council. The
City Manager may establish rules of procedure for the processing of any
such appeals.
§ 20-4.7. Street Tree Planting; Lists; Replacements; Private Work;
Subdivisions. [Added by Ord. #1655, § 7806]
§ 20-4.8. Duty of Utility to Protect Trees; Excavations. [Added by
Ord. #1655, § 7807]
b. There is sufficient assurance that the public safety will not be impaired.
To this end the Director may require a public liability and property
damage insurance policy, permit and processing fee.
a. Upon written approval of the Director, any person may undertake
privately or by agreement with a private nursery or tree service, the
planting of a street tree provided that the location, species and manner
of planting are acceptable to the Director.
b. The Director shall prepare a list of those tree species which are
acceptable for use as a street tree. The Director shall also establish
such criteria relating to the location and manner of planting such tree
as will protect public safety and public and private improvements.
c. All new plantings of street trees as replacements for street trees
existing on the effective date of this section shall conform to the species
and planting criteria set forth in paragraph b of this subsection.
d. There may be imposed as a condition of approval for all parcel and
subdivision maps that the subdivider plant street trees at such locations
and in such manner as may be determined by the Director.
a. It shall be the duty of any person owning or operating any utilities
within the public right-of-way (including but not limited to water,
§ 20-4.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-4.8
AO:707
§ 20-4.9. Liability; Tree Damage. [Added by Ord. #1655, § 7808]
The provisions of this section shall not be considered to release or relieve
any owner of real property within the City from a duty to maintain his
property, including such portions of the public right-of-way that are the
maintenance responsibility of the property owner. However, in the sole and
exclusive determination of the Director, whenever damage to the public
right-of-way is directly caused by the action of a street tree, the City may
repair and/or reconstruct the right-of-way improvements exclusively or on
any proportional cost basis determined by the Director. This subsection
shall not be construed as creating an additional cause of action or liability
on behalf of any property owner, person or the City.
§ 20-5. REGULATION OF NEWSRACKS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OFWAY.
§ 20-5.1. Findings. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
The City Council of the City of Compton finds and determines as follows:
sewers, gas, electrical, telephone and cable television services) to
maintain such utilities in a manner to prevent damage to street trees.
b. Any person excavating, trenching or otherwise engaged in subsurface
works within the public right-of-way shall not cut any street tree root
exceeding three inches in diameter unless specifically authorized to do
so by the Director. In addition to the penalties otherwise prescribed by
this section for violation of the terms thereof, any person who, without
authorization, cuts a street tree root in excess of three inches in
diameter shall be liable for the cost of removal and replacement of the
street tree, should such removal be necessary in the sole and exclusive
determination of the Director, or shall be liable for the costs of remedial
pruning should such be necessary in the sole and exclusive
determination of the Director.
a. That the uncontrolled proliferation and placement of newsracks in the
public right-of-way constitutes a threat to public health, safety and
general welfare including impeding pedestrian, wheelchair and
vehicular traffic; interfering with ingress and egress to and from
buildings, vehicles and public transportation; obstructing views of
traffic signs and street-crossing pedestrians; and impeding
performance of essential utility, traffic control and emergency services;
and
b. That unreasonably deteriorated or inadequately maintained newsracks
threaten the public health and safety; and
c. That newsracks not reasonably maintained in a neat and clean
condition threaten the general welfare including the aesthetic
appearance of the public right-of-way; and
§ 20-4.8 COMPTON § 20-5.1
AO:708
§ 20-5.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
As used in this section:
APPLICANT OR PERMITTEE — Shall mean the publisher or distributor,
or custodian, employee, officer or other person who, as an agent of the
publisher or distributor, has applied for (applicant) or been granted
(permittee) a permit pursuant to the provisions of this section.
CITY MANAGER — Shall mean the City Manager or the City Manager's
designee(s).
DIRECTOR — Shall mean the Director of the Department of Public Works,
or his/her designee.
HARMFUL MATTER — Has the meaning set forth in Section 313 of the
California Penal Code, or in any successor provision.
MINOR — Shall mean any natural person under 18 years of age.
NEWSRACK — Shall mean any self-service container or coin-operated box,
storage unit or other dispenser that rests or projects, in whole or in part,
in or upon any portion of the public right-of-way, and is installed, used
or maintained for the display, sale or distribution of any publication listed
in the permit granted under this section. Unless otherwise stated in this
section, the term newsrack includes shared newsrack and combination
dispenser and the same standards and regulations apply to all three.
OPERABLE ELEMENT — Shall mean any component of a newsrack
requiring handling or manipulation to obtain the publication therein
including the door or coin mechanism.
PARKWAY — Shall mean that area between the sidewalk and the curb of any
street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the
roadway and property line adjacent thereto. Parkway also includes any area
within the roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.
PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued pursuant to this section allowing the
placement of a newsrack within a specifically designated portion of a public
sidewalk or parkway.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, company, corporation, association,
business, firm, partnership or other legal entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean any area used or intended for use by
the public for pedestrian or vehicular travel within the City, including but
d. That the intent of these provisions is to ensure the public health, safety
and general welfare is protected without unreasonably restricting the
dissemination of constitutionally protected information; and
e. That it is not the intent of these provisions to regulate the placement of
newsracks on private property. It shall remain the responsibility of the
permittee to determine the property lines and ensure newsracks are
placed within the public right-of-way in compliance with this section.
§ 20-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-5.2
AO:709
not limited to public streets, highways, roadways, sidewalks, median strips,
parkways, plazas or alleys.
ROADWAY — Shall mean that part of a public right-of-way that is designated
and used primarily for vehicular travel.
SHARED NEWSRACK — Shall mean a single newsrack housing more than
one publication, and is subject to the same standards and regulations as a
newsrack, unless otherwise stated in this section.
SHARED PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued to a person as a primary
applicant providing for the sharing of a newsrack among specified
publications as long as all of the standards of this section are otherwise met.
The primary applicant shall be considered the permittee for all purposes
under this section except as explicitly set forth.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean that part of a public right-of-way that is
designated and used primarily for pedestrian travel.
STREET — Shall mean all areas dedicated to public use for public street
purposes and includes but is not limited to roadways, parkways, alleys and
sidewalks.
§ 20-5.3. General Prohibition. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack or other related
structure which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway or which
rests wholly or in part upon, along or over any portion of the roadway.
§ 20-5.4. Display of Certain Matter Prohibited. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
No person or entity shall knowingly place or maintain in any newsrack
which rests in whole or in part, upon, in or on any portion of a public rightof-
way, or which projects onto, into or over any part of a public right-of-way,
any publication or material exposed to public view which contains material
harmful to minors.
§ 20-5.5. Permit Requirements and Standards. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
It is unlawful for any person to install or permit the installation or
maintenance of any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or
over any public sidewalk or parkway without first obtaining a permit from
the City.
a. General Provisions. One permit will be issued per applicant covering all
newsracks in each application. Each permit may be amended quarterly
by submitting an amendment of permit application to the Director,
provided fees are paid for additional newsracks. A condition of any
permit issued under this section is that the permittee shall keep on file
with the City an accurate record readily identifying the locations of its
newsracks. This information may be used to check the accuracy of
information provided in the permit application or compliance with
conditions of any existing permit or this section.
§ 20-5.2 COMPTON § 20-5.5
AO:710
b. Initial Permit Application. Applicants interested in installing newsracks
shall first submit to the Director a permit application available from the
Public Works Department. Applications that do not include all of the
requested information and/or documents shall be deemed incomplete.
Incomplete applications shall not be processed and shall not
automatically be deemed approved under the circumstances specified
in paragraph d below. Applications shall contain the following as to
each newsrack:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
newsrack;
2. The name, address and telephone number of the responsible
person whom the City may notify or contact at any time concerning
the newsrack;
3. The number of newsracks and the exact proposed location of each
newsrack shown on an 8 1/2 inch by eleven-inch diagram (to scale),
and identifying all items in the public right-of-way, including but not
limited to bus benches, street poles and posts, fire hydrants, fire
call boxes, driveways, wheelchair ramps, crosswalks, curb returns,
buildings, landscaping, other newsracks, and any other public or
private improvements within a twenty-foot radius of the proposed
location. The above required document shall also be submitted in a
digital format that is AUTO cad compatible;
4. A photograph and/or model number of the type of newsrack being
used;
5. The name of the publication(s) to be contained in each newsrack;
6. An Indemnification and Hold Harmless Agreement pursuant to
subsection 20-5.9 below, and agreement to conform to the
requirements of this section;
7. A Certificate of Insurance pursuant to subsection 20-5.10 below;
8. The date that said newsrack(s) is proposed to be installed;
9. (Reserved)
10. An application and processing fee, as established by resolution of
the City Council; and
11. Any additional information which the Director may deem necessary
for the proper disposition of the application.
12. In the case of a shared permit, all of the information set forth above
must be supplied for all publications sharing the newsrack. In
addition, the primary applicant shall assume responsibility and
authority for complying with all of the standards of this section for
the shared permit, and all publications sharing the newsrack must
§ 20-5.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-5.5
AO:711
assent to the assumption of responsibility and authority for the
primary applicant.
c. Permit Renewal Applications. If a permittee is in compliance with this
section, a permit may be automatically renewed for each successive
fiscal year by timely payment of the renewal fee established by
resolution of the City Council and the filing of a complete permit
renewal application by or before the first day of July of each year.
Applications that do not include all of the requested information or
documents shall be deemed incomplete, shall not be processed, and
shall not automatically be deemed approved under the circumstances
specified in paragraph d below.
d. Review of Permits. Once submitted, a complete permit application will
be reviewed and acted upon within 15 business days. If the applicant is
not notified in writing by the 15 business day of approval, denial or
extension of the permit review period, the permit application shall be
deemed approved.
e. Issuance of Permits. Upon a finding by the Director that the application
is complete, accurate and in compliance with this section, a permit shall
be issued. Approval of a newsrack permit shall not in any event
constitute an easement on or an encumbrance against the public rightof-
way. No right, title or interest in the public property upon, in or over
which the newsrack is located, or any part thereof, shall vest or accrue
in the distributor or owner of the newsrack by reason of approval of a
newsrack permit.
f. Denial of Permit. If an application or portion of an application for a
permit is denied, the Director shall promptly notify the applicant in
writing of the specific cause for such denial.
g. Permit Revocation. A permit may be revoked if the permittee is found to
be in violation of the provisions of this section. Any permit issued in
error may be revoked without liability to the City.
h. Sale or Transfer of Permits. Permits shall not be sold or transferred
except as a part of the sale of a majority of the related business assets
of the permittee. The proposed new permittee shall notify the Director
in writing within 10 business days that the permit has been sold or
transferred. The notification shall include the name and contact
information for the proposed new permittee. No transfer or sale shall
be effective until the proposed new permittee executes an
Indemnification and Hold Harmless Agreement in favor of the City as
required in subsection 20-5.9 below, and obtains the requisite
insurance coverage pursuant to subsection 20-5.10 below. Until such
time, the existing permittee shall maintain the required insurance
coverage and shall remain liable for any personal injury or property
damage caused by or related to the permittee's newsrack(s).
§ 20-5.5 COMPTON § 20-5.6
AO:712
§ 20-5.6. Physical Standards for Newsracks. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
Newsracks shall comply with the following standards:
a. Any operable element of a newsrack shall not exceed 48 inches in
height or be less than 15 inches above the public right-of-way on which
it is located.
b. No newsrack or shared newsrack shall exceed 48 inches in height, 30
inches in width or 24 inches in depth. No combination dispenser shall
exceed 60 inches in height, 120 inches in width or 30 inches in depth.
The top of the coin mechanism shall not be more than six inches above
the top of the newsrack.
c. No exterior or interior component of any newsrack shall advertise,
publicize or promote anything other than the display, sale or purchase
of the publication(s) therein.
d. Newsracks shall only contain current editions of the publication(s) for
which the permit was issued.
e. Coin-operated newsracks shall be equipped with a functional coinreturn
mechanism.
f. Each newsrack shall have permanently affixed in a readily visible place
the current name, address and telephone number of the permittee.
g. Each newsrack shall have a door, covering and/or other appropriate
device(s) preventing the publications therein from getting wet or falling
out due to rain, wind or similar environmental conditions.
h. Each newsrack shall be continuously maintained in a reasonably neat
and clean condition and in good repair including: (1) reasonably free of
dirt, trash, debris, foreign objects, graffiti, stickers, dents and grease;
(2) reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in any
visible painted areas; (3) reasonably free of rust and corrosion in any
visible unpainted metal areas; (4) any clear parts through which
publications are visible shall be unbroken and reasonably free of
cracks, scratches, dents, blemishes and discoloration; (5) any paper or
cardboard parts or inserts shall be reasonably free of tears, peeling or
fading; and (6) no structural components shall be broken or unduly
misshapen. A maintenance log documenting the permittee's inspection
of each newsrack shall be maintained by the permittee and available for
inspection upon request of the City.
i. Newsracks shall be installed on a single pedestal or a multiple post
using drop-in type anchor bolts to secure newsracks to the public rightof-
way, and shall be constructed, installed and maintained in a safe and
secure condition approved by the Director.
j. Newsracks shall not be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any
property or to any permanently fixed object not owned by the owner of
the newsrack unless consent of the owner of such property or object is
§ 20-5.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-5.6
AO:713
§ 20-5.7. Standards for Proper Removal of Newsracks. [Ord. #2185,
§ 1]
Upon removal of any newsrack, the permittee, at its expense, shall eliminate
any potential hazards to the public, such as bolts, brackets or holes, and
shall restore any disturbed area of the public right-of-way to the same
or reasonably similar condition as any adjoining public right-of-way by
removing any protrusions, cleaning the cavity of debris, filling the cavity
with high strength epoxy or grout to meet the elevation of the adjoining
public right-of-way, and avoiding potential depressions by taking into
account shrinkage and settlement of the new material. The public right-ofway
shall be level and free of protrusions or depressions. The permittee
shall match as closely as reasonably possible the color, texture and material
of any adjoining public right-of-way surface.
§ 20-5.8. Location Standards for Newsracks. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
Newsracks shall be located in accordance with the following:
obtained in writing and presented with the permit application or permit
renewal application.
k. All newsracks attached as a group must open in the same direction.
l. Newsracks shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1980, as amended, and all regulations adopted thereunder.
a. No portion of any newsrack shall project into or be located in any
roadway.
b. Newsracks shall be placed no closer than six inches of the roadway
edge of any curb painted red.
c. Newsracks shall be located only adjacent to the curb (if there is no
curb, then to the edge of the roadway), or the wall of a building.
d. Except as stated in paragraph b above, newsracks located adjacent to
the curb (or edge of the roadway) shall be located no less than 18
inches or more than 24 inches from the roadway edge and shall not
open toward the roadway.
e. Newsracks located adjacent to a building shall be located parallel to
and not more than six inches from the wall. The Director may approve a
distance of more than six inches if required for proper maintenance of
surface behind the newsrack, and the safe flow of pedestrian or
wheelchair traffic is not impaired.
f. No portion of a newsrack shall be located directly in front of any display
window except near the curb.
g. No newsrack shall be located directly opposite another newsrack on the
same public right-of-way.
§ 20-5.6 COMPTON § 20-5.8
AO:714
§ 20-5.9. Indemnification Requirement. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
The permit application and any permit renewal application shall include
an Indemnification and Hold Harmless Agreement in favor of the City in
substantial compliance with this section, which must be executed by every
h. Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided no group of
newsracks extends more than 10 feet along a curb and a clear paved
space of at least four feet separates each group of newsracks. If the
Director determines a violation exists, priority to remain shall be given
first to newsracks evidencing the earliest date of installation, followed
by newsracks with the highest frequency of publication, followed by a
lottery.
i. No newsrack of shared newsracks shall weigh, in the aggregate, in
excess of 125 pounds when empty.
j. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
1. Within five feet of any marked crosswalk;
2. Within 15 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;
3. Within five feet of fire hydrant, fire call box, fire lane, police call
box, traffic signal controller, traffic signals or other emergency
facility;
4. Within 10 feet of a driveway or alley approach;
5. Within five feet ahead of and 25 feet to the rear of any sign marking
a designated bus stop;
6. Within six feet of any bus bench or transit advertising shelter;
7. At any location reducing the clear space for the passage of
pedestrians to less than four feet. When feasible, newsracks should
be placed to allow the widest path of travel;
8. Within three feet of or on any public area improved with lawn,
flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping approved by the City;
9. Within 150 feet of another newsrack containing the same
publication and located on the same side of the public right-of-way
in the same block;
10. Within five feet of a curb painted blue, or within three feet of a curb
painted yellow or white; or
11. So as to unreasonably obstruct or interfere with: the flow of
pedestrian, wheelchair or vehicular traffic; sites used for public
utility purposes or other government use; the ingress or egress to
or from any residence or building; or the use of poles, traffic signs
and signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted by the
City at that site.
§ 20-5.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-5.9
AO:715
permittee, and person on a shared permit, prior to issuance of any permit
under this section. Pursuant to the Indemnification and Hold Harmless
Agreement, the permittee shall agree to defend, indemnify, protect and
hold the City, and its elected officials, officers, representatives, agents
and employees harmless from and against all claims asserted or liability
established for damages or injuries to any person or property, including
its own employees, agents or officers which arise from or are connected
with or are caused or claimed to be caused by any newsrack owned by or
attributable to the permittee; provided however, that the permittee's duty to
indemnify and hold harmless shall not include any claims or liability arising
from the established sole negligence or sole willful misconduct of the City.
§ 20-5.10. Insurance Requirements. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
A condition for issuance of a permit pursuant to this section, is that every
permittee, and person on a shared permit, agrees to maintain a policy of
public liability insurance, naming the City of Compton, its officials, officers
and employees as an "additional insured," in an amount of not less than
$500,000 combined single limit for any injury to persons and/or damage to
property by reason of installation, use and maintenance of such newsrack
on public property. The policy shall provide that the insurance coverage
shall not be cancelled or reduced by the insurance carrier without the City
having been given 30 days' prior written notice thereof by such carrier.
The permittee shall provide and keep in force that policy of public liability
insurance during such time as it continues to operate any newsrack under
the terms of this section. If the insurance is canceled at any time during
the term of the permit, it shall be grounds for revocation of the permit.
No newsrack may be installed, used or maintained until permittee provides
the City with evidence of the requisite insurance, including proof on the
endorsement page(s) that the City is an "additional Insured."
§ 20-5.11. Newsracks in Violation of Section. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
a. Notwithstanding any condition upon which summary removal is
available, enforcement action may be initiated upon determination by
the Director that a newsrack has been abandoned as set forth in
subsection 20-5.14 below, or installed, used, or maintained in violation
of this section or any condition of the permit. The permittee will be
notified in writing of the alleged violation, the intent of the City to
remove the newsrack if the violation is not corrected or a hearing not
requested within five business days after the giving of such notice of
violation and intent to remove, and the procedure for requesting an
appeal hearing. Failure to properly correct the violation or to appeal the
notice within five business days of the date of the notification shall
result in the newsrack being summarily removed and stored by the
Public Works Department. Appeals shall be processed pursuant to
subsection 20-5.15 below. A removal and storage fee, as established by
City Council resolution, shall be assessed against each newsrack
removed. A timely request for an appeal hearing shall stay removal;
provided, however, if the violation is not corrected within five calendar
§ 20-5.9 COMPTON § 20-5.11
AO:716
§ 20-5.12. Permit Fees. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
All newsracks require timely payment of an annual permit fee established
by the City Council. No refunds are provided for newsracks taken out of
days after the decision of the City Manager, the City may remove the
newsrack in accordance with paragraph b of this section.
b. Whenever a newsrack is removed by the City and stored, the Director
shall notify the permittee by mailing a notice of removal, stating the
date the newsrack was removed, the reasons therefor, the procedure
for claiming the newsrack and the procedure for obtaining a postremoval
hearing, if desired. Any newsrack removed and stored
pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall be released to the
permittee if claimed within 30 continuous calendar days from the date
of notice of removal and on payment of reasonably incurred removal
and storage fees. Upon the failure of the permittee to claim such
newsrack and pay the fees within 30 continuous calendar days after the
mailing of the written notice of removal, the newsrack shall be deemed
abandoned property in possession of the City and may be disposed of
pursuant to law.
c. If the Director determines that the condition or placement of a
newsrack poses an imminent threat to the safety of pedestrians or
wheelchair users, or the safe flow of vehicles; or that a newsrack is
located within the public right-of-way without a permit, the Director
may cause the newsrack to be summarily removed without prior notice.
d. Upon the summary removal of a newsrack, the Director shall notify the
permittee by mailing a notice of summary removal, stating the date the
newsrack was removed, the reasons therefor, the procedure for
claiming the newsrack and the procedure for obtaining a post-removal
hearing, if desired. Any newsrack removed and stored pursuant to the
provisions of this subsection shall be released to the permittee if
claimed within 30 continuous calendar days from the date of notice of
summary removal and on payment of reasonably incurred removal and
storage fees. Upon the failure of the permittee to claim such newsrack
and pay the fees within 30 continuous calendar days after the mailing of
the written notice of removal, the newsrack shall be deemed abandoned
property in possession of the City and may be disposed of pursuant to
law.
e. If the permittee or otherwise responsible party cannot be readily
contacted based exclusively on information provided in a current
permit, related permit application or information affixed to the
newsrack, no further action on behalf of the City is required. If the
responsible party thereafter notifies the Director to reclaim the
offending newsrack, and the newsrack has not been deemed abandoned
and disposed of, a notice of summary removal and procedure for
obtaining a post-removal hearing shall be served in accordance with
paragraph d above, unless waived by the responsible party.
§ 20-5.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-5.12
AO:717
service. Permit fees are due and payable annually on the first day of July
of each year, and shall be prorated for any partial year. Annual permit fees
shall be delinquent after 30 days past due. A late payment fee shall be
assessed on all delinquent amounts in accordance with subsection 9-1.6.
The fee is based on the total number of newsracks in service in the public
right-of-way. This fee shall be sufficient to recover the costs of processing
the permit application and enforcing permit requirements.
§ 20-5.13. Recovery of Costs, Fees and Penalties. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
The City Council may set fees on an annual basis to recover all reasonable
costs of reinspection and removal of newsracks. Any time a newsrack is
caused to be removed, summarily or otherwise, due to violations of this
section, the City may recover all reasonable costs to include:
§ 20-5.14. Abandonment. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
A newsrack shall be deemed abandoned if it: (1) is removed pursuant to
subsection 20-5.11 above, and unclaimed for 30 continuous calendar days
from the date of notification of removal; or (2) remains empty or without a
permitted publication for 30 continuous calendar days. Newsracks deemed
abandoned may be disposed of pursuant to law. The City may dispose of
a newsrack and shall not be responsible for any newsrack, including its
contents, deemed abandoned for 60 continuous calendar days.
§ 20-5.15. Appeal. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order
or action taken under the provisions of this section may appeal the same
by filing an appeal. An appeal must be perfected within five business days
after receipt of notice of any protested finding, determination, notice, order
or action by filing with the City Manager a letter of appeal briefly stating
therein the basis for such appeal. A hearing shall be held on a date no
more than 15 business days after receipt of the letter of appeal unless
appellant requests a longer time period. The City Manager shall give the
appellant, and any other interested party, a reasonable opportunity to be
heard, in order to show cause why the finding, determination, notice, order
or action should not be upheld. Within 30 calendar days of the conclusion of
the hearing, the City Manager shall affirm, overrule or modify the finding,
determination, notice, order or action. The decision of the City Manager
shall be final and conclusive.
§ 20-5.16. Business License. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
A permit issued under this section shall not substitute for any business
license otherwise required under this Code.
a. Cost of the investigative and administrative staff to process the case.
b. Cost of newsrack removal including the costs of any necessary sidewalk
repair and/or storage of the newsrack.
§ 20-5.12 COMPTON § 20-5.17
AO:718
§ 20-5.17. Penalty. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
Any violation of the provisions of this section is an infraction, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50 for a first
violation; a fine not exceeding $100 for a second violation in the same
calendar year; and a fine not exceeding $200 for each additional violation
in the same calendar year. Each day that such violation is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder.
§ 20-5.18. Applicability of Section Provisions. [Ord. #2185, § 1]
§ 20-6. TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURES. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
This section shall be known as "Temporary Street Closures."
§ 20-6.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
§ 20-6.2. Permit Required for Temporary Street Closures. [Ord.
#2201, § 1]
a. The provisions of this section shall apply to all newsracks, whether
installed and maintained prior to or after the effective date of this
section. Those newsracks installed prior to the effective date of this
section shall be brought into compliance with the provisions of this
section within 90 calendar days of the effective date of this section.
b. Any newsracks not brought into compliance within 90 days after the
effective date of this section76 shall be deemed to be in violation of this
section.
c. The City Clerk shall notify all publications or distributors who, prior to
the effective date of this section, have newsracks located within the City
of the enactment of this section by mailing a copy thereof to each such
distributor or publication.
a. Pursuant to the authority of California Vehicle Code Section 21101(e),
the provisions of this section shall apply to, and control the closing of
any City street for the purpose of holding events such as; celebrations,
block parties, street dances, local special events or other purposes,
when in the opinion of local authorities such closing is necessary for the
safety and protection of persons who are to use that portion of the
street during temporary closing.
b. Provisions of this section are to be supplementary and complementary
to all of the provisions of the Compton Municipal Code, State law, and
any law cognizable at common law or in equity, and nothing herein shall
be read, interpreted or construed in any manner so as to limit any
existing right or power of the City of Compton.
76.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2185, codified herein, was adopted December 16, 2008.
§ 20-5.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-6.2
AO:719
§ 20-6.3. Scope of Permit. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
§ 20-6.4. Permit Application. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
An application for a permit for a temporary street closure shall be in
writing and made upon a form provided by the Municipal Law Enforcement
Services Department and shall include the following information:
a. Except as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any person
to close any portion of a public street or alley to vehicular or pedestrian
traffic for the purpose of conducting a celebration, block party, street
dance, local special event, without first being issued a permit in
accordance with the provisions herein. This section shall not apply to
those governmental agencies which are otherwise authorized to close
streets.
b. A street closure permit may be issued subject to such terms and
conditions as are determined to be necessary and proper for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Street closure
permits shall be issued to persons over the age of 18 only.
a. Use of Sidewalks. The City Manager or his/her designee shall issue a
street closure permit that authorizes the permit holder to use the
sidewalks adjacent to the streets for which the permit applicant seeks a
street closure permit.
b. Pedestrian Access. A street closure permit that authorizes the use of the
adjacent sidewalks shall require the permit holder to provide for
pedestrian access along the areas to be closed, including, to and from
any adjacent building.
c. Restriction on Length of Street Closure. No street closure permit shall
be issued to allow closure of an intersection or any street for more than
600 feet measured along the centerline of the road, or 300 feet on a culde-
sac or dead end.
d. Thoroughfares and Major Roadways. No street closure permit shall be
issued to allow closure of a thoroughfare or major roadway.
e. Limited Number of Closures. Each organization or person applying for
a temporary street closure permit is limited to being issued four street
closure permits per calendar year.
f. Time Limits. A street closure permit shall be effective between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any given calendar day.
a. The name(s), address, telephone numbers and signature(s) of the
applicant(s).
b. The location for which the street closure permit is being applied,
including the actual address and closest intersections.
§ 20-6.2 COMPTON § 20-6.4
AO:720
§ 20-6.5. Barricades — Placement and Removal — Litter Collection.
[Ord. #2201, § 1]
Permit recipients shall place barriers in accordance with the "Work Area
Traffic Control Handbook" (Watch Manual) published by BNi Building News
and shall be responsible for removing such barricades and warning devices
as are deemed necessary by, and are acceptable to the City Manager or his
designee. Such persons shall also provide for the collection and removal of
all trash, garbage, and litter caused by or arising out of such temporary
street closure.
§ 20-6.6. Time of Filing. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
The application shall be filed with the Municipal Law Enforcement Services
Department not less than 30 days before the event and no more than 90
days before the event.
§ 20-6.7. Hold Harmless and General Liability Insurance. [Ord.
#2201, § 1]
Each applicant shall agree to assume the defense of and indemnify and
hold harmless the City, its Councilmembers, boards, commissions, officers,
employees and agents, from all suits, actions, damages or claims to which
the City may be subjected of any kind or nature whatsoever resulting
from, caused by, arising out of, or as a consequence of such temporary
street closure and the activities permitted in connection therewith. The
City Manager may require, as a condition to issuance of a permit, that the
c. If the applicant is an organization, the name, residence and business
addresses, phone numbers of its responsible officers.
d. The name address, phone number of the chairman of the event, or the
person otherwise responsible for its conduct.
e. The date on which the event is to occur.
f. The estimated number of persons who will participate.
g. Whether any sound amplification equipment is proposed to be used,
and if so, information describing such sound amplification equipment.
h. Whether or not charity, gratuity or offerings will be solicited or
accepted, or sales of food, beverages or other merchandise will occur.
i. Whether such temporary street closure will occupy all or only a portion
of the street or intersection involved.
j. A petition signed by 70% of the residents indicating that they have no
objections to the proposed street closure in accordance with subsection
20-6.20.
k. Such additional information as the City Manager or his/her designee
may deem necessary.
§ 20-6.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-6.7
AO:721
applicant obtain general liability insurance to serve that end, in such an
amount and with such terms as the City's Risk Manager determines to be
appropriate under the circumstances.
§ 20-6.8. Deposit. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
As a condition of issuance of any street closure permit, a refundable deposit
may be required. The amount of the deposit shall be at least $300. The
deposit shall be applied towards the costs and expenses outlined below in
subsection 20-6.9.
§ 20-6.9. Costs. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
The applicant shall assume and reimburse the City for any and all costs and
expenses determined by the City Manager to be unusual or extraordinary,
and related to the closing of the street for which the permit is sought,
including but not limited to:
§ 20-6.10. Alcohol. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
The consumption and sale of alcoholic beverages is not permitted at any
event for which a street permit closure has been issued.
§ 20-6.11. Standards of Issuance. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
The issuance of a permit by the City Manager or his designee shall be
a determination by the City Manager or his designee that the temporary
street closing is necessary for the safety and protection of persons who are
to use that portion of the street during such temporary closing. A permit
may be denied or revoked by the City Manager or his designee, when, from
a consideration of the application or from such other information as may
be otherwise obtained, the City Manager finds that one or more of the
following circumstances exist:
a. The cost of providing, erecting and moving barricades and/or signs;
b. The cost of replacing missing and/or damaged barricades;
c. The cost of providing and moving garbage or waste receptacles;
d. The cost of City personnel who are required by the City to work
overtime hours or other than a regular shift, or to perform duties as a
result of such temporary street closure.
The applicant shall be responsible to reimburse the City for any and all costs
that exceed the amount of the deposit received pursuant to subsection 20-6.8.
a. The applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statements
of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any other
document required pursuant to this section;
§ 20-6.7 COMPTON § 20-6.11
AO:722
§ 20-6.12. Processing of Permit. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
The application shall be reviewed by the following departments; Municipal
Law Enforcement Services, Public Works, Los Angeles County Sheriffs,
Compton Station, Fire and Risk Management before a determination is
made to either grant or deny the permit.
§ 20-6.13. Notice of Issuance or Denial. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
Written notice of the issuance or denial of a permit shall be provided by the
City Manager or his/her designee to the applicant. If a permit is denied, said
written notice shall state the reasons for denial.
§ 20-6.14. Appeal Procedure. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
Upon the denial or revocation of a permit by the City Manager or his
designee, the applicant may appeal to the City Council by filing the
application within two City working days after receipt of such denial or
revocation, with the City Clerk, who shall set the appeal for hearing at the
next available regular Council meeting. After holding a hearing, the City
b. The application has failed to meet the standards in this section, or the
applicant has failed to pay in advance any deposit required, or refuses
to agree to such conditions as are imposed in the permit;
c. The time, duration, size and location of the temporary street closure
will substantially disrupt the orderly and safe movement of other traffic;
d. The temporary street closure is of a size or nature that will require the
diversion of so great a number of law enforcement officers of the City to
properly police the closed or contiguous areas, that it will adversely
effect normal law enforcement protection to the remainder of the City;
e. The concentration of persons will unduly interfere with proper fire and
public safety protection, or ambulance service to areas contiguous to
such street closure;
f. The temporary street closure may unduly interfere with the movement
of emergency public safety officers and fire equipment;
g. The temporary street closure will unduly interfere with the orderly
operation of parks, hospitals, churches, schools or other public and
quasi-public institutions in the City;
h. The temporary street closure will conflict with or interfere with another
temporary street closure for which a permit has been granted;
i. Any term, condition, restriction or limitation of such permit has been
violated;
j. Any provision of the Compton Municipal Code and/or State law has
been violated.
§ 20-6.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-6.14
AO:723
Council may reverse, affirm or modify in any respect the determination of
the City Manager or his designee.
§ 20-6.15. Waiver of Time Limitations. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
The City Manager or his designee may waive the time limitation for filing an
application for a permit and the City Council may waive the time limitation
for filing an appeal if it is found that unusual circumstances or good cause
exists and no unreasonable burden upon the City or its citizens will be
created thereby.
§ 20-6.16. Officials to Be Notified. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
Upon granting, revoking or denying a permit, the City Manager or his
designee shall send a copy of such permit (including any conditions or
restrictions), denial or revocation to the Municipal Law Enforcement
Services Department, Los Angeles Sheriff's Department (Compton Station),
the Fire Chief, the Public Works Director and Risk Manager.
§ 20-6.17. Fire Lanes. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
Any street closure pursuant to the provisions of this section shall at all times
have a fifteen-foot wide emergency vehicle lane on both sides of the street,
which shall extend throughout the closed area of the street and beyond
to the next intersection. Said lane shall at all times remain clear of all
obstructions to provide emergency vehicular access.
§ 20-6.18. Fire Hydrants. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
No obstruction shall be erected or maintained within a fifteen-foot wide
radius of any fire hydrant.
§ 20-6.19. Fire Station. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
In the interests of public safety, no more than five temporary street closures
will be permitted on the same calendar day in any fire station initial
response area. Applications shall be considered on a first come, first serve
basis.
§ 20-6.20. Petitions. [Ord. #2201, § 1]
A petition must be submitted indicating that 70% of the residences or
businesses within the closure area have no objections to and support the
closure. Petitions must be signed by the owner, manager, assistant manager,
or lessee of the residences or businesses impacted by the closure. All
petitions must be completed on City forms.
§ 20-6.14 COMPTON § 20-6.20
AO:724
Chapter 21
INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT
Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of
Ordinance Nos. 856, 940, 973, 1074, 1100, 1108, 1163, 1236, 1289,
1440, 1551, 1532, 1537, 1913, 1926.
§ 21-1. WASTE MANAGEMENT. [Ord. #1946, § 1; Ord. #2035, § 1;
Ord. #2184, § 1; Ord. #2297, § 1; amended 6-25-2019 by Ord. No.
2310]
§ 21-1.1. Definitions.
a. Definitions Generally. For the purposes of this chapter the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this chapter unless it is apparent from the context that a
different meaning was intended. Words and phrases not ascribed a
meaning by this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed by Division
30, Part 1, Chapter 2 of the California Public Resources Code, Sections
40105-40201, and the regulations of CalRecycle, if defined therein, as
amended from time to time.
ACT — The California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989
(California Public Resources Code Section 40000 et seq., sometimes
referred to as "AB 939") as amended from time to time.
APPLICABLE LAW — All laws, regulations, rules, orders, directives,
judgments, decrees, permits, approvals, or other requirement of the
United States, the State of California, the County of Los Angeles,
the City, and any federal, state, regional or local administrative and
regulatory agencies, that are applicable to the provision of solid waste
and recyclable materials handling services in the City, as they all may
be enacted, issued, or amended from time to time.
AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR — The City or a solid waste enterprise
operating under the provisions of a collection agreement authorized by
the City Council.
BILL/BILLING — The statement(s) of charges provided to customers for
solid waste and recycling materials handling services rendered by an
authorized collector.
BIN — A metal container with a hinged lid and wheels with a capacity
of less than 10 cubic yards and designed for mechanical pick-up by
collection vehicles.
BROWN GOODS — Discarded electronic equipment such as, but not
limited to, cellular telephones, video cassette recorders, compact disc
(CD) players, CD recorders, digital video disc (DVD) players, DVD
recorders, video cassette recorders, stereos, audio receivers, video
receivers, facsimile machines, central processing units (CPUs), laptop
computers, and peripherals (e.g., external computer hard drives,
§ 20-6.20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.1
AO:725
computer keyboards, computer mice, and computer printers), and other
similar items commonly known as "brown goods" and "e-waste."
BULKY ITEMS/BULKY WASTE — Solid waste that cannot and/or would
not typically be accommodated within a cart including specifically
without limitation: furniture (including chairs, sofas, mattresses, and
rugs); appliances (including refrigerators, ranges, washers, dryers,
water heaters, dishwashers, plumbing, small household appliances and
other similar items, commonly known as "white goods"); brown goods,
electronic waste; wood waste, and tree branches (if no larger than
two feet in diameter and four feet in length, and weighing not more
than 60 pounds). "Bulky waste" does not include car bodies or parts,
construction and demolition debris or items requiring more than two
persons to remove. Other items not specifically included or excluded
above will be collected as bulky waste provided the authorized collector
has agreed to collect them. In the event a question arises as to whether
a specific item or category of items meets the definition of bulky waste,
the City Manager will determine whether that definition will apply,
which determination will be final and binding.
CALRECYCLE — The State of California's Department of Resources
Recycling and Recovery.
CART — A plastic container with a hinged lid and wheels serviced by an
automated or semi-automated truck and with a capacity of no less than
30 and no greater than 101 gallons.
CITY MANAGER — An individual having that title in the employ of the
City or the City Manager's designee.
CIVIC LITTER CONTAINER — A City-owned receptacle located in a
public area for the temporary accumulation and collection of solid
waste generated by the public in public places.
COLLECT/COLLECTED/COLLECTION — To take physical possession,
transport and remove solid waste or recyclable materials within the
City.
COLLECTION AGREEMENT — An agreement between the City and
a solid waste enterprise, entered into pursuant to this chapter
authorizing the solid waste enterprise to provide solid waste and
recyclable materials handling services.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES — All premises in the City, other than
residential premises. The term "commercial premises" includes, but
is not limited to, stores; offices; federal, state, county, and local
governmental institutions, including, but not limited to, schools, school
districts, special districts, and water districts; restaurants; rooming
houses; hotels; motels; offices; manufacturing, processing, or
assembling shops or plants; hospitals; clinics; nursing homes;
convalescent centers; dormitories; barracks; and card rooms. In the
event a question arises as to whether a specific premises meets the
definition of "commercial premises," the City Manager will determine
§ 21-1.1 COMPTON § 21-1.1
AO:726
whether that definition will apply, which determination will be final and
binding.
COMPOSTING — The separation of organic waste from the waste
stream for controlled decomposition into a material that may be used
as a soil amendment.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Solid waste resulting
from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations at any
premises and includes, but is not limited to, concrete, asphalt, rock and
dirt.
CONTAINER — Any and all types of solid waste or recyclable materials
receptacles, including carts, bins and roll-off boxes.
CUSTOMER — A person receiving solid waste and recyclable materials
handling services from an authorized collector pursuant to the terms of
a collection agreement.
DISPOSE/DISPOSAL — The ultimate disposition of solid waste at a
landfill or otherwise as permitted by applicable law.
DIVERSION — Shall have the meaning ascribed in Section 40124 of the
California Public Resources Code, as amended from time to time.
ELECTRONIC WASTE — Has the meaning ascribed to "Covered
Electronic Waste" in Section 42463 of the Public Resources Code, as
amended from time to time, and all brown goods.
EMSW CONVERSION — Shall have the meaning ascribed in California
Public Resources Code Section 40131.2, as amended from time to time.
FOOD WASTE — Unused and discarded solid food products/scraps,
including, but not limited to, all vegetables, fruits, meat, fish, shells,
bones, cheese, bread, coffee grounds, and discarded paper that is
contaminated with food waste.
GENERATOR — Any person whose act or process produced solid waste
or recyclable materials or whose act first causes solid waste or
recyclable materials to become subject to regulation.
GREEN WASTE — Any vegetative matter resulting from normal yard
and landscaping maintenance that is not more than four feet in its
longest dimension or four inches in diameter. "Green waste" includes
plant debris, such as tree trimmings, wood stumps, grass cuttings,
dead plants, leaves, branches, flowers, plant stocks, leaves, dead trees
(subject to length and diameter limitations), and other forms of organic
waste that is generated at the premises wherein the green waste is
collected. "Green waste" excludes yucca and palm fronds. "Green
waste" does not include material not normally produced from gardens
or landscape areas, such as brick, rock, gravel, large quantities of dirt,
concrete, sod, nonorganic wastes, oil, and painted or treated wood
products. "Green waste" is an organic waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Wastes defined in Public Resources Code
§ 40141 as well as all substances defined as hazardous waste, acutely
§ 21-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.1
AO:727
hazardous waste, or extremely hazardous waste in Health and Safety
Code §§ 25110.02, 25115, and 25117.1 and listed as hazardous waste
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), pursuant
to the RCRA, and all future amendments thereto, and all rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
HOLIDAY — Labor Day, New Year's Day, Independence Day,
Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day, and shall also include any other
day designated by resolution of the City Council, the City Manager, or a
collection agreement.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Hazardous waste generated at
residential premises.
MEDICAL WASTE — Shall have the meaning ascribed in California
Health and Safety Code Section 117600 et seq., as amended from time
to time.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or lot containing four or
more dwelling units. Multifamily dwelling units generally receive solid
waste and recyclable materials collection through the use of shared
bins.
OCCUPANT — The person who is in possession of, is the inhabitant of,
or has the care and control of a premises or is otherwise responsible for
the day-to-day operations of the premises.
ORGANIC WASTE — Food waste, green waste, landscape and pruning
waste, nonhazardous wood waste and food-soiled paper waste that is
mixed in with food waste.
OWNER — The person holding legal title to a premises.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, organization, partnership,
corporation, business trust, joint venture, the United States, the State
of California, the County of Los Angeles, the City, other cities, and
special purpose districts.
PREMISES — Any land or building in the City where solid waste is
generated or accumulated.
PUBLIC AGENCY/PUBLIC ENTITY — Any governmental agency or
department thereof, whether federal, state or local.
RCRA — The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ("RCRA") (42
U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.), as amended from time to time.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Solid waste that prior to collection is
separated by the generator from other solid waste, has some potential
economic value, and is handled differently than other solid waste in
order to allow it to be processed for recycling. Recyclable materials
include any materials identified by resolution of the City Council, the
City Manager, or a collection agreement.
RECYCLE/RECYCLING — The process of collecting, sorting, cleansing,
treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise be disposed
§ 21-1.1 COMPTON § 21-1.1
AO:728
of as solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in
the form of raw materials for new, reused, or reconstituted products
which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the
marketplace. Recycling does not include transformation or EMSW
conversion.
REFUSE — Solid waste exclusive of recyclable materials, organic
waste, and green waste.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES — Premises upon which dwelling units exist,
including, without limitation, single-family dwellings and multifamily
dwellings, apartments, including apartments and condominiums in
which each unit has separate cooking and bathing facilities, but does
not include hotels, motels, rooming houses, hospitals, nursing homes,
convalescent centers, dormitories or barracks or other group living
places. In the event a question arises as to whether a specific premises
meets the definition of "residential premises," the City Manager will
determine whether that definition will apply, which determination will
be final and binding.
ROLL-OFF BOX — A container of 10 yards or larger.
SHARPS — Waste generated by a household that includes a hypodermic
needle, syringe, or lancet.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling unit in a building or lot
containing three or fewer residential dwelling units. Single-family
dwelling units generally receive individual solid waste and recyclable
materials handling services with the use of carts.
SOLID WASTE — All discarded putrescible and nonputrescible solid
and semisolid wastes including refuse, recyclable materials, green
waste, organic waste, construction and demolition debris, bulky items,
and any combination thereof which are permitted for disposal of in
a Class III landfill, and which are included in the definition of the
nonhazardous solid waste set forth in the California Code of
Regulations.
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS HANDLING SERVICES
— The collection, reduction, separation, recovery, conversion, transfer,
transport, storage, recycling, processing and disposal of solid waste,
including recyclable materials, green waste, and other organic waste.
SOLID WASTE ENTERPRISE — Any person which is regularly engaged
in the business of providing solid waste and recyclable materials
handling services.
SOURCE SEPARATE/SOURCE-SEPARATED — The segregation by the
generator of recyclable materials, organic waste or green waste from
other solid waste.
TAX ROLL — The assessment roll upon which the general taxes of the
City are collected by the County of Los Angeles.
§ 21-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.1
AO:729
§ 21-1.2. Integrated Solid Waste Management.
TRANSFORMATION — Shall have the meaning ascribed thereto in
California Public Resources Code § 40201, as amended from time to
time.
UNIVERSAL WASTE — Discarded consumer products containing
mercury, lead, cadmium and other substances that are hazardous to
human health and the environment, including, but not limited to,
batteries and fluorescent tubes.
b. Additional definitions. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
preclude the City and any authorized collector from incorporating into
any collection agreement definitions relating to their respective
contractual rights and obligations, which may differ from or augment
those set forth herein.
a. Provision of Service. The City shall provide for or furnish solid waste
and recyclable materials handling services throughout the City. The
solid waste and recyclable materials handling services may be
furnished by any one or a combination of City officers and employees,
an authorized collector(s) pursuant to a collection agreement(s), or
agreement(s) with another local agency or local agencies. The provision
of solid waste and recyclable materials handling services shall be under
the direction of the City Manager. From time to time, the City Council
may adopt resolutions that further implement the purposes and intent
of this chapter. Except as may be specifically provided in this chapter, or
as may be specified by a resolution of the City Council, the City is not
subject to the provisions of this chapter that impose obligations on
authorized collectors.
b. Manner, Time and Frequency of Collection. Authorized collectors shall
make arrangements with their customers specifying the manner in
which solid waste and recyclable materials handling services are
provided, subject to the City's duty to protect the public health, safety
and well-being and to limit sources of noise and air pollution within the
City by prohibiting collection between certain hours and on certain
holidays. The City Council may determine, by resolution or a collection
agreement, the manner in which solid waste and recyclable materials
handling services are provided within the City, specifying the hours,
days and frequency of collection.
c. Categories. The City Council may determine, by resolution or a
collection agreement, collection categories (e.g., single-family
residential and multifamily residential) and make or impose collection
requirements which vary for such categories.
d. Mandatory Service; Collection Arrangement Required. Except as
expressly provided in this chapter, the owner and occupant of every
premises in the City is required to make or cause to be made
arrangements with an authorized collector for regular solid waste and
§ 21-1.1 COMPTON § 21-1.2
AO:730
§ 21-1.3. Fees, Franchises and Permits.
recyclable materials handling services, and shall pay the charges for
those services as established by the City; shall not enter into an
agreement for solid waste and recyclable materials handling services
with any person other than an authorized collector, and shall implement
measures to reach the diversion and other goals mandated by the act.
It shall be unlawful for any such person to fail to comply with the
foregoing requirements. An occupant of a premises shall be deemed
to have complied with this section if the owner of such premises has
caused to be made appropriate arrangements with an authorized
collector for regular solid waste and recyclable materials handling
services and the payment of the charges for those services as
established by the City. It is further unlawful, and a public nuisance,
for any person to occupy any premises within the City for which
appropriate arrangements for regular solid waste and recyclable
materials handling services have not been made and kept in full force
and effect.
e. Deposit of Solid Waste on Public Property. Any person who deposits or
causes to be deposited any solid waste on any public property, including
the public right-of-way, except in a container provided therefor as
herein specified, shall immediately clean up, contain, collect and
remove same. To facilitate proper disposal of solid waste by pedestrians
and motorists, publicly patronized establishments shall provide, empty,
and maintain adequate containers for deposit of solid waste generated
by the public as a result of the patronization of such establishments.
a. Fees.
1. Pursuant to Division 30, Part 3, Chapter 8 of the Public Resources
Code, § 41900 et seq., the City may levy fees ("fees" or "charges")
upon authorized collectors and/or premises for planning and
program development and administration regarding solid waste
and recyclable materials handling services and for such services.
Such fees may include charges for the use of disposal facilities and
may include costs of preparing and implementing source reduction
and recycling elements, household hazardous waste elements and
integrated waste management plans. The charges shall be the
amounts which the City Council from time to time may determine
and establish by ordinance or resolution.
2. The City may determine to collect all or part of such charges (plus
any interest or penalties) on the tax roll for the premises, whether
or not delinquent, the water bill, by separate bill of the City or an
authorized collector, or by such other means as the City Council
may elect. Charges, whether or not delinquent, collected on the tax
roll shall be collected pursuant to the provisions of Division 5, Part
3, Chapter 6, Article 4 of the California Health and Safety Code.
Nondelinquent charges collected on the tax roll shall be levied as
§ 21-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.3
AO:731
an annual charge in an amount computed in accordance with this
chapter.
b. Residential Solid Waste and Recyclable Materials Handling Services
Franchises.
1. Upon a determination that the public health, safety and well-being
so require, the City Council, by ordinance, referring to the solid
waste enterprise by name, may authorize, by collection agreement,
one or more solid waste enterprises to provide solid waste and
recyclable materials handling services to residential premises in all
or any part of the City. Any collection agreement is subject to all of
the provisions and to any rights held by any other solid waste
enterprise which may hold rights pursuant to Public Resources
Code § 49520.
2. Each collection agreement shall be granted on such terms and
conditions as the City Council shall establish in its sole discretion,
as matters of local concern, subject to the provisions of the
Compton City Charter and applicable law.
3. Each collection agreement awarded by the City shall be in writing,
signed by the Mayor, approved as to form by the City Attorney, and
filed with the City Clerk. No solid waste enterprise or any other
person shall infer the existence of any other form of agreement not
meeting all the foregoing requirements.
4. In the sole discretion of the City Council, the solid waste and
recyclable materials handling services may be authorized on an
exclusive or nonexclusive basis, and with or without competitive
bidding, and may relate to any class or type of solid waste within all
or any part of the City.
5. Each authorized collector shall possess a current City business
license and shall display a current City-issued decal on each
collection vehicle operated in the City.
6. Each authorized collector shall comply with all requirements set
forth in the authorized collector's collection agreement and all
applicable law, including this Code, this chapter and any regulation
which has been adopted pursuant to this chapter.
c. Commercial Solid Waste and Recyclable Materials Handling Services
Franchises.
1. Upon a determination that the public health, safety and well-being
so require, the City Council, by ordinance, referring to the solid
waste enterprise by name, may authorize, by collection agreement,
one or more solid waste enterprises to provide solid waste and
recyclable materials handling services to commercial premises in
all or any part of the City. Any collection agreement is subject to all
of the provisions and to any rights held by any other solid waste
§ 21-1.3 COMPTON § 21-1.3
AO:732
enterprise which may hold rights pursuant to Public Resources
Code § 49520.
2. Each collection agreement shall be granted on such terms and
conditions as the City Council shall establish in its sole discretion,
as matters of local concern, subject to the provisions of the
Compton City Charter and applicable law.
3. Each collection agreement awarded by the City shall be in writing,
signed by the Mayor, approved as to form by the City Attorney, and
filed with the City Clerk. No solid waste enterprise or any other
person shall infer the existence of any other form of agreement not
meeting all the foregoing requirements.
4. In the sole discretion of the City Council, the solid waste and
recyclable materials handling services may be authorized on an
exclusive or nonexclusive basis, and with or without competitive
bidding, and may relate to any class or type of solid waste within all
or any part of the City.
5. Each authorized collector shall possess a current City business
license and shall display a current City-issued decal on each
collection vehicle operated in the City.
6. Each authorized collector shall comply with all requirements set
forth in the authorized collector's collection agreement and all
applicable law, including this Code and this chapter.
d. Collection Agreement Required. Except as expressly provided in this
chapter, no person shall provide solid waste and recyclable materials
handling services in the City unless that person has entered into a
collection agreement meeting all the requirements of this chapter,
irrespective of any permit issued by any other public agency
authorizing the provision of solid waste and recyclable materials
handling services. Any such collection agreement shall be in addition to
any business license or permit otherwise required by this Code.
e. Resolution of Conflicts. In the event of a conflict between the provisions
of a collection agreement and the provisions of this chapter, the
provisions of the collection agreement shall control.
f. Licenses and Permits. Every authorized collector shall obtain and
maintain at all times during the authorized collector's operations a
business license issued by the City, and all applicable permits and
licenses required by any public agency having jurisdiction.
g. Solid Waste Facilities. No person shall construct or operate a solid
waste management facility, including, but not limited to, a materials
recovery facility, solid waste transfer or processing station, composing
facility, a buy-back or drop-off center, disposal facility, or a recycling
center without satisfying all City requirements for land use,
environmental and other approvals.
§ 21-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.3
AO:733
h. Liabilities for Fees.
1. Charges for a premises may be billed on the water bill, the tax roll,
whether or not delinquent, or separate bill of the City or authorized
collector. The charges (plus any interest or penalties) shall be due
and payable on the date stated on the water bill, the property tax
bill, or separate bill for the premises.
2. Each person required by this chapter to arrange for solid waste and
recyclable materials handling services shall pay or cause to be paid
the charges for such services to the City, if billed by the City,
authorized collector, if billed by the authorized collector, or the
County of Los Angeles Auditor-Controller, if billed on the tax roll.
The owner and occupant of each premises shall be jointly and
severally liable for the payment of the charges (plus any interest or
penalties).
3. Any charges, except charges billed on the tax roll, which remain
unpaid for a period of 30 or more days after the date upon which
they were billed shall be deemed delinquent. A penalty of 10% shall
be charged and an additional 1.5% per month shall be charged
until the charges and penalties and interest are paid.
4. The charges collected on the tax roll, including delinquent and
nondelinquent charges, shall be collected pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 5, Part 3, Chapter 6, Article 4 of the
California Health and Safety Code in the same manner, by the same
persons, and at the same time as, together with and not separately
from, the City's general taxes and shall be delinquent at the same
time and thereafter be subject to the same delinquency penalties.
5. The charges shall be a civil debt owing to the City or authorized
collector, as applicable. As a cumulative and alternative remedy,
the City or authorized collector, as applicable, may pursue
collection of delinquent accounts through collection agencies,
small claims courts or any other means provided by law, and may
recover reasonable attorneys' fees and costs as permitted by law.
6. Solid Waste and Recyclable Materials Handling Services may be
discontinued for commercial premises if any charges remain
unpaid for a period of 30 or more days after the date upon which
they were billed.
7. Upon written notice from the owner or occupant of a premises to
discontinue solid waste and recyclable materials handling services,
there shall be refunded any advance charges. However, solid waste
and recyclable materials handling services cannot be discontinued
as long as the premises is receiving water service from the City or
any other public water agency.
8. Any person with a valid self-haul permit who does not use the solid
waste and recyclable materials handling services offered by the
§ 21-1.3 COMPTON § 21-1.3
AO:734
§ 21-1.4. Containers.
authorized collector shall be exempt from the payment of fees
pursuant to this chapter.
a. Containers: Use.
1. The authorized collector shall provide the containers specified in
the collection agreement to each premises in the City.
2. Each person required by this chapter to arrange for solid waste and
recyclable materials handling services shall keep in a suitable place
a sufficient number of containers provided by the authorized
collector or approved by the City capable of holding without
spilling, leaking, or emitting odors, all solid waste, including
recyclable materials, which would ordinarily accumulate on the
premises between the time of two successive collections.
3. Each person required by this chapter to arrange for solid waste and
recyclable materials handling services shall deposit or cause to be
deposited in containers provided by the authorized collector or
approved by the City all solid waste, including recyclable materials,
generated or accumulated on those premises.
4. No person shall place ashes which are not cold and free from fire in
any container.
5. Subject to any exclusions set forth in this chapter, no person shall
deposit solid waste from a premises in any place other than an
approved container located on the premises which generated the
solid waste.
b. Containers, Bulky Waste and Green Waste: Placement and Removal.
1. No person shall place for collection any container not in
conformance with the container provided by an authorized
collector or approved by the City.
2. No person shall place a container adjacent to a street or public
right-of-way for collection if the container and its contents weigh
more than 65 pounds, unless the authorized collector is using
automated collection equipment.
3. No person shall place a container or any bulky waste adjacent to a
street or public right-of-way for collection service before 12:00
noon on the day preceding the regularly scheduled collection day.
4. During the hours for collection, containers for residential premises
shall be placed at the location designated by the authorized
collector and shall be accessible for mechanized pick-up, if
mechanized pick-up methods are utilized by the authorized
collector. Bins shall be accessible to the authorized collector.
Except during the time a container is placed for curbside
§ 21-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.4
AO:735
§ 21-1.5. Collection.
collection, containers for residential premises shall not be visible
from the public right-of-way. Upon collection, all containers shall be
replaced in an upright position, at the location where found by an
authorized collector.
5. Containers shall be removed from any location adjacent to a street
or public right-of-way not later than 6:00 a.m. on the day following
the regularly scheduled collection day.
6. An authorized collector who has been notified in writing by a
customer or the City that solid waste service is to be discontinued
shall remove all of its bins or carts from such customer's premises
within one week following receipt of notification that service is to
be discontinued from such customer's premises.
7. Green waste shall be cut into pieces not to exceed four feet in
length and four inches in diameter before being placed adjacent to
a street or public right-of-way for collection. Green waste shall be
placed in containers designated for the collection of green waste,
or tied securely in bundles not exceeding 60 pounds and shall not
be contaminated with other forms of solid waste or with hazardous
waste.
8. The City Manager may waive the requirements of this section when
necessitated by conditions beyond the control of the authorized
collector, owner, or occupant of the premises.
a. Frequency. Except as expressly provided in this chapter or an
applicable collection agreement, or as otherwise approved by the City
Manager if necessary to maintain the public health or safety, each
person required by this chapter to arrange for solid waste and
recyclable materials handling services shall make arrangements with
the authorized collector to have all solid waste from the premises (other
than construction and demolition debris) collected no less than once
each calendar week. Subject to the foregoing requirement, the owners
or occupants of commercial premises or multifamily dwellings may
specify the frequency of collection of solid waste from the premises and
the size and number of bins or other containers required.
b. Schedule. Collection by an authorized collector shall be in accordance
with the applicable collection agreement or a schedule approved by the
City Manager, which shall identify the routes and collection days and
which shall not permit the accumulation of solid waste in quantities
detrimental to the public health or safety.
c. Hours and Days of Collection. Collection from any premises by an
authorized collector shall not be made between the hours of 6:00 p.m.
and 5:00 a.m. of the following day or at any time on a Sunday or a
holiday. The City Manager may waive the requirements of this section
§ 21-1.4 COMPTON § 21-1.5
AO:736
§ 21-1.6. Special Collections.
§ 21-1.7. Exemptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized collector to
collect or dispose of solid waste except as set forth below or in a collection
agreement.
when necessitated by conditions beyond the control of the authorized
collector and may require an authorized collector to change hours of
operation if disruption occurs.
d. Designation of Routes and Times. Authorized collectors shall design
their routes and times for collection in a manner which minimizes air
pollution, traffic, noise and wear and tear on public and private streets
and other problems with the potential to adversely affect public health,
safety, or the environment.
a. An authorized collector shall provide on-call collection of bulky waste
and other items to its customers in accordance with the applicable
collection agreement.
b. No sharps, medical waste, hazardous waste (including but not limited
to tires, oil and antifreeze), household hazardous waste, universal
waste, battery acid, poisonous, caustic or toxic material or any other
substance capable of damaging clothing or causing injury to a person
shall be mixed or placed with any other solid waste, including
recyclable materials, organic waste or green waste, which is to be
collected by an authorized collector. Such items shall be collected at the
owner's or occupant's expense only after arrangements have been
made for such collection in accordance with all applicable law.
a. Composting Organic Waste. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent
owners or occupants from composting organic waste.
b. Self-Hauler's Exclusion. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent owners or
occupants from, on a regular basis, collecting and disposing of solid
waste, including recyclable materials, green waste and organic waste,
generated in or on their premises, in lieu of making arrangements with
an authorized collector ("self-haulers"). No self-hauler shall employ or
engage any solid waste enterprise, other than an authorized collector,
to collect or dispose of such materials. Before collecting or disposing of
solid waste, including recyclable materials, green waste and organic
waste, self-haulers shall obtain a self-haul permit from the City
established by resolution of the City Council, and shall report to the City
the type, total weight and destination of solid waste removed, including
recyclable materials, green waste and organic waste, on a form
prescribed by the City Manager together with supporting
documentation required by the City Manager on a quarterly basis
(March, June, September and December). Notwithstanding any other
§ 21-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.7
AO:737
provision of this chapter, no self-hauler shall be obligated to use
containers provided by the authorized collector.
c. Selling or Donating Recyclable Materials or Organic Waste. Nothing in
this chapter shall prevent a person from selling or donating any sourceseparated
recyclable materials or organic waste to a person or entity
other than an authorized collector, provided that no such materials may
be transported for disposition to a landfill or transfer station (as defined
in Public Resources Code § 40200). If the seller or donor of recyclable
materials is required to pay monetary or nonmonetary consideration in
any form or amount for the collection of recyclable materials or organic
waste, the fact that the generator receives a reduction or discount in
price (or in other terms of the consideration the generator is required to
pay) shall not be considered a sale or donation. Before selling or
donating recyclable materials or organic waste, each business, as
defined in Subsection 21-1.8b1 or c1, shall obtain a permit from the City
established by resolution of the City Council, and shall report to the City
the name of the person or entity to whom the recyclable materials or
organic waste was sold or donated, and the type and total weight of the
recyclable materials or organic waste removed on a form prescribed by
the City Manager together with supporting documentation required by
the City Manager on a quarterly basis (March, June, September and
December).
d. Buying Recyclable Materials or Organic Waste. Nothing in this chapter
shall prevent a person which is not a solid waste enterprise engaged in
the business of collecting or disposing of solid waste for a fee, other
charge or consideration from buying source-separated recyclable
materials or organic waste for monetary or other valuable
consideration, and removing and transporting such materials to a
destination for marketing, provided that no such materials may be
transported for disposition in a landfill or transfer station (as defined in
Public Resources Code Section 40200).
e. Document Destruction Service. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent
any person engaged in the business of destroying or disposing of secret,
confidential, or sensitive documents from transporting or disposing of
such documents by shredding, lumping, incinerating or other means, as
a part of such document destruction or disposal service. Before
transporting or disposing of such documents, persons shall obtain a
permit from the City established by resolution of the City Council, and
shall report to the City the destination and total weight of documents
removed on a form prescribed by the City Manager together with
supporting documentation required by the City Manager on a quarterly
basis (March, June, September and December).
f. General Requirements Applicable to Exclusions. In all cases where the
right to an exclusion pursuant to this chapter is exercised, disposal
shall be made in accordance with applicable law at a disposal or
processing facility which meets all applicable regulatory requirements.
Green waste shall only be disposed of at a permitted facility where
§ 21-1.7 COMPTON § 21-1.7
AO:738
§ 21-1.8. Collection of Recycling Materials; Commercial and
Multifamily Recycling Requirements.
green waste is sorted, mulched, or separated for the purpose of
recycling, reuse, or composting. Recyclable materials shall only be
disposed of at certified materials recovery facility or other mixed waste
processing facility for diversion from disposal. Any disposal by a person
exempted under this section shall not relieve such person from any
obligation or liability imposed by this chapter or any other City
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation or for the payment of any fees
pursuant to this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
a. Ownership of Recyclable Materials and Organic Waste. Upon placement
of source-separated recyclable materials at a designated recycling
location or placement of source-separated recycling material or organic
waste in a container provided by an authorized collector for the
collection of recycling materials or organic waste, the recyclable
materials or organic waste shall become the property of the authorized
collector.
b. Mandatory Commercial Recycling.
1. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, public
entities or commercial businesses (including, but not limited to, a
firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint stock company, corporation,
or association that is organized as a for-profit entity or nonprofit
entity) that generate four cubic yards or more of solid waste per
week and multifamily dwellings ("business" or "businesses" for
purposes of this section) shall divert their solid waste from disposal
by taking one, or any combination, of the following actions in
compliance with the requirements of Chapter 12.8 of Part 3 of
Division 30 of the California Public Resources Code (Section 42649
et seq.):
(a) Source separate recyclable materials and make arrangements
with an authorized collector for delivery of a container or
containers designated for recyclable materials, and deposit
recyclable materials in the designated container or containers
provided by the authorized collector; or
(b) Source separate recyclable materials and self-haul such
materials in compliance with Subsection 21-1.7b; or
(c) Source separate recyclable materials and sell or donate such
materials in compliance with Subsection 21-1.7c.
2. The deposit of any materials other than recyclable materials in a
container designated for recyclable materials is prohibited and the
deposit of recyclable materials in a container that is not designated
for recyclable materials is prohibited.
§ 21-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.8
AO:739
3. To comply with this section, owners or managers of multifamily
dwellings may require tenants to source-separate their recyclable
materials.
4. A business may request an exemption from the requirements of this
section by submitting an application on a form prescribed by the
City Manager. After reviewing the exemption request, the City
Manager shall either approve or disapprove the exemption request.
To be eligible for an exemption from the requirements of this
section, the business must demonstrate that there are no
recyclable materials being generated by any activities of the
business or there is inadequate storage space for the storage of
recyclable materials.
5. The City may require a business that is granted an exemption from
the requirements of this section to submit an application every year
from the date the exemption was granted by the City.
6. Each business that does not make arrangements with an
authorized collector pursuant to Subsection b1(a) shall be
responsible for ensuring and demonstrating to the City its
compliance with the requirements of this subsection and
Subsection 21-1.7b or c. Each such business must provide
satisfactory proof to the City of the person or entity to whom the
recyclable materials is sold or donated, if applicable, and the type,
total weight and destination of recyclable materials self-hauled on a
form prescribed by the City Manager together with supporting
documentation required by the City Manager on a quarterly basis
(March, June, September and December).
7. To the extent authorized by law, the City or an authorized collector
may inspect the premises and examine the containers for refuse
and recyclable materials. The City shall notify a business if the
business is not in compliance with this section or if self-hauling is
not appropriate or effective.
8. The City shall implement a commercial solid waste recycling
program in conjunction with the authorized collector that consists
of education, outreach and monitoring of businesses that is
designed to divert solid waste from businesses. The authorized
collector shall be responsible for providing recycling service to all
businesses, including recycling containers, and for monitoring and
correcting contamination of recyclable materials, and for reporting
recycling participation to the City in accordance with the City's
requirements.
9. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent or limit the right of
any business to donate or sell its recyclable materials as provided
by Public Resources Code Section 41952.
c. Mandatory Commercial Organics Recycling.
§ 21-1.8 COMPTON § 21-1.8
AO:740
1. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, public
entities, commercial businesses (including, but not limited to, a
firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint stock company, corporation,
or association that is organized as a for-profit entity or nonprofit
entity), and multifamily dwellings ("business" or "businesses" for
purposes of this section) that generate four cubic yards or more of
solid waste per week shall divert their solid waste from disposal by
taking one, or any combination, of the following actions in
compliance with the requirements of Chapter 12.9 of Part 3 of
Division 30 of the California Public Resources Code (Section
42649.8 et seq.):
(a) Source separate organic waste and make arrangements with
an authorized collector for delivery of a container or containers
designated for organic waste, and deposit organic waste in the
designated container or containers provided by the authorized
collector;
(b) Source separate organic waste and recycle such materials on
site; or
(c) Source separate organic waste and self-haul such materials in
compliance with Subsection 21-1.7b; or
(d) Source separate organic waste and sell or donate such
materials in compliance with Subsection 21-1.7c.
2. The deposit of any materials other than organic waste in a
container designated for organic waste is prohibited and the
deposit of organic waste in a container that is not designated for
organic waste is prohibited.
3. To comply with this section, a business that is an owner may
require a lessee or tenant of that property to source separate their
organic waste.
4. To comply with this section, when arranging for gardening or
landscaping services, the contract or work agreement between a
business and a gardening or landscaping service shall require that
the organic waste generated by those services be managed in
compliance with Chapter 12.8 of Part 3 of Division 30 of the
California Public Resources Code (Section 42649.8 et seq.).
5. A business that is a multifamily dwelling is not required to arrange
for the recycling of food waste that is generated by the business.
6. A business may request an exemption from the requirements of this
section by submitting an application on a form prescribed by the
City Manager. After reviewing the exemption request, the City
Manager shall either approve or disapprove the exemption request.
To be eligible for an exemption from the requirements of this
section, the business must demonstrate that the business does not
§ 21-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.8
AO:741
§ 21-1.9. Cleanup Responsibility.
generate at least 1/2 cubic yard of organic waste per week, there
is inadequate space to provide additional organic waste recycling
bins, the business is currently implementing actions that result
in the recycling of a significant portion of its organic waste, or
there is some extraordinary and unforeseen event that warrants a
temporary exemption.
7. The City may require a business that is granted an exemption from
the requirements of this section to submit an application every year
from the date the exemption was granted by the City.
8. Each business that does not make arrangements with an
authorized collector pursuant to Subsection c1(a) shall be
responsible for ensuring and demonstrating to the City its
compliance with the requirements of this subsection and
Subsection 21-1.7b or c if applicable. Each such business must
provide satisfactory proof to the City of the type and total weight of
organic waste recycled on site, the person or entity to whom the
organic waste is sold or donated, and the type, total weight and
destination of organic waste self-hauled on a form prescribed by
the City Manager together with supporting documentation
required by the City Manager on a quarterly basis (March, June,
September and December).
9. To the extent authorized by law, the City or an authorized collector
may inspect the premises and examine the containers for refuse
and organic waste. The City shall notify a business if the business is
not in compliance with this section or if self-hauling is not
appropriate or effective.
10. The City shall implement an organic waste recycling program in
conjunction with the authorized collector that consists of
education, outreach and monitoring of businesses that is designed
to divert organic waste from businesses. The authorized collector
shall be responsible for providing organic waste recycling service
to all businesses, including recycling containers, and for
monitoring and correcting contamination of organic waste, and for
reporting recycling participation to the City in accordance with the
City's requirements.
11. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent or limit the right of
any business to donate or sell its organic waste as provided by
Public Resources Code § 41952.
a. Cleanup Responsibility.
1. Until solid waste, including recyclable materials, green waste and
organic waste, has been collected in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, the owner or occupant shall
§ 21-1.8 COMPTON § 21-1.9
AO:742
§ 21-1.10. Additional Prohibited Acts.
immediately clean up any solid waste generated or accumulated
on the premises that has spilled or is otherwise located outside
an authorized container notwithstanding human or animal
interference with containers, wind or other natural forces.
2. Each authorized collector shall immediately clean up any solid
waste spilled or otherwise released or discharged into the
environment during its collection.
a. Use of Containers. No person shall keep solid waste in containers other
than those supplied by the authorized collector or approved by the City;
nor shall any person accumulate solid waste for more than six
consecutive days; nor shall any person keep upon any premises any
solid waste which is offensive, obnoxious or unsanitary.
b. Moving of Containers. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the
owner or occupant of the premises, an officer or employee of the City, or
the authorized collector to move any container from the location where
the container was placed for storage or collection without the prior
written approval of the owner or occupant.
c. Scavenging of Solid Waste. It shall be unlawful for any person other
than the owner or occupant of the premises, an officer or employee of
the City, or the authorized collector to collect, remove or otherwise
handle any solid waste, including recyclable materials, contained in any
container that has been placed for storage or collection without the
prior written approval of the owner or occupant or to remove recyclable
materials placed at a designated recycling collection location.
d. Graffiti. It shall be unlawful for any person to apply any paint or
markings (commonly known as "graffiti" or "tagging") to any container
supplied by the authorized collector or approved by the City without the
prior written approval of the authorized collector or City.
e. Bulky Waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to place bulky waste
adjacent to a street or public right-of-way without first having made
arrangements with the authorized collector for the collection of the
bulky waste.
f. Hazardous Waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to spill or to place
sharps, medical waste, hazardous waste (including but not limited to
tires, oil and antifreeze), household hazardous waste, universal waste,
battery acid, poisonous, caustic or toxic material or any other substance
capable of damaging clothing or causing injury to a person with any
other solid waste, including recyclable materials, organic waste or
green waste in any container provided by an authorized collector.
g. Solid Waste from Outside City. It shall be unlawful for any person to
place for collection any solid waste from outside the City.
§ 21-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.10
AO:743
h. Nonconforming Solid Waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to place
for collection by an authorized collector any solid waste, including
bulky waste, that does not conform to the standards of this chapter.
i. Civic Litter Container; Prohibited Waste. It shall be unlawful for any
person to place solid waste generated at premises or hazardous waste
in any civic litter container.
j. Burning of Solid Waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any
solid waste within the City, except in an approved incinerator or
transformation facility or other device for which all required permits
have been issued by public agencies having jurisdiction and in a
manner that complies with such permits and applicable law.
k. Dumping or Burial of Solid Waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to
dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, inject, or bury
any solid waste within the City, except pursuant to a permit issued by
public agencies having jurisdiction and in a manner that complies with
such permit and applicable law.
l. Collection of Solid Waste Without License Prohibited. Except as
expressly provided in this chapter, no person shall collect any solid
waste from any premises within the City, nor shall any person place a
container for the accumulation of solid waste at any premises within the
City, without a City business license and a collection agreement or
operate a collection vehicle within the City without displaying a current
City-issued collector's decal.
m. Failure to Make Collection Arrangements. Except as expressly provided
in this chapter, it is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises
in the City to not make arrangements for regular solid waste and
recyclable materials handling services with the authorized collector.
n. Unauthorized Disposal. It shall be unlawful for any person to place solid
waste in, or otherwise use, the containers of another without their
permission.
o. Trespass. It shall be unlawful for an authorized collector to enter on
private property beyond the extent necessary to collect the solid waste
or recyclable materials properly placed for collection.
p. Transporting Loose Solid Waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to
transport any loose solid waste by motor vehicle unless the cargo is
covered and/or secured in such a manner as to prevent depositing of
solid waste on public or private property.
q. Transfer of Loads on Public Streets. It shall be unlawful for any person
to transfer solid waste or recyclable materials from one collection
vehicle to another on any public street or road unless such transfer is
essential to the method of operation and is approved by the City
Manager, or is necessary owing to mechanical failure or accidental
damage to a vehicle.
§ 21-1.10 COMPTON § 21-1.10
AO:744
§ 21-1.11. Enforcement.
§ 21-2. DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION
WASTE.
§ 21-2.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. #2181, § 1]
r. Interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the
performance of solid waste and recyclable materials handling services
being rendered by the City or an authorized collector.
a. Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5. the City Manager and
City Code Enforcement Officers are authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter as well as those of California Penal Code
Sections 374, 374a, 374.2, 374.3, 374.4, 374d, 374.7, and 375,
California Government Code Sections 68055, et seq.; and California
Vehicle Code Sections 23111 and 23112.
b. Whenever in this chapter, enforcement authority is given to any City
employee or officer, such authority may be exercised by designees of
those officers and employees.
c. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, violations of this chapter
are punishable as set forth in Subsections 1-6.1 through 1-6.6.
d. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.
e. The City Manager or the City Manager's designee(s) shall have the
authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. This authority shall
be in addition to the authority granted law enforcement officers
pursuant to this Code.
a. The provisions of this § 21-2 are adopted in recognition of the fact that
construction and demolition waste constitutes a substantial portion of
the total volume of solid waste generated in the City, much of which is
ultimately disposed of in solid waste landfills in Los Angeles County.
These construction and demolition waste materials have significant
potential for solid waste reduction, reuse, and recycling.
b. The purpose and intent of the provisions of this § 21-2 is to promote the
reduction, reuse, and recycling of construction and demolition waste in
order to protect the public health, welfare, and safety and to assist the
City in meeting its statutory obligations under the California Integrated
Waste Management Act of 1989 (AB 939), which requires that each
local jurisdiction in the state divert from landfills 50% of all solid waste
through source reduction, recycling, and composting activities.
c. The further purpose and intent of the provisions of this § 21-2 is to
ensure that all construction and demolition waste generated at covered
projects in the City is processed at a facility or facilities which cause not
less than 75% of such materials to be diverted from landfills in order to
assist the City in meeting its statutory obligations under AB 939.
§ 21-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.2
AO:745
§ 21-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2181, § 1]
For the purposes of this § 21-2 of Chapter 21, the terms and phrases set
forth below will have the following definitions:
§ 21-2.3. Imposition of Diversion Requirements. [Ord. #2181, § 1]
a. CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE – Shall mean used or
discarded materials, packaging, and rubble resulting from covered
projects that involve construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition
operations on pavements, single-family and multifamily residences,
commercial buildings, and other structures.
b. COMMINGLED LOADS OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION
WASTE – Shall mean construction and demolition waste that has been
intermixed at the point of generation and has not been segregated by
type or nature of materials prior to their collection or disposal.
c. SOURCE-SEPARATED LOADS OF CONSTRUCTION AND
DEMOLITION WASTE – Shall mean construction and demolition waste
that has been segregated at the point of generation by type or nature of
materials prior to their collection or disposal.
a. The Building Official is authorized to impose the conditions and
requirements set forth in this § 21-2 upon permits that are issued for
construction, renovation, and demolition projects described below,
which projects meet the specified square footage, valuation, or other
criteria, and are therefore deemed to be "covered projects:"
1. The construction of a new residential or commercial structure that
involves 250 square feet or more of floor area, and that has a
valuation equal to or exceeding $10,000.
2. The renovation of an existing residential or commercial structure
that involves 250 square feet or more of floor area, and that has a
valuation equal to or exceeding $10,000.
3. The construction of an accessory structure or other addition to an
existing residential or commercial structure that involves 250
square feet or more of floor area, and that has a valuation equal to
or exceeding $10,000.
4. A demolition project that involves a residential or commercial
structure or structures on the same or abutting property that
equals or exceeds 250 square feet in floor area, and that has a
valuation equal to or exceeding $10,000.
5. The reroofing of a structure that requires the removal of the
existing roof.
b. In calculating the square footage or the valuation of a construction or
renovation project, the square footage or valuation of all structures that
§ 21-2.2 COMPTON § 21-2.3
AO:746
§ 21-2.4. Exemptions. [Ord. #2181, § 1]
§ 21-2.5. Submission of Waste Diversion Plans. [Ord. #2181, § 1]
will be concurrently constructed or renovated by the applicant on the
same property or abutting property will be included.
a. The following projects are exempt from the requirements of Subsection
21-2.3:
1. Work for which only a plumbing, electrical, or mechanical permit is
required, and which the Building Official determines, based upon
information provided by the applicant, will not generate more than
one ton of construction or demolition waste.
2. Seismic tie-down projects.
3. Installation of prefabricated patio enclosures and covers where no
foundation or other structural building modifications are required.
4. Installation of prefabricated accessories, such as signs or antennas,
where no structural building modifications are required.
5. Construction or renovation projects that are less than 250 square
feet in floor area.
6. Construction or renovation projects that have a valuation of less
than $10,000.
7. Construction or renovation projects that involve a roof, but the
tear-off of the existing roof is not required.
8. The construction of new fencing.
9. Construction, renovation, or demolition work that the Building
Official determines, based upon information provided by the
applicant, will not generate more than one ton of construction or
demolition waste.
b. If an applicant for a project desires to obtain an exemption for that
project, then the applicant must file with the Building Official an
application for exemption stating all facts that support the requested
exemption.
c. The Building Official will review each application for exemption and
determine whether an exemption is authorized by this section. The
applicant will be notified of the Building Official's decision.
a. An applicant for a permit for a covered project that meets the criteria
set forth above in Subsection 21-2.3 may elect to comply with the
diversion requirements of this § 21-2 by following one of the two
procedures specified below:
§ 21-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.5
AO:747
1. An applicant for a permit for a covered project may arrange with
the City's franchised solid waste collector for one or more
construction and demolition bins for the removal of all construction
and demolition waste generated by the covered project that will not
be salvaged or reused at the site of the covered project. The
selection of this option will eliminate the need for a Waste
Diversion Plan and the payment of an administrative fee but will
not eliminate the required payment of a diversion performance
deposit or the submission of a Waste Diversion Report.
2. An applicant for a permit for a covered project may self-haul all
construction and demolition waste generated at the project site if a
Waste Diversion Plan, in a form provided by the Building Official, is
submitted by the applicant. This form will require the following
information:
(a) The vendor or the qualified facility or facilities that the permit
applicant proposes to use to collect or to receive the types of
materials that constitute the construction and demolition
waste.
(b) The estimated tonnage or volume of construction and
demolition waste, by materials type, that is expected to be
generated by the covered project.
(c) The estimated tonnage or volume of construction and
demolition waste, by materials type, that may reasonably be
salvaged, recycled, reused, or otherwise diverted from disposal
at a landfill.
(d) The estimated tonnage or volume of construction and
demolition waste that is expected to be disposed of in a landfill.
b. No construction or demolition permit will be issued to an applicant for
any covered project under Paragraph a2 above unless the Building
Official has approved the Waste Diversion Plan and has made the
following findings:
1. The Waste Diversion Plan submitted by the applicant contains all of
the information required by Paragraph a2 above; and
2. The Waste Diversion Plan indicates that at least 75% of all
construction and demolition waste generated by the covered
project will be diverted from disposal at a landfill; provided,
however, that the Building Official may approve a diversion
percentage that is less than 75% if the applicant provides
reasonable written justification for that lower diversion
percentage.
§ 21-2.5 COMPTON § 21-2.6
AO:748
§ 21-2.6. Submission of Waste Diversion Report. [Ord. #2181, § 1]
Prior to the final inspection of a covered project, or the issuance of any
certificate of occupancy, or the release of any required diversion
performance deposit, the permittee must submit additional information that
is required by a Waste Diversion Report in a form to be provided by the
Building Official. That additional information will include the following:
§ 21-2.7. Payment of Administrative Fee. [Ord. #2181, § 1]
An administrative fee in an amount established by resolution of the City
Council must be paid by an applicant for a permit for a covered project that
requires the submission of a Waste Diversion Plan. This administrative fee
will be in an amount sufficient to cover the City's costs for the processing
and review of Waste Diversion Plans, Waste Diversion Reports, applications
for diversion performance deposit refunds, and other documentation
related to the administration of this § 21-2.
§ 21-2.8. Diversion Performance Deposit Requirements. [Ord.
#2181, § 1]
An applicant for a permit for a covered project must submit with the permit
application a diversion performance deposit to guarantee compliance with
the diversion requirements of this § 21-2. The deposit must be payable to
the City and must be in the form of cash or a cash equivalent, such as
a. If compliance with the diversion requirements of this § 21-2 is based
upon the procedures specified above in Subsection 21-2.5a1 that
authorize arrangements with the City's franchised solid waste collector,
then the permittee must submit the original or a photocopy of the
document or documents evidencing the engagement of the franchised
solid waste collector to collect and dispose of the construction and
demolition waste generated at the site of the covered project.
b. If compliance with the diversion requirements of this § 21-2 is based
upon the procedures specified above in Subsection 21-2.5a2 that
authorize self-hauling, then the permittee must submit the following:
1. A copy of the previously approved Waste Diversion Plan for the
covered project on which is noted the actual volume or weight of
each type of material that has been diverted from disposal at a
landfill, or that has been disposed of at a landfill, and the location
or locations where those materials were transported.
2. Photocopies of receipts, weight slips, or similar records of
measurement from the vendor or from the facility or facilities that
collected or received each type of material constituting the
construction and demolition waste.
3. Any additional information that the permittee deems to be relevant
to a determination of its good faith efforts to comply with the
diversion requirements set forth in Subsection 21-2.5a2.
§ 21-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.8
AO:749
a personal check, certified check or cashier's check. The amount of the
deposit for each category of covered projects set forth above in Subsection
21-2.3 will be established by resolution of the City Council. The Building
Official may, in the exercise of sound discretion, reduce the deposit for a
covered project if it is determined that the amount of the required deposit
is not commensurate with the volume of construction and demolition waste
that is expected to be generated by the covered project.
§ 21-2.9. Refund or Forfeiture of Diversion Performance Deposit.
[Ord. #2181, § 1]
a. The permittee of a covered project may, within six months after its
completion, obtain a refund of the diversion performance deposit by
filing with the Building Official an application for a refund. The
application must include information that demonstrates the permittee
has either:
1. Arranged for and used at the project site one or more construction
and demolition bins provided by the City's franchised solid waste
collector for the removal of all construction and demolition waste
generated at the site of the covered project; or
2. Complied with the diversion requirements set forth in the approved
Waste Diversion Plan submitted in accordance with Subsection
21-2.5a2.
b. The Building Official will refund the entire diversion performance
deposit for a covered project under any of the following circumstances:
1. The permittee arranged for and used at the project site, on a
continuous basis, one or more construction bins provided by the
City's franchised solid waste collector for the collection and
removal of all construction and demolition waste generated during
the course of completion of the covered project.
2. The permittee complied with the diversion requirements set forth
in the approved Waste Diversion Plan and diverted from landfill
disposal the required percentage of construction and demolition
waste generated by the covered project.
3. The application for a permit for a covered project is withdrawn or
canceled before any construction, renovation, or demolition has
commenced.
4. The diversion performance deposit was erroneously paid by the
permit applicant.
c. The Building Official may authorize a partial refund, up to 75% of the
diversion performance deposit, where the permittee did not achieve the
required percentage of diversion specified in the Waste Diversion Plan,
but the Building Official determines that the permittee made a good
faith effort to comply with those diversion requirements and that
§ 21-2.8 COMPTON § 21-2.9
AO:750
§ 21-2.10. Use of Diversion Performance Deposits. [Ord. #2181, § 1]
Diversion performance deposits received by the Building Official will be
deposited in a special account to be used only for the following purposes:
§ 21-2.11. Duties of the Building Official. [Ord. #2181, § 1]
The duties of the Building Official with regard to the implementation and
enforcement of the provisions of this § 21-2 consist of the following:
attainment of those requirements was not feasible under the
circumstances.
d. If the Building Official determines that the permittee of a covered
project has not made a good faith effort to achieve the required
percentage of diversion specified in the Waste Diversion Plan, or if the
permittee of a covered project fails within six months after the
completion of a covered project to submit supporting information
required by Paragraphs a1 or a2 above, then the diversion performance
deposit will be forfeited to the City.
a. The payment of refunds of diversion performance deposits.
b. The payment of costs incurred in administering the City's construction
and demolition waste diversion program, which costs are not covered
by the administrative fee referenced above in Subsection 21-2.7.
c. The development and implementation of additional policies and
programs that are approved by the City Council to promote the
diversion of construction and demolition waste from landfill disposal
and to encourage the salvage, reuse, and recycling of that waste.
a. To develop and to make available to applicants for permits for covered
projects the following forms:
1. Applications for exemption of projects from the diversion
requirements of Subsection 21-2.3.
2. The Waste Diversion Plan that is referenced above in Subsection
21-2.5a2.
3. The Waste Diversion Report that is referenced above in Subsection
21-2.6.
4. Forms related to diversion performance deposits to be paid to the
City in accordance with Subsection 21-2.8.
5. Applications for the refund of diversion performance deposits as
provided for in Subsection 21-2.9.
6. Forms related to the appeal of decisions made by the Building
Official, as provided for in Subsection 21-2.12.
§ 21-2.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.11
AO:751
b. To distribute to permit applicants the name, address, telephone
number, days and hours of operation, and schedule of rates and charges
of one or more construction and demolition waste recycling facilities
that meet the following criteria and that have been approved by the City
Council:
1. A facility that provides to the City a written guarantee that it is
currently achieving not less than a 75% diversion rate for all
construction and demolition waste that is delivered to the premises
of that facility.
2. A facility that provides to the City satisfactory evidence in writing
that it has adequate capacity to receive and to process the tonnage
of construction and demolition waste that is reasonably anticipated
to be generated in the City and diverted from landfills on a daily,
weekly, and monthly basis.
3. A facility that provides to the City satisfactory evidence in writing
that it has obtained and maintains all permits, licenses, and other
authorizations from Federal, State, regional, County, and municipal
agencies that are required for its operation as a construction and
demolition waste recycling facility, and that such facility is in full
regulatory compliance with those permits, licenses, and other
authorizations.
4. A facility that has entered into a written agreement with the City
for the processing and diversion of construction and demolition
waste attributable to "covered projects" that are subject to Cityissued
permits, which agreement sets forth insurance and
indemnification provisions and such other terms and conditions as
may be approved by the City Council.
At its option, the City Council may designate one or more construction
and demolition waste recycling facilities as a qualified recycling facility
for use by the City's franchised solid waste collector and by all permittees
that are subject to the provisions of this § 21-2, subject to such conditions,
limitations, and exceptions as may be approved by the City Council with
regard to the collection and disposal of commingled and source-separated
loads of construction and demolition waste.
c. To review permit applications for all covered projects to determine
whether the diversion of at least 75% of the construction and
demolition waste is feasible, and, where such diversion is not feasible,
to authorize a lower diversion rate.
d. To receive, review, approve, conditionally approve, or reject the Waste
Diversion Plan submitted by a permit applicant for a covered project.
e. To determine a permit applicant's entitlement to an exemption from the
diversion requirements of Subsection 21-2.3.
§ 21-2.11 COMPTON § 21-2.11
AO:752
§ 21-2.12. Appeals. [Ord. #2181, § 1]
§ 21-2.13. Diversion Information for Projects Not Covered. [Ord.
#2181, § 1]
The Building Official will provide information to applicants for permits for
construction, renovation, repair, or demolition projects that do not meet the
criteria for a "covered project" set forth above in Subsection 21-2.3, which
information identifies methods, procedures, and recycling facilities that can
be used to ensure the diversion from landfills of at least 75% of all projectrelated
construction and demolition waste.
§ 21-2.14. Evaluation by Building Official. [Ord. #2181, § 1]
Within one year after the effective date of this § 21-2, the Building Official
must submit to the City Council a report on the effects of this § 21-2,
including but not limited to an assessment of whether § 21-2 is achieving its
stated goals and any recommended modifications to this § 21-2.
§ 21-2.15. Violations; Enforcement. [Ord. #2181, § 1]
f. To determine the amount of the diversion performance deposit that is
required to be paid for covered projects in accordance with Subsection
21-2.8.
g. To review the Waste Diversion Report submitted by a permittee upon
completion of a covered project and to determine compliance with the
diversion requirements of this § 21-2.
h. To determine whether a diversion performance deposit paid to the City
in accordance with Subsection 21-2.8 is to be refunded, in whole or in
part, or is to be forfeited.
a. An aggrieved applicant or permittee may appeal to the City Manager, or
the City Manager's designee, any decision of the Building Official that
relates to the denial of an exemption, the refusal to approve a Waste
Diversion Plan or a Waste Diversion Report, or the refusal to refund the
entire amount of a diversion performance deposit.
b. A Notice of Appeal from the decision of the Building Official must be
filed with the City Manager within 10 business days after that decision
is made by the Building Official. Any failure to file a Notice of Appeal
within that ten-day period will constitute a waiver of any objection to
that decision, and the decision will be deemed final.
c. The Notice of Appeal must describe the decision that is being appealed,
the reasons why the decision is deemed to be in error, and must be
accompanied by all supporting documentation.
d. The City Manager will review the Notice of Appeal and the supporting
documentation and will render a written decision on the appeal.
§ 21-2.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.15
AO:753
Chapter 22
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance
Nos. 856, 1021, 1155, 1412, 1429, 1444, 1522, 1524, 1534, 1727,
1728, 1880, 1893, 1908, 1914, 1969, 1974, 2033, 2058, 2074, 2138
and 2194.
§ 22-1. FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
§ 22-1.1. Title. [Ord. #2232, § 1]
This section shall be known as the "Fire Prevention Code of the City of
Compton" and may be cited as such.
§ 22-1.2. Adoption of the California Fire Code. [Ord. #2232, § 2]
§ 22-1.3. Amendments. [Ord. #2232, § 3]
a. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the construction, renovation,
or demolition of a covered project in a manner that violates any
provision of this § 21-2.
b. Any person violating any provisions of this § 21.2 is subject to the
enforcement and penalty provisions that are set forth in Subsection
21-1.11 of this Chapter 21.
a. A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Clerk of the City of Compton, being marked and designated as the 2010
California Fire Code, including all State of California-adopted
Appendices, and including all provisions of the 2010 International Fire
Code, including its Appendix Chapters 1-4 and Appendices A-H, unless
otherwise amended by the City of Compton in Sections B, C, and D
below, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the City
of Compton, in the State of California regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards
arising from the storage, handling, and use of hazardous substances,
materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property
in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided,
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of said Fire Prevention Code on file in the office of the City
Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in subsection 22-1.3 of this section.
a. The following sections of Appendix Chapter 1 are hereby amended or
added and adopted as follows:
§ 21-2.15 COMPTON § 22-1.3
AO:754
1. Amendments. Section 102.1 of the International Fire Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN PROVISIONS
Section 102.1 Construction and design provisions. The provisions
of this code apply to conditions arising after the adoption thereof,
conditions not legally in existence at the time of this adoption,
tenant improvement renovations that exceed 25% of the value of
the building, or $50,000, and to conditions which, in the opinion of
the Fire Chief, constitute a distinct hazard to life or property.
2. Amendments. Section 104.7.2 of the International Fire Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 104.7.2 Technical Assistance.
To determine the acceptability of technologies, processes,
products, facilities, materials and uses attending the design,
operation or use of a building or premises subject to inspection by
the Fire Chief or his designee, the fire code official is authorized
to require the owner or agent to provide, without charge to the
jurisdiction, a technical opinion and report. The opinion and report
shall be prepared by a qualified engineer, specialist, and laboratory
or fire safety specialty organization acceptable to the fire code
official and shall analyze the fire safety properties of the design,
operation or use of the building or premises and the facilities and
appurtenances situated thereon, to recommend necessary changes.
The fire code official is authorized to require design submittals
to be prepared by, and bear the stamp of, a registered design
professional.
When there is a fire, explosion, hazardous materials incident or
other potential life or serious property threatening situation, the
fire code official can request the owner or operator to hire a private
fire protection or hazardous materials investigator, acceptable to
the fire code official and at the expense of the owner or operator, to
provide a full report of the incident, including, without limitation,
such matters as origin, cause, circumstances or proposed solution
to the problem.
3. Amendments. Section 104.10 of the International Fire Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
FIRE INVESTIGATIONS
104.10 Fire investigations. The Fire Department is authorized to
promptly investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of each
and every fire, explosion, unauthorized release of hazardous
materials, or any other hazardous condition within the City. If it
appears to the bureau of investigation that such fire is suspicious
in origin, it is authorized to take immediate charge of all physical
§ 22-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.3
AO:755
evidence relating to the cause of fire and to pursue investigation to
its conclusion.
4. Amendments. Section 104.11.3 is hereby added to the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
MUTUAL AID
Section 104.11.3 Mutual aid. The Chief of the Compton Fire
Department, or his duly authorized representative, is authorized
and instructed to cooperate with the Fire Departments of the cities
of Downey, Long Beach, Montebello, Santa Fe Springs, Vernon, City
of Los Angeles, and the unincorporated area of Los Angeles County
adjacent to the City of Compton and, in his discretion, having due
regard for the interests and requirements of the City of Compton,
to dispatch at any time to such other municipality or County district
for service therein such of the equipment and personnel of the
Compton Fire Department as may be necessary or advisable, in
his opinion, under the circumstances and conditions which may
at any such time exist, to assist the Compton Fire Department
of such other municipality or County district in combating any
fire or menace of fire, or meeting any condition or emergency
which may reasonably fall within the purview of duties or activities
ordinarily performed by Compton Fire Departments, provided such
other municipality or County fire district shall have made a similar
reciprocal agreement to furnish similar service to the City of
Compton under like conditions, such arrangement to be evidenced
either by a certified copy of a resolution or ordinance of its
legislative body substantially the same as the provisions of this
section or by other appropriate written evidence of such
arrangement filed with the Chief.
5. Amendments. Section 104.11.4 is hereby added to the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
PROTECTION AND IMMUNITIES
Section 104.11.4 Protection and immunities. The protection and
immunities afforded by law shall be extended to all the firefighters
and personnel in the Compton Fire Department while acting
extraterritorially the same as though such firefighters and
personnel were operating in the City of Compton.
6. Amendments. Section 104.11.5 is hereby added to the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
VEHICLE CREATING HAZARD
Section 104.11.5 Vehicle creating hazard. Whenever it is
determined by the Fire Chief or his designee that an unattended
or attended vehicle parked or stopped upon any public street,
road, alley or right-of-way, or upon private property, creates an
§ 22-1.3 COMPTON § 22-1.3
AO:756
immediate danger or fire hazard to itself, other vehicles, persons or
surrounding property, such Fire Chief or his designee shall request
the local Law Enforcement Agency (M.L.E.S.) to cause the removal
of the vehicle to a safe location; and the local Law Enforcement
Agency shall cause the removal at the expense of the Registered
Owner of the vehicle; and Notice of the removal shall be given to
the registered owner as soon as feasible.
7. Amendments. Section 104.11.6 is hereby added to the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
OUTSIDE OBSTRUCTIONS
Section 104.11.6 Outside obstructions. No person shall park or
place any material or vehicle in any established exit way, driveway,
gateway, or alleyway between buildings that would hamper the
ingress of fire equipment in case of fire. When in the opinion of
the Fire Chief or his designee, any driveway, gateway, or alleyway
between buildings is so obstructed by objects, materials, or
vehicles as to impede the ingress or egress of said way, it shall
be removed immediately upon an order of the Fire Chief or his
designee. When such obstruction is a vehicle, it may be removed or
impounded at the owner's expense and as prescribed by law.
8. Amendments. Section 403.1 is hereby amended to the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
FIRE WATCH PERSONNEL
Section 403.1 Fire Safety Officer. When, in the opinion of the Fire
Chief, it is necessary for the preservation of life and property,
due to the hazardous nature of an event, production, operation or
function, the Fire Chief shall require the owner, agent, or lessee to
employ or cause the employment of one or more fire department
safety officers, to be on duty at such place during the hazardous
activity.
9. Amendments. Section 105.1.3.1 is hereby added to section 105 of
the International Fire Code to read as follows:
PERMIT FEES
Section 105.1.3.1 Permit fees. All applications for permits, plan
checks, field inspections, and special activities shall be
accompanied by the sums set forth and established in Appendix
A (Fee Schedule). Use permits require annual renewal by the
permitted. Applications for permits will be made to the fire
prevention office in such form and detail as prescribed by the
Fire Chief or his designee. Applications for permits must be
accompanied by such plans as required by the Fire Chief or his
designee. Any applicable permit fees must be paid at the time of
application for the permit.
§ 22-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.3
AO:757
10. Amendments. Section 105.1.3.2 is hereby added to the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
PENALTIES
Section 105.1.3.2 Penalties. The permit fees as specified in
Appendix A of this code shall be doubled, but in no case shall be
less than $200, when work requiring a permit has been started
or carried on prior to obtaining such permit as was necessary. A
person shall acknowledge that a permit was necessary. A person
shall be deemed to have a knowledge if he is a State licensed
contractor or previously had applied for a permit in the City of
Compton, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve a
person from fully complying with the requirements of this code in
the execution of work, nor from any other penalties in this code.
11. Amendments. Section 105.4.6 of the International Fire Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
RETENTION OF CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
Section 105.4.6. Retention of construction documents. For all work
performed for which a permit is required under Section 105 of
this code, three sets of plans and specifications shall accompany
the permit application. The Compton Fire Department will review
such plans and specifications for code compliance and retain one
set for their records, returning two approved or denied sets to the
applicant. Upon final plan approval, a copy of said plans must be
submitted in an approved digital format. Failure to do so could
result in the loss of the permit. One set shall be kept on the site
of the building or other work at all times during which the work
authorized thereby is in progress. Once plans are completed by
the Fire Prevention Bureau the responsible party will be contacted
to pick up the plans. The Fire Prevention Bureau will only be
responsible for plans for a maximum of 90 days. Failure to pick-up
completed plans in this ninety-day period could result in the need
to resubmit plans and the payment of additional fees.
Exception: The Fire Chief or his designee may waive submission
of plans and specifications if he finds that the nature of the work
applied for is such that reviewing plans is not necessary to obtain
code compliance.
12. Amendments. Section 105.5 of the International Fire Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
REVOCATION
Section 105.5 Revocation. The Fire Chief or his designee is
authorized to revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this
code when it is found by inspection or otherwise that there has
been a false statement or misrepresentation as to the material facts
§ 22-1.3 COMPTON § 22-1.3
AO:758
in the application or construction documents on which the permit
or approval was based including, but not limited to, any of the
following:
1. The permit is used for a location or establishment other than
that listed in the permit.
2. The permit is used for a condition or activity other than that
listed in the permit.
3. Conditions and limitations set forth in the permit have been
violated.
4. There have been any false statements or misrepresentations as
to the material fact in the application for permit or plans
submitted or a condition of the permit.
5. The permit is used by a different person or firm than the name
for which it was issued.
6. The permittee failed, refused or neglected to comply with
orders or notices duly served in accordance with the provisions
of this code within the time provided therein.
7. The permit was issued in error or in violation of an ordinance,
regulation or this code.
8. When deemed necessary for the protection of life, limb, or
property; or for changing the occupancy, equipment, materials,
processes, or other conditions in such a manner as to create a
greater danger of fire or explosion or less protection than was
present at the time of issuance of such a permit.
13. Amendments. Section 105.6.22 of the International Fire Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
HIGH-PILED STORAGE
Section 105.6.22 High-piled storage. An operational permit is
required to use a building or portion thereof as a high-piled storage
area exceeding 500 square feet (46 m2).
When using any building or portion thereof exceeding 2,500 square
feet for high piled combustible storage in racks, a floor plan
showing the dimensions and location of the rack system shall be
submitted with the application for such permits.
14. Amendments. Section 105.6.25 of the International Fire Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
LUMBER YARDS, WOODWORKING PLANTS, AND PALLET YARDS
Section 105.6.25. Lumber yards, woodworking plants, and pallet
yards. An operational permit is required for the storage or
§ 22-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.3
AO:759
processing of lumber exceeding 100,000 board feet, or pallets in
excess of 200.
15. Amendments. Section 108.1 is hereby added to section 108 of the
International Fire Code and is amended to read as follows:
APPEALS
Section 108.1 Appeals. Whenever the Chief of the Compton Fire
Department or his designee shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit for, or when it is claimed that the
provisions of this code do not apply or that the true intent and
meaning of this code have been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the Chief of
the Compton Fire Department to the Compton City Council within
30 days from the decision appealed.
16. Amendments. Section 109.3 of the International Fire Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
VIOLATION PENALTIES
Section 109.3 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or
do work in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the Fire Chief or his designee, or of a permit or
certificate used under provisions of the Fire Chief or his designee,
this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not
to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Nevertheless, any
such violation or offense may be deemed an infraction as defined
by Penal Code Section 19 and charged as such at the discretion of
the prosecuting attorney, in which event, the punishment therefore
shall not be imprisonment, but a fine not to exceed the amounts
specified by Government Code Section 36900 as then in effect.
Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
17. Amendments. Section 111.4 of the International Fire Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
FAILURE TO COMPLY
Section 111.4. Failure to comply: Any person who shall continue
any work after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than
$100 or more than $500.
b. The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2010
California Fire Code are hereby established as follows:
§ 22-1.3 COMPTON § 22-1.3
AO:760
18. Amendments. Section 3203.6.1 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
LOCATION
Section 3203.6.1 Containers of cryogenic fluids shall not be located
where they could become part of an electrical circuit and within
dike areas containing other hazardous materials.
The storage and use of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary
containers in any amount is prohibited within the limits of the
City of Compton without prior approval. Prior approval requires
the submittal of a proposed storage use and will require technical
assistance as specified in section 104.7.2.
19. Amendments. Section 3404.2.9.6.1 of the California Fire Code is
hereby added to read as follows:
LOCATIONS WHERE ABOVE-GROUND TANKS ARE PROHIBITED
Section 3404.2.9.6.1 Locations where aboveground tanks are
prohibited. The storage of Class I and II liquids in aboveground
tanks outside of buildings is prohibited unless otherwise approved
by the Fire Chief or his designee.
20. Amendments. Section 3406.2.4.4 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
LOCATIONS WHERE ABOVE-GROUND TANKS ARE PROHIBITED
INSIDE BUILDINGS
Section 3406.2.4.4 Locations where aboveground tanks are
prohibited inside buildings. The storage of Class I and II liquids in
aboveground tanks inside of buildings is prohibited.
21. Amendments. Section 3804.2 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
MAXIMUM CAPACITY WITHIN ESTABLISHED LIMITS
Section 3804.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. The
aggregate capacity of any one installation for the storage of
liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) shall not exceed a water capacity of
2,000 gallons (7,580 L) of liquefied petroleum gas within the City
of Compton.
c. The following sections of the 2010 International Fire Code (IFC) and the
California Building Standards Code, Part 9 (CFC) are hereby amended
and adopted as follows:
22. Amendments. Section 202 of the California Fire Code/International
Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
§ 22-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.3
AO:761
Section 202 General Definitions. "Fire Chief" shall mean the fire
chief serving the City of Compton Fire Department, or duly
authorized representative.
23. Amendments. Section 303.1 is hereby added to the Fire Prevention
Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
ASPHALT
Section 301.2 Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in
Section 105.6 for the activities or uses regulated by Sections 306,
307, 308, and 315. Permit required. No person shall use or operate
an asphalt kettle in the City of Compton without obtaining a permit
from the Compton Fire Department prior to its use.
24. Amendments. Section 303.11 is hereby added to the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
Section 303.11 No person shall apply by any means a flammable or
combustible liquid material as a roof coating, upon any structure,
if such material has a flash point of 100° F. or less, unless such
material has been approved for such use by a recognized testing
agency.
25. Amendments. Section 303.12 is hereby added to the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
Section 303.12 No person shall apply by any means a flammable or
combustible liquid with a flash point of 100° F. or less as a driveway
coating, unless such material has been approved for such use.
26. Amendments. Section 315.3.2 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
HEIGHT AND TOTAL ACCUMULATION FOR STORAGE
Section 315.3.2 Height and total accumulation. Storage in the open
shall not exceed 15 feet in height and 100 cubic yards in total
aggregate content.
27. Amendments. Section 315.3.3 is hereby added to the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
ALLEYS
Section 315.3.3 Alleys. No person owning or occupying or having
the possession or control of any property bordering on any public
alley in the City of Compton shall fail, refuse, or neglect to keep
the portion of such alley between the center line thereof and the
property line of such property free from garbage, rubbish, and
combustible materials or compounds and flammable liquids and
other obstructions.
§ 22-1.3 COMPTON § 22-1.3
AO:762
28. Amendments. Section 315.3.4 is hereby added to the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
OUTSIDE STORAGE
Section 315.3.4 Outside Storage Outside Storage of combustible
material shall not be located within 10 feet of a property line.
Exceptions:
1. The separation distance is allowed to be reduced to three feet
for storage no exceeding six feet in height.
2. The separation distance is allowed to be reduced when fire
code official determines that no hazard to the adjoining
property exists.
29. Amendments. Section 503.2.4 of the International Fire Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 503.2.4. Turning Radius. The required turning radius of a
fire apparatus access road shall be determined by the Fire Chief or
his designee. See Appendix D
30. Amendments. Section 503.4.1 is hereby added to the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
ACCESS ROADS WITH VEHICLE PARKING
Section 503.4.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall
have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet, exclusive of
shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with
Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less
than 13 feet six inches.
Section 503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire
apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner,
including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and
clearances established in Section 503.2.1 shall be maintained at all
times.
31. Amendments. Section 505.1 of the International Fire Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
ADDRESS NUMBERS
Section 505.1 Address numbers. Approved address numbers and
letters must be placed on all new and existing buildings and units in
such a location as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or
road fronting such buildings and units. Numbers and letters must
be at least four inches in height for residential, six inches in height
for commercial, and 12 inches in height for industrial buildings
and units and may not be located on doors or other areas that
can be obstructed from view. The numbers and letters will be in
§ 22-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.3
AO:763
a color that contrasts with their background and must be in the
City's approved numbering sequence. Commercial and industrial
buildings and units that are served by an alley must also have
approved address numbers and letters posted in a visible location
near the primary door to the alley.
32. Amendments. Section 506.1 of the International Fire Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
MASTER KEY, KNOX BOXES
Section 506.1 Where required. All new and existing commercial,
Residential Apartments, Condos, Townhomes and manufacturing
buildings shall be provided with a master key Knox-Box® at a
location approved by the Compton Fire Department. Such box shall
be provided with a master key or such keys necessary for access
to all portions of the premises. Such box and key shall be provided
prior to occupancy and/or final inspection.
Section 506.1.2 Locks. An approved lock shall be installed on gates
or similar barriers when required by the fire code official.
Section 506.2 Key box maintenance. The operator of the building
shall immediately notify the fire code official and provide the new
key when a lock is changed or rekeyed. The key to such lock shall
be secured in the key box.
SECURITY BUILDINGS OR COMMUNITIES WITH SECURITY
GATES
Section 506.1. Security buildings or communities with security
gates. All existing properties which are secured by security doors
or gates, that are designed and installed to prohibit entry except
by card, key or special means are hereby required to immediately
provide an approved Knox access system. Such systems shall be
approved by the Compton Fire Department.
33. Amendments. Section 507.1 is hereby added to the Fire Prevention
Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
EXISTING FACILITIES
Section 507.1 Required water supply. An approved water supply
capable of supplying the required fire flow for fire protection shall
be provided to premises which facilities, buildings or portions of
buildings are hereafter constructed or moved into or within the
jurisdiction. Required by the Fire Chief or his designee, water
supply and fire hydrants must be provided at existing facilities
when the fire load potential exceeds the water supply availability.
34. Amendments. Section 507.5 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby added to read as follows:
§ 22-1.3 COMPTON § 22-1.3
AO:764
ON-SITE FIRE HYDRANTS
Section 507.5 Where required. Where a portion of the facility
or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the
jurisdiction is more than 400 feet from a hydrant on a fire
apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around
the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and
mains shall be provided where required by the Fire Chief or his
Designee.
35. Amendments. Section 603.1.8 is hereby added to the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
FUEL-FIRED APPLIANCES
Section 603.1.8 Oil burning equipment, pumps, piping and valves.
Oil burning equipment, pumps, piping and valves installed inside
of buildings shall be protected against fire exposure in one of the
following manners: One story buildings: automatic fire sprinklers
(Extra Hazard Rating) in all areas where equipment and piping
are located. (2) All multi-story buildings: piping to be installed in
noncombustible one hour rating oil tight enclosure or shaft (with
service openings) to the point where the piping enters the one hour
rated equipment room. (3) Remote controlled shut-off valves are
required on all systems.
36. Amendments. Section 604.2.14.1 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
STANDBY POWER
Section 604.2.14.1 Standby Power. A standby power generator
set conforming to the Electrical Code shall be provided on the
premises. The set shall supply all functions required by this section
at full power. Set supervisions with manual start and transfer
override features shall be provided at the central control station.
The installation of any combustion engine and gas turbines
associated with such power-generating systems shall be installed
in accordance with the 2010 California Electrical Code.
37. Amendments. Section 604.2.14.1.1 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby added to read as follows:
FUEL SUPPLY
Section 604.2.14.1.1 Fuel supply. An on-premises fuel supply
sufficient for not less than six hours at full demand operation of the
system shall be provided. Where fire pumps are required, an eighthour
fuel supply is required.
38. Amendments. Section 604.2.15.1.2 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby added to read as follows:
§ 22-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.3
AO:765
CAPACITY
Section 604.2.14.1.2 Capacity. The stand-by system shall have a
capacity and rating that would supply all equipment required to
be operational at the same time. The generating capacity need
not be sized to operate all the connected electrical equipment
simultaneously.
39. Amendments. Section 604.2.14.1.3 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
CONNECTED FACILITIES
Section 604.2.14.1.3 Connected facilities. All power, lighting,
signal and communication facilities specified in Sections 403.9 and
403.10 of the 2010 California Building Code, as applicable; fire
pumps required to maintain pressure, standby lighting and normal
circuits supplying exit signs and means of egress illumination shall
be transferable to the standby source.
40. Amendments. Section 604.2.14.2 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
SEPARATE CIRCUITS AND LUMINARIES
Section 604.2.14.2 Separate circuits and luminaries. Separate
lighting circuits and fixtures sufficient to provide light with an
intensity of not less than one foot-candle (11 lux) measured at floor
level in all corridors, stairways, pressurized enclosures, elevator
cars and lobbies and other areas that are clearly a part of the
escape route.
41. Amendments. Section 604.2.15.2.1 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
OTHER CIRCUITS
Section 604.2.14.2.1 other circuits. All circuits supply lighting for
the central control station and mechanical equipment rooms.
42. Amendments. Section 604.2.14.3 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
EMERGENCY SYSTEMS
Section 604.2.14.3 Emergency systems. The following are
classified as emergency systems and shall operate within 10
seconds of failure of the normal power supply:
(1) Exit signs and means of egress illumination as required by the
2010 California Building Code
(2) Elevator car lighting
§ 22-1.3 COMPTON § 22-1.3
AO:766
(3) Fire alarm system
(4) Fire-detection system
(5) Sprinkler alarm system
Installation of emergency electrical systems shall be in accordance
with the provisions of the 2010 California Electrical Code. When the
standby power-operation system reaches full operating capacity; the
emergency electrical systems and equipment shall be transferred
thereto.
43. Amendments. Section 607.1.1 is hereby added to the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
ELEVATOR RECALL FOR HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS
Section 607.1 Elevator recall for high-rise buildings. At least one
elevator in each bank shall be available for Compton Fire
Department access to any floor. The elevator shall open into a
lobby, which may serve additional elevators, and shall be separated
from the remainder of the building by construction as required for
corridors. The elevator may be within a smoke proof enclosure.
44. Amendments. Section 903.2 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 903.2 Where required. For automatic fire sprinkler
requirements, see City of Compton Ordinance No. 1908.
45. Amendments. Section 903.2.8 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed
in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all
buildings with a Group R area.
46. Amendments. Section 903.2.7.1 is hereby added to the
International Fire Code to read as follows:
Section 903.2.7.1 Protection of attached garages. Residential
occupancies protected by an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with NFPA 13R of NFPA 13D shall have automatic
sprinklers installed in attached garages and in other areas as
required by the Fire Chief or his designee.
47. Amendments. Section 903.2.11.3 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
BUILDINGS 55 FEET OR MORE IN HEIGHT
Section 903.2.11.3 An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout buildings with a floor level having an occupant load of
§ 22-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.3
AO:767
30 or more that is located 55 feet (16 764 mm) or more above the
lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
Exceptions:
1. Airport control towers.
2. Open parking structures.
3. Occupancies in Group F-2.
48. Amendments. Section 907.2 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
907.2 Where required - New buildings and structures.
An approved fire alarm system installed in accordance with the
provisions of this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in new
buildings and structures in accordance with Sections 907.2.1
through 907.2.23 and provide occupant notification in accordance
with Section 907.5, unless other requirements are provided by
another section of this code.
A minimum of one manual fire alarm box shall be provided in
an approved location to initiate a fire alarm signal for fire alarm
systems employing automatic fire detectors or waterflow detection
devices. Where other sections of this code allow elimination of fire
alarm boxes due to sprinklers, or automatic fire alarm systems, a
single fire alarm box shall be installed at a location approved by the
enforcing agency.
Exceptions:
1. The manual fire alarm box is not required for fire alarm control
units dedicated to elevator recall control, supervisory service
and fire sprinkler monitoring.
2. The manual fire alarm box is not required for Group R-2
occupancies unless required by the fire code official to provide
a means for fire watch personnel to initiate an alarm during a
sprinkler system impairment event. Where provided, the
manual fire alarm box shall not be located in an area that is
accessible to the public.
3. The manual fire alarm box is not required to be installed when
approved by the fire code official.
49. Amendments. Section 907.2.13 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS
Section 907.2.13 High-rise buildings and Group I-2 occupancies
having occupied floors located more than 75 feet above the lowest
§ 22-1.3 COMPTON § 22-1.3
AO:768
level of fire department vehicle access. High-rise buildings and
Group I-2 occupancies having occupied floors located more than
75 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access
shall be provided with an automatic smoke detection system in
accordance with Section 907.2.13.1, a fire department
communication system in accordance with Section 907.2.13.2 and
an emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance
with Section 907.5.2.2.
Exceptions:
1. Airport traffic control towers in accordance with Sections
907.2.22 and 412.
2. Open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.3.
3. Buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with
Section 303.1.
4. Low-hazard special occupancies in accordance with Section
503.1.1.
5. In Group I-2 and R-2.1 occupancies, the alarm shall sound at a
constantly attended location and general occupant notification
shall be broadcast by the emergency voice/alarm
communication system.
50. Amendments. Section 907.2.12.3 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
FIRE DEPARTMENT VOICE COMMUNICATION SYSTEM
Section 907.2.12.3 Emergency voice/alarm communication system.
An emergency voice/alarm communication system, which is also
allowed to serve as a public address system, shall be installed in
accordance with Section 907.5.2.2 and be audible throughout the
entire special amusement building.
51. Amendments. Section 907.5.2 is hereby added to the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
MANUAL FIRE ALARM BOXES
907.5.2 Alarm notification appliances.
Alarm notification appliances shall be provided and shall be listed
for their purpose.
52. Amendments. Section 907.2.12.5 is hereby added to the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Compton to read as follows:
TENANT IMPROVEMENTS
Refer to CBC Section 303.1
§ 22-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.3
AO:769
For shell buildings and others constructed for future tenant
improvements, only those code measures relevant to the building
components and systems considered to be new construction (or
newly constructed) shall apply.
Where required - Retroactive in existing buildings and structures.
Unless otherwise made more restrictive by other provisions of
this code, existing nonresidential buildings which presently do not
exceed 3,000 square feet of floor area but after tenant
improvements will, or existing buildings exceeding 3,000 square
feet of floor area which undergo tenant improvements, alterations,
or remodel exceeding 25% of the value of said building, shall be
provided with a sprinkler system and an approved automatic fire
detection and alarm system.
Agreements shall be made for the automatic transmission of fire
alarms from the building in which the fire alarm system is installed
to an approved Central or Remote Station System in a manner and
form acceptable to the Fire Chief or his designee.
An approved manual, automatic or manual and automatic fire
alarm system shall be installed in existing buildings and structures
in accordance with sections 907.3.1 through 907.3.1.8. Where
automatic sprinkler protection is provided in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and connected to the building fire
alarm system, automatic heat detection required by this section
shall not be required.
An approved automatic fire detection system shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of this code and NFPA 72. Devices,
combinations of devices, appliances and equipment shall be
approved. The automatic fire detectors shall be smoke detectors,
except an approved alternative type of detector shall be installed
in spaces such as boiler rooms where, during normal operation,
products of combustion are present in sufficient quantity to actuate
a smoke detector.
53. Amendments. Section 907.7.5.1 of the California Fire Code/
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE-DIALING SERVICES
Section 907.7.5.1. Automatic telephone-dialing devices. Automatic
telephone-dialing devices used to transmit an emergency alarm
shall not be connected to any (Compton) Fire Department
telephone number unless approved by the fire chief or his designee.
54. Amendments. Sections 3308.2 through 3308.22 of the California
Fire Code/International Fire Code are hereby added to read as
follows. (See Section 22-2.)
§ 22-1.3 COMPTON § 22-2
AO:770
§ 22-2. FIREWORKS.
§ 22-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
As used in this section:
DANGEROUS FIREWORKS — Shall mean and include any of the following:
INFLAMMABLE LIQUID — Shall mean and include any liquid whose flash
point is 100° F., or less.
SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS — Shall mean and include any fireworks not
designated as "dangerous fireworks."
§ 22-2.2. Sales of Fireworks. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
No person shall do any of the following:
Pyrotechnics or fireworks containing phosphorous, sulphocyanide,
mercury, chlorate of potash and sulphur, or chlorate of potash and
sugar;
a.
b. Firecrackers or salutes;
c. Blank cartridges;
d. Sky rockets, including all devices which rise in the air during discharge;
Roman candles, including all devices discharging balls of fire into the
air;
e.
Chasers, including all devices which dart or travel about the surface of
the ground during discharge;
f.
Snakes, boa constrictors, and snake nests containing dichloride of
mercury;
g.
h. All articles for pyrotechnic display which contain gunpowder;
Articles commonly known as son-of-a-gun or devil-on-the-rock and
crack-it sticks and automatic torpedoes and which contain arsenic;
i.
Explosives known as devil-on-the-rock, or any other articles of similar
character which explodes through means of friction, and all other
similar fireworks, unless otherwise designated; and
j.
Toy torpedoes of all kinds, except those specifically designed for use
only with pistol paper caps containing not more than 0.25 grain of
explosive compound to each paper cap.
k.
a. Manufacture, possess, or sell any dangerous fireworks;
b. Sell any safe and sane fireworks, except as provided in this section; or
c. Discharge any dangerous fireworks any place.
§ 22-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-2.3
AO:771
§ 22-2.3. Permits Required. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
Charitable organizations, associations, or corporations (called "applicants"
in subsections 22-2.4 through 22-2.10) may sell safe and sane fireworks
upon first obtaining a permit from the City of Compton as provided in
subsection 22-2.8 of this section.
§ 22-2.4. Random Drawing. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
§ 22-2.5. Application Fees. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
An application fee as set forth in subsection 22-2.6 shall accompany the
application. A permit fee as set forth in subsection 22-2.6 shall be paid at
the time the permit is obtained. The City Manager shall set uniform fees in
amounts which reimburse the City of Compton for its costs of investigation
and administration.
§ 22-2.6. Eligibility for Sale of Fireworks. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
a. Organizations will be selected through a random drawing to be
conducted by the City Clerk.
b. The successful applicant shall hold the drawing for two years, providing
all additional requirements are met.
c. Any applicants failing to file all required documentation by April 1 will
be disqualified for consideration. No exceptions.
d. Applicants desiring to obtain a permit for the sale of fireworks in the
City of Compton shall make an application for a permit through the City
of Compton Clerk's Office not earlier than March 1st, nor later than
April 1st, of the year for which a license is sought. A random drawing
will be held on the second Tuesday in May at 11:00 a.m. There shall be
only one licensed fireworks stand per every 8,000 residents, not to
exceed 15. Those applications not meeting those requirements by the
last day set forth in this subsection shall not be eligible for the lottery.
e. Successful applicants in the random drawing shall file for a permit with
the Compton Fire Department between the second Wednesday of May
and the first Monday of June of the year for which a license is awarded.
Upon filing for a permit with the Compton Fire Department, the fee set
forth in Appendix A of this code shall be paid at that time.
a. No permit shall be issued to any person except nonprofit organizations,
associations, or corporations organized primarily for veteran, patriotic,
welfare, civic betterment, or charitable purposes. One permit will be
issued to an organization per calendar year.
b. Applicants shall have their principal and permanent meeting place in
the City of Compton, shall have been organized and established in the
City of Compton for a minimum of one year continuously proceeding the
§ 22-2.3 COMPTON § 22-2.6
AO:772
filing of the application for the permit, and shall have a bona fide
membership of at least 35 members.
c. The applicant organization shall supply the following:
1. A membership list, including name, address and telephone number
of each member. The President or Chief Executive Officer, or at
least one of the officers of the applicant shall reside within the City
of Compton.
2. The applicant shall provide documentation to substantiate that
organization's nonprofit status.
3. A license obtained from the State Fire Marshal under California
Health and Safety Code Section 12500 et seq.
4. The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
designated location of the fireworks stand. The applicant shall
supply a copy of a recorded deed evidencing its ownership of the
designated location, or an executed lease, rental, or license
agreement evidencing that the applicant has the legal authority to
locate and operate a fireworks stand at the designated location. An
applicant may request that the proposed location of its stand be
changed if such request is made prior to June 1st and the applicant
pays the transfer fee of $50, provides the ownership or lease
documents required in this section, and timely complies with all
other inspections and permitting requirements required by law for
the new location.
5. Pay a nonrefundable application and permit fee of $250.
6. Upon the approval of such application, the applicant shall complete
the following prior to the issuance of a permit:
(a) Post a $200 deposit with the City of Compton to guarantee that
all trash and debris shall be cleared from the premises of the
temporary fireworks stand by the date so stipulated in
paragraph n of subsection 22-2.10;
(b) File with the City Clerk a certificate of insurance and
endorsements in the minimum amount of
$100,000/$300,000/$25,000 which shall cover the operation
and premises of a temporary fireworks stand, and, in addition,
the City of Compton shall be named as an additional insured on
such insurance; and
(c) Successful applicants agree to submit copies of receipts for
expenditures by September 1st of the operating year. The
licensee shall use the net proceeds derived from its operations
under license only for the benefit of the City of Compton and no
other purpose. Failure to comply will result in a disqualification
§ 22-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-2.6
AO:773
§ 22-2.7. Processing of Applications. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
The Fire Chief shall cause to be investigated compliance of applications
with the provisions of this code and such rules and regulations as have been
promulgated thereof and shall submit to the City Clerk a report of his or
her findings and his or her recommendations for or against the issuance of
the permit. The City Clerk may make such further investigations, as he/she
deems necessary to establish the existence or nonexistence of facts material
to the application. The City Clerk shall notify the applicant of the date of the
hearing on the application before the City Council.
§ 22-2.8. Granting or Denial of Permits. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
The City Council, after a hearing thereon and in its sole discretion, may
grant or deny a permit to sell fireworks. The City Council shall use the
following criteria for granting permits:
§ 22-2.9. Inspections. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
from operating a fireworks stand the subsequent calendar
year.
a. Whether the applicant in fact complies with the eligibility requirements
set forth in section;
b. The amount of community activity of the applicant;
c. The length of community service of the applicant;
d. The manner in which funds have been used by the applicant for prior
community services;
e. The size of the annual budget of the applicant used in community
service;
f. Such other community activities of the applicant as the Council deems
relevant; and
g. Applicants shall be notified by the City Clerk of the acceptance or
rejection of such application for a license.
a. The applicant, by acceptance of the permit shall agree that fire officials
and police officials may make inspections of the fireworks stand at any
time.
b. Prior to the final issuance of a license to sell, the applicant shall have
had the proposed fireworks stand inspected by the appropriate
representatives of the Compton Fire Department, and shall have
received certification by the Compton Fire Department that the
proposed fireworks stand complies with the applicable provisions of
this code, the State Fireworks Law and all regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto.
§ 22-2.6 COMPTON § 22-2.10
AO:774
§ 22-2.10. Sales of Fireworks; Stands. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
a. No person other than the permit holder shall operate the fireworks
stand for which the permit is issued or share or otherwise participate in
the profits of the operation of such stand.
b. No person other than the individuals, who are members of the
permitted, or the wives or husbands or adult children of such members,
shall sell or otherwise participate in the sale of the fireworks at such
stand. No person other than those actually engaged in selling the
fireworks shall occupy the interior of the stand.
c. No person shall be paid any consideration for selling or otherwise
participating in the sale of fireworks at such stand.
d. Nothing contained in subsections 22-2.1 through 22-2.9, and in this
subsection shall limit the powers granted to the Compton Fire
Department and its employees under this code.
e. No one less than 18 years of age shall sell or participate in the sale of
"safe and sane fireworks."
f. During hours of operation, the sales booth shall be staffed by no less
than two qualified personnel. The licensee shall be responsible for
appropriate security and safe keeping of fireworks stored overnight in
temporary fireworks stands.
g. No fireworks shall be erected within 1/2 mile of any other stand, nor
within 100 feet of any gasoline station or commercial garage, nor within
25 feet of any structure. The minimum setback from the street curbing
shall be 10 feet.
h. Fireworks stands shall be constructed entirely out of metal and shall
have metal flooring attached. No fireworks stand shall have a floor area
in excess of 400 square feet.
i. All electrical wiring must be enclosed in conduits. The breaker boxes
shall be GFI breakers. The manufacturer must have installed all wiring.
Absolutely NO electrical wiring will be done at the stand site. All
standards shall meet the approval of the Compton Building and Safety
Department, prior to the beginning of sales.
j. No generators will be allowed within 25 feet of the fireworks stand.
k. "No Smoking" signs must be displayed on and in the fireworks stand.
l. Firework stand in excess of 24 feet in length must have at least two
exits; and each stand in excess of 40 feet in length must have at least
three exits spaced equal distance apart; provided, however, that in no
case shall the distance between exists exceed 24 feet.
§ 22-2.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-2.10
AO:775
§ 22-2.11. Exceptions. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
The provisions of this section shall not prohibit any person who is a
manufacturer, wholesaler, dealer, or jobber, having a permit secured
pursuant to the provisions of this section, from storing or selling any kind of
fireworks for direct shipment out of the City of Compton or from storing or
selling at wholesale any safe and sane fireworks to permittees hereunder;
or the use of torpedoes, flares, or fuses by railroad or other transportation
agencies for signal purposes or illumination; or the sale or use of blank
cartridges for ceremonial purposes, athletic or sport events, or military
ceremonials or demonstrations; or the sale of dangerous fireworks to
permittees having a permit as provided for in this section for public
displays; or the use and display of fireworks of whatever nature by any
person engaged in the production of motion pictures, theatricals, or operas
when such use and display is a necessary part of such production.
§ 22-2.12. Public Displays. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
Any person planning to make a public display of fireworks shall first make
a written application for a permit to the Chief of the Compton Fire
Department or his designee at least 10 days in advance of the date of
display.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Compton Fire Department or his
designee to make an investigation and submit a report of his findings and
recommendations for or against the issuance of the permit, together with
his reasons thereof, to the City Council. The City Council shall have the
power, in its discretion, to grant or deny the application.
§ 22-2.13. Applications for Public Displays. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
The applicant for such public display permit shall, at the time of the
application, furnish proof that he carries compensation insurance for his
employees, as provided by the laws of the State, and that he has filed
with the City Clerk a bond with at least two good and sufficient sureties,
to be approved by the City Council, in the sum of not less than $1,000,
conditioned upon the applicant's payment of all damages to persons or
property which shall or may result from, or be caused by, such public display
or fireworks or any negligence on the part of the applicant, or his agents,
m. Each stand shall be provided with two, 2 1/2 gallon soda-and-acid or
water pressure type fire extinguishers, underwriter approved, IN
GOOD WORKING ORDER, and easily accessible for use in case of fire.
n. No fireworks shall be distributed within the City of Compton to any
retail permitted or other person prior to neither June 30th nor later
than 10:00 p.m. on July 4th. Stands shall only be open between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. No stand may be erected before June
25 and shall be removed from the temporary location by 2:00 p.m., on
the 9th day of July and all unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be
cleared from the location by 5:00 p.m. on July 5.
§ 22-2.10 COMPTON § 22-2.13
AO:776
servants, employees, or subcontractors in the presentation thereof. If the
permit is granted, the sale, possession, and use of fireworks for the public
display shall be lawful for that purpose only.
§ 22-2.14. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
The Chief of the Compton Fire Department or his designee shall adopt
reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for and the
presentation of public displays of fireworks. Every such display shall be
handled or supervised by a competent and experienced pyrotechnic
operator approved by the Chief of the Compton Fire Department or his
designee. All public displays of fireworks shall be of such character and so
located, discharged, or fired as not to be hazardous or dangerous to persons
or property.
No permit issued or authorized to be issued by the provisions of this section
shall be transferable.
§ 22-2.15. Deliveries. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
No person shall transport, convey, or deliver any dangerous fireworks,
except for permittees making deliveries to other permittees, or to locations
for public displays of fireworks authorized by the provisions of this code, or
to distributors outside the City of Compton.
§ 22-2.16. Gasoline Storage. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
No person shall sell or discharge any fireworks in any public garage or
public oil station or on any premises where gasoline or other inflammable
liquids are stored or dispensed, or where more than four motor vehicles are
stored.
§ 22-2.17. Rubbish. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
No person shall allow any rubbish to accumulate on any premises where
fireworks are stored or sold.
§ 22-2.18. Violations: Penalties. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
Any person violating any provision of this section or knowingly or
intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the City of
Compton any material fact in procuring the license or permit provided for
in this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
In addition thereto, any such misrepresentation or violation shall constitute
grounds for the revocation of the permit by the City Council on 24 hours'
notice to the permittee, or if any such violation is committed in the presence
of the Chief of Police or any police officer, the City Manager shall be
empowered, upon receiving a written and signed report thereof from any
such officer, to close any such sales booth or stand forthwith.
§ 22-2.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-2.19
AO:777
§ 22-2.19. Wholesale Permit. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
§ 22-2.20. Application for Wholesale Permit. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
Any application for a wholesale permit to engage in the possession and
wholesale distribution of safe and sane fireworks in the City of Compton
shall conform to the following requirements:
a. The City Council may, in its discretion, grant a wholesale permit for the
possession and wholesale distribution of safe and sane fireworks within
the City of Compton to any person licensed by the State Fire Marshal as
a manufacturer, importer, exporter, or wholesaler of safe and sane
fireworks. Any such permit shall be upon the terms and conditions
provided in this code, and shall contain the provisions set forth in this
code.
b. Such wholesale permit shall, unless revoked by the City Council, be
automatically reissued from year to year; provided, however, that the
permittee shall annually, on or before March 31st of each year, file an
application therefor in the same form as an application for the original
permit, and shall pay the application fee required by subsection
22-2.21a.
a. It shall be in writing, verified and accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee and a refundable fireworks stand removal deposit in
amounts set forth in subsection 22-2.21a;
b. It shall be filed with the City Clerk on or before March 31st of the year
in which such permit is to be effective;
c. It shall be accompanied by a statement that, upon issuance of a permit,
the applicant will deliver to the City of Compton a products liability,
public liability and property damage insurance policy or bond in the
amount of not less than $1,000,000. Such policy shall be with a
corporate insurance company and in such form as shall be approved by
the City Attorney, and shall name the City of Compton, its officers and
employees as additional insured;
d. It shall contain such other information as may be required by any City
of Compton representative(s);
e. It shall set forth the name, principal place of business and telephone
number of the applicant, its State fireworks license number or
numbers, the names and addresses of its principal partners, owners or
officers, and the name, residence address and capacity of the person
signing the application;
f. It shall contain a statement that fireworks will not be furnished, sold,
distributed or placed in the possession of any person or organization in
the City of Compton, or for sale, use or distribution in the City of
Compton, unless such person or organization holds a valid and
§ 22-2.19 COMPTON § 22-2.20
AO:778
§ 22-2.21. Fee Imposed Upon Distributors. [Ord. #2232, § 4]
§ 22-3. APPENDIX "A" FEE SCHEDULE. [Ord. #2232, § 4; Ord.
#2295 § 13]
Fire Permits/Plan Checks/Field Inspections/Special Activities Fees. The City
Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, from time to time determine and
fix the amount to be assessed as annual Fire Permit Fees.
Chapter 23
SEWER AND WATER
Editor's Note: For Regulations and Rates of the Compton Municipal
Water Department, see Article I, Appendix to this chapter.
§ 23-1. WATER CODE.
§ 23-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1176, § 7400]
As uses in this chapter:
EMPLOYEE — Shall mean any person designated by the City Manager
or the Water Superintendent to perform work and labor for the Water
Department, excluding contractors and their employees.
SERVICE AREA — Shall mean that area permanently served with potable
water by the Compton Municipal Water Department from the existing
distribution system which adjoins or abuts upon such area, excluding all
areas from any other water source and excluding undeveloped,
unsubdivided areas where such main or mains lack capacity to adequately
supply such area.
SERVICE, SERVICE CONNECTION, OR WATER SERVICE — Shall mean
that pipe (including meter and box) installed between the water main and
the property to be served with water.
unrevoked permit from the City of Compton to so possess, sell, use or
distribute such fireworks.
a. Each fireworks wholesaler or distributor providing safe and sane
fireworks to organizations or persons licensed under this code shall pay
an annual regulatory fee to the City of Compton in an amount
established by resolution of the City Council.
b. The fee required by this section shall be payable within five days from
the date that the City Clerk notifies applicants that their permit has
been approved.
c. No fireworks wholesaler or distributor may supply, offer for sale or sell
fireworks, unless and until the fee imposed by this subsection has been
paid to the City of Compton and the City of Compton has issued a
permit.
§ 22-2.20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.1
AO:779
WATER DEPARTMENT OR DEPARTMENT — Shall mean that certain
department, branch, or function of the City known as the Compton
Municipal Water Department which cares for, maintains, and operates
pumps, plants, mains, and all the necessary facilities for acquiring,
distributing and delivering water and shall include all officers, agents,
servants, or employees engaged in such work or service employed by the
City.
WATER SUPERINTENDENT — Shall mean the person designated by the
City Manager to have charge of the supervision and administration of the
Water Department.
§ 23-1.2. Rates, Charges, and Administration. [Ord. #1176, § 7401]
"Rates," "charges," and "administrative" regulations shall be set forth in the
rules and regulations of the Water Department as prescribed by resolution
of the Council.
§ 23-1.3. Meter Reading and Billing Period. [Ord. #1176, § 7402]
Meters shall be read by the Water Department at intervals of approximately
two months, or as near thereto as the convenient operation of the
Department will permit. The interval between two successive meter
readings shall be deemed and regarded as a bimonthly period for the
purpose of computing and rendering bills. The charge made when a meter
is specially read between regularly established meter reading times for the
purpose of turning a water service on or off shall be figured by one of the
following methods: (1) the prorated minimum, or (2) the water consumed,
whichever is the greater.
§ 23-1.4. Meters Required. [Ord. #1176, § 7403]
Meters shall be installed on all customer permanent water services.
§ 23-1.5. Combined Readings. [Ord. #1176, § 7404]
Combined meter readings shall not be used for billing purposes in those
cases where a customer is served by more than one meter.
§ 23-1.6. Time of Payment. [Ord. #1176, § 7405]
All charges, except those for water furnished, shall be due and payable in
advance. Bills for water furnished shall be due and payable when rendered
and shall become delinquent 15 days thereafter. Surety bonds may be
accepted, if approved by the City Manager or Water Superintendent, to
cover the charged for water main extensions, including services and
appurtenances.
§ 23-1.1 COMPTON § 23-1.7
AO:780
§ 23-1.7. Penalties for Noncompliance or Nonpayment. [Ord. #856,
§ 7406; Ord. #1552; Ord. #1558, § 1; Ord. #2295 § 14]
Upon the failure of any customer to comply with the provisions of this
section or to pay any charges or penalties imposed, the Water Department
may discontinue service, five days from the date of final notice, until such
charges and/or penalties are paid. If service is discontinued by the
Department, a fee established by ordinance or resolution of the City Council
may be charged and collected before service will be resumed.
§ 23-1.8. Delinquencies; Liabilities. [Added by Ord. #1472,
§ 7406.1]
In the event any fees and other charges due from any occupant of any
single-family residence or any residential units, as provided for in this
section, should become due and payable and fall delinquent, the owner
or owners of the premises, whether or not other than the occupant, shall
forthwith be jointly and severally liable for the payment of all such fees and
charges which have charges which have fallen delinquent.
§ 23-1.9. Delinquent Charges; Mode of Collection. [Added by Ord.
#1472, § 7406.2]
The Council hereby adopts procedures similar to those appearing in Section
54354.5 et seq. of the Government Code of the State for the purposes of
collecting delinquent water service charges and penalties.
a. Any charges or fees authorized pursuant to the provisions of this
section, which charges remain unpaid for a period of 60 days after the
date upon which they are billed, may be collected thereafter by the City
from the owners of record of any premises provided water services as
follows:
1. Once each year the Council shall cause to be prepared a report of
the delinquent charges, fees, and penalties. The Council shall fix a
time, date and place for hearing the report and any objections or
protests thereto.
2. The Council shall cause a notice of the hearing to be mailed to the
landowners listed on the report not less than 10 days prior to the
date of the hearing.
3. At the hearing the Council shall hear any objections or protests of
the landowners liable to be assessed for delinquent charges, fees,
and penalties.
The Council may make such revisions or corrections to the report
as the Council deems just, after which, by resolution, the report
shall be confirmed.
4. The delinquencies set forth in the report as confirmed shall
constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of
§ 23-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.9
AO:781
§ 23-1.10. Meter Locking. [Added by Ord. #1552, § 7406.3; Ord.
#1558, § 2; Ord. #2295 § 15]
Upon the failure of any customer to comply with the provisions of this
section, service may be discontinued. If any person or persons unlawfully
turns on service that has been turned off by the Water Department, the
meter shall be locked. If a meter is locked by the Department, a fee
established by ordinance or resolution of the City Council may be charged
and collected before service will be resumed.
§ 23-1.11. Penalty for Turning On by Customer. [Ord. #856, § 7407;
Ord. #1552; Ord. #1558, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any premises, or any person for him
or on his behalf, to turn on the water or cause it to be turned on after it
has been turned off at the curb stop by the Water Department. Should such
turn on occur, the person or persons will be violating § 1-6 of the Compton
Municipal Code and Section 499 of the California Penal Code. Violators will
be liable to the penalty stated in § 1-6. The person or persons must pay a
service charge of $20 plus damages and all delinquent charges before water
service is resumed.
§ 23-1.12. Meter Bypass. [Ord. #856, § 7408; Ord. #1552; Ord.
#1158, § 1]
All water use where a meter is installed shall pass through the meter. It shall
be unlawful for any person to install or to cause to be maintained any bypass
or connection around or in the place of a meter. Such unlawful act will
result in having the occupants and/or owners responsible for all water used
land and shall be a lien on the property for the amount of such
delinquent charges, fees, and penalties. A certified copy of the
confirmed report shall be filed with the County Auditor for the
amounts of the respective assessments against the respective
parcels of land as they appear on the current tax rolls. The liens
created shall attach upon the recordation in the office of the County
Recorder of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation. The
assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as ordinary City ad valorem property taxes are collected
and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures
and sale in cases of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All
laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of City ad
valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessments.
b. Nothing set forth in this subsection shall limit the right of the City to
proceed against any occupant of any single-family residence or
residential unit for any delinquencies due under this section. Nothing
set forth in this subsection shall prevent the City from availing itself of
any other legal remedy by which the City might collect such charges or
fees.
§ 23-1.9 COMPTON § 23-1.12
AO:782
from the time of meter pulling and the time that the bypass is discovered.
Charges may be estimated by previous billings. Such act is a misdemeanor
and violators will be subject to the penalty stated in § 1-6.
§ 23-1.13. Private Fire Service. [Ord. #1176, § 7409]
The Water Department will install on all new automatic fire sprinkler service
connections a check valve of a type approved by the National Board of Fire
Underwriters and will equip the same with a bypass meter. The charge
for installing such service shall be for time and materials, plus 20% for
overhead.
§ 23-1.14. Private Fire Sprinkler Services — Connections for Other
Services. [Ord. #1176, § 7409.1]
The Water Department shall have the right to install and connect with the
automatic fire sprinkler service connection at the curb a service connection
for rendering other types of water service to the same premises served
by the automatic fire sprinkler service connection. The charge for such
other service connection installation shall be as provided in the rules and
regulations referred to in Subsection 23-1.2.
§ 23-1.15. Liability for Fire Sprinkler Service. [Ord. #1176,
§ 7409.2]
When an automatic fire sprinkler service connection is installed, the control
valve thereon will be left closed and sealed until a written order to turn on
the water is received from the customer. After the water is turned on, the
Water Department shall not be liable for damages of any kind whatsoever
that may occur on or to the premises served by reason of the installation,
maintenance or use of such service connection or because of fluctuation of
pressure or interruption of the water supply.
§ 23-1.16. Unlawful Uses. [Ord. #1176, § 7409.3]
If water is used through an automatic fire sprinkler service connection
for any purpose other than the extinguishing of fires or a purpose related
thereto, the Water Department shall have the right either to place a meter
on the automatic fire sprinkler service connection at the customer's
expense, and to charge at meter rates for all water used, or to shut off the
entire supply of water to the premises through such service connection.
§ 23-1.17. Detector and Meter Installations. [Ord. #1176, § 7409.4]
Where a service is installed to supply fire host lines only, a detector check
and bypass meter or a domestic meter may be required at the discretion of
the Water Superintendent. The charge for such installation shall be for time
and materials, plus 20% overhead.
§ 23-1.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.18
AO:783
§ 23-1.18. Monthly Charge for Private Fire Protection Service.
[Added by Ord. #1552, § 7409.5; Ord. #1558, § 2]
The monthly charge to be collected for private fire protection service shall
be at the rate of $5 per inch diameter, with a minimum of $15 for
connections three inches and smaller.
§ 23-1.19. Meter Location. [Ord. #1176, § 7410]
All meters shall be placed outside the property line in the public street or
alley whenever practical and be protected and maintained as a part of the
operation of the Department.
Where a water meter is placed inside the premises of a customer, provision
shall be made for convenient meter reading and repair by representatives
of the Department. Failure by the customer to make such provision shall
be sufficient cause for the removal of such meter and the withholding of
service until a connection is made inside the dedicated street or alley.
§ 23-1.20. Damages to Customer's Premises Due to Leaks on
Property. [Ord. #1176, § 7411]
The City, in no way whatsoever, shall be responsible for any damage to
persons or property because of any leakage, breakage or seepage from,
or accident or damage to, any meter or pipe situated within any private
premises; and the City will not be responsible for any leakage, breakage
or seepage from any pipe situated between any meter installed on public
property and the private premises served thereby; nor shall the City be
responsible for any damage, injury or loss occasioned directly or indirectly
by the existence of any meter or pipe situated upon private property.
§ 23-1.21. Damage to Meters by Hot Water or Steam. [Ord. #1176,
§ 7412]
§ 23-1.22. Use of Fire Hydrants. [Ord. #1176, § 7413]
Fire hydrants shall be opened only by City employees or such persons as
may have first obtained a written permit from the water department. No
a. The Department will change and repair the first meter damaged by hot
water or steam at no cost to the customer. When the first meter is found
to have been damaged by hot water or steam emanating from the
premises served, a notice of such damage will be mailed to the owner of
the premises.
b. If the substituted meter shall be similarly damaged and such damage
occurs within three years after the installation of the substituted meter,
the cost of changing and repairing such substituted meter will be
charged to the owner of the premises or the owner of the appliance
causing such damage. After three continuous years in service an
undamaged substituted meter shall be termed thereafter a first meter.
§ 23-1.18 COMPTON § 23-1.22
AO:784
such permit shall be issued to any person who is in violation of any of
the provisions of this section and/or the rules and regulations of the water
department and/or whose indebtedness to the department is delinquent.
§ 23-1.23. Admittance of Department Employees to Customer
Premises. [Ord. #1176, § 7414]
Authorized inspectors, agents and employees of the department shall have
the right of entry and access at all reasonable times, into and upon any and
all customers' buildings, grounds or premises, or any part or parts thereof
for the purpose of:
§ 23-1.24. Right of Access for Cross-Connection Survey. [Ord.
#1176, § 7415]
Authorized inspectors, agents and employees of the department and/or
the Los Angeles County Health Department shall have the right of entry
and access at all reasonable times, into and upon any and all customers'
buildings, grounds, or premises for the purpose of:
a. Testing, changing or reading water meters installed, maintained and
operated by said department; or
b. Inspecting any and all such buildings, grounds and premises (including
any and all plumbing, water piping, fixtures and connections therein or
thereon) to determine:
1. The manner and quantity of such use; or
2. The existence of any condition causing, or likely to affect the
furnishing or receipt of water service.
Each such inspector, agent and employee shall be furnished with, and upon
request of any customer shall display, appropriate evidence of
identification.
a. Determining the existence, operation and maintenance of, and/or the
use in, on, or about said building, grounds or premises of:
1. Any plumbing, piping, water fixtures or connections which may
now or hereafter cause, create or permit backflow, backsiphonage;
or any other condition affecting, or likely to affect the purity and/or
potability of the water supply furnished by the department; or
2. Any source of water supply which may now or hereafter be
connected with the water supply system of the department; or
3. Any source of pressure, vacua, contamination or pollution
(including any and all equipment, fixtures or appliances connected
or used therewith or therefore) affecting, or likely to affect, the
purity and/or potability of said water supply of said department;
and
§ 23-1.22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.24
AO:785
§ 23-1.25. Prohibition of Cross-Connections. [Ord. #1176, § 7417;
Ord. #1767, § 1]
4. Facilitating the enforcement, from time to time, by the department
of any and all of its applicable rules and regulations.
b. Each such inspector, agent, and employee shall be furnished with, and
upon request of any customer shall display, appropriate evidence of
identification.
c. If, and when the department or the Los Angeles County Health
Department shall ascertain that a condition affecting the purity and/or
potability of the water supply exists in, on, or about any building,
grounds or premises in violation of any health law, rule and regulation
of this State, or any health ordinance, code of the City and/or the
County of Los Angeles, or any rule or regulation of the department, it
shall:
1. Immediately notify the person, firm or corporation, owning and/or
controlling such building, grounds, or premises, of the existence of
such conditions;
2. Require of such person, firm or corporation to comply, within
reasonable time (to be stated in said notice), with any such law,
ordinance, code, rule and regulation so violated; and
3. Further notify him or it that for his or its failure to so comply within
said prescribed period, the department will take, cause to be taken
by the appropriate authority or authorities, such steps to enforce
such compliance, to remedy such condition, and/or to protect the
interests of the department as provided by law or by this section.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is (1) to protect the public
water supply against actual or potential cross-connection by isolating
within the premises contamination that may occur because of some
undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises; (2) to
eliminate existing connections between drinking water systems and
other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for
human consumption; (3) to eliminate cross-connections between
drinking water systems and sources of contamination; and (4) to
prevent the making of cross-connections in the future.
These regulations are adopted pursuant to the State of California Code
of Regulations, Title 17 - Public Health, entitled "Regulations Relating
to Cross-Connections".
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation at any time to make
or maintain or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or
permanently, for any period of time whatsoever, any cross-connection
between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served with water
by the Compton Municipal Water Department and any other source
of water supply or their construction as may cause or allow backflow
§ 23-1.24 COMPTON § 23-1.25
AO:786
of water or other substances into the water supply system of the
Water Department and/or the service of water pipes or fixtures of any
consumer of the Water Department.
b. Definitions.
1. AIR-GAP SEPARATION – Shall mean the physical break between a
supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air-gap shall be at least
double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above
the top rim of the vessel, and in no case less than one inch.
2. APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE – Shall mean
devices which have passed laboratory and field evaluation tests
performed by a recognized testing organization which has
demonstrated its competency to perform such tests to the
California Department of Health Services.
3. APPROVED WATER SUPPLY – Shall mean any water supply whose
potability is regulated by a state or local health agency.
4. AUXILIARY SUPPLY – Shall mean any water supply, on or available
to the premises, other than the approved water supply.
5. AWWA STANDARD – Shall mean an official standard developed and
approved by the American Water Works Association (AWWA).
6. BACKFLOW – Shall mean a flow condition caused by a differential
in pressure that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases,
mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable
supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved
water supply source. Backsiphonage is one cause of backflow. Back
pressure is the other cause.
7. CONTAMINATION – Shall mean a degradation of the quality of the
potable water by any foreign substance which creates a hazard to
the public health or which may impair the usefulness or quality of
the water.
8. CROSS-CONNECTION – Shall mean any unprotected actual or
potential connection between a potable water system used to
supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system
containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot
be approved as safe, wholesome and potable. Bypass
arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or
changeover devices, or other devices through which backflow could
occur, shall be considered to be cross-connections.
9. DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY – Shall mean an assembly of at
least two independently acting check valves, including tightly
closing shut-off valves, on each side of the check valve assembly
and test cocks available for testing the water tightness of each
check valve.
§ 23-1.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.25
AO:787
10. HEALTH AGENCY – Shall mean the California Department of
Health Services or the local health agency, with respect to a small
water system.
11. LOCAL HEALTH AGENCY – Shall mean the County or City health
authority.
12. PERSON – Shall mean an individual, corporation, company,
association, partnership, municipality, public utility, or other public
body or institution.
13. PREMISE – Shall mean any and all areas on a customer's property
which are served or have the potential to be served by the public
water system.
14. PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM – Shall mean a system for the provision of
piped water to the public for human consumption, which has five or
more service connections or regularly serves an average of 25
individuals daily at least 60 days out of the year.
15. RECLAIMED WATER – mean waste water which, as a result of
treatment, is suitable for uses other than potable use.
16. REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION
DEVICE – Shall mean a device incorporating two or more check
valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve
located between the two checks, a tightly closing shut-off valve on
each side of the check valve assembly, and equipped with necessary
test cocks for testing.
17. SERVICE CONNECTION – Shall mean the point of connection of a
user's piping to the water supplier's facilities.
18. WATER SUPPLIER – Shall mean the person who owns or operates
the approved water supply system.
19. WATER USER – Shall mean any person obtaining water from an
approved water supply system.
c. Cross-connection protection requirements.
1. General Provisions.
(a) Unprotected cross-connections with the public water supply
are prohibited.
(b) Whenever backflow protection has been found necessary, the
Water Department will require the water user to install an
approved backflow prevention device by and at his/her expense
for continued service or before a new service will be granted.
(c) Whenever backflow protection has been found necessary on a
water supply line entering a water user's premises, then any
and all water supply lines from the Water Department's mains
§ 23-1.25 COMPTON § 23-1.25
AO:788
entering such premises, buildings or structures shall be
protected by an approved backflow prevention device. The
type of device to be installed will be in accordance with the
requirements of this ordinance.
2. Where Protection is Required.
(a) Each service connection from the Water Department's water
system for supplying water to premises having an auxiliary
water supply shall be protected against backflow of water from
the premises into the public water system unless the auxiliary
water supply is accepted as an additional source by the Water
Department and is approved by the public health agency
having jurisdiction.
(b) Each service connection from the Water Department's water
system for supplying water to any premises on which any
substance is handled in such fashion as may allow its entry into
the water system shall be protected against backflow of the
water from the premises into the public system. This shall
include the handling of the process waters and waters
originating from the Water Department's water system which
have been subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality.
(c) Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on the service
connection to any premises having: (1) internal crossconnections
that cannot be permanently corrected and
controlled to the satisfaction of the State or local health
department and the Water Department; or (2) intricate
plumbing and piping arrangements or where entrance to all
portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection
purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain
whether or not cross-connections exist.
3. Type of Protection Required.
(a) The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent
backflow into the approved water supply shall be
commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the
consumer's premises. The type of protective device that may
be required (listing in increasing level of protection) includes:
Double Check Valve Assembly (DC), Reduced Pressure
Principle Backflow Prevention Device (RP), and an Air-Gap
separation (AG). The water user may choose a higher level of
protection required to protect the approved water supply, at
the user's water connection to premises with varying degrees
of hazard given in Table 1. Situations which are not covered in
Table 1 shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, and the
appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the
Water Department or health agency.
§ 23-1.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.25
AO:789
Table 1
Type of Backflow Protection Required
Degree of Hazard
Minimum
Type of
Backflow
Prevention
Sewage and Hazardous Substances:
Premises where the public water system is
used to supplement the reclaimed water
supply
AG
Premises where there are waste water
pumping and/or treatment plants and there is
no interconnection with the potable water
system. This does not include a single family
residence that has a sewage lift pump. A RP
may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved
by the health agency and the Water
Department.
AG
Premises where reclaimed water is used and
there is no interconnection with the potable
water system. A RP may be provided in lieu of
an AG if approved by the health agency and
the Water Department.
AG
Premises where hazardous substances are
handled in any manner in which the
substances may enter a potable water system.
This does not include a single family
residence that has a sewage lift pump. A RP
may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved
by the health agency and the Water
Department.
AG
Premises where there are irrigation systems
into which fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides
are, or can be, injected
RP
Auxiliary Water Supplies:
Premises where there is an unapproved
auxiliary water supply which is
interconnected with the public water system.
A RP or DC may be provided in lieu of an AG if
approved by the health agency and the Water
Department.
AG
§ 23-1.25 COMPTON § 23-1.25
AO:790
Table 1
Type of Backflow Protection Required
Degree of Hazard
Minimum
Type of
Backflow
Prevention
Premises where there is an unapproved
auxiliary water supply and there are no
interconnections with the public water
system. A DC may be provided in lieu of a RP
if approved by the health agency and the
Water Department.
RP
Fire Protection Systems:
Premises where the fire system is directly
supplied from the public water system and
there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply
on or to the premises (not interconnected)
DC
Premises where the fire system is supplied
from the public water system and
interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary
water supply. A RP may be provided in lieu of
an AF if approved by the health agency and
the Water Department.
AG
Premises where the fire system is supplied
from the public water system and where
either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps
which take suction from the private reservoirs
or tanks are used
DC
Premises where entry is restricted so that
inspections for cross-connections cannot be
made with sufficient frequency or at
sufficiently short notice to assure that crossconnections
do not exist
RP
Premises where there is a repeated history of
cross-connections being established or
reestablished
RP
(b) Two or more services supplying water from different street
mains to the same building, structure, or premises through
which an interstreet main flow may occur, shall have at least a
standard check valve on each water service to be located
adjacent to and on the property side of the respective meters.
Such check valve shall not be considered adequate if backflow
protection is deemed necessary to protect the Water
Department's mains from pollution or contamination; in such
§ 23-1.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.25
AO:791
cases, the installation of approved backflow devices at such
service connections shall be required.
d. Backflow Prevention Devices.
1. Approved Backflow Prevention Devices.
(a) Only backflow prevention devices which have been approved
by the Water Department shall be acceptable for installation by
a water user connected to the Water Department's potable
water system.
(b) The Water Department will provide, upon request, to any
affected customer a list of approved backflow prevention
devices.
2. Backflow Prevention Device Installation.
(a) Backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a manner
prescribed in Section 7603, Title 17 of the California Code of
Regulations. Location of the devices should be as close as
practical to the user's connection. The Water Department shall
have the final authority in determining the required location of
a backflow prevention device.
(1) Air-Gap Separation (AG) - The air-gap separation shall be
located on the user's side of and as close to the service
connection as is practical. All piping from the service
connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and
be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from
any point between the service connection and the air-gap
separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate a
distance of at least two pipe diameters of the supply inlet,
but in no case less than one inch above the overflow rim of
the receiving tank.
(2) Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Device
(RP) - The approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device shall be installed on the user's side of
and as close to the service connection as is practical. The
device shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches above
grade and not more than 36 inches above grade measured
from the bottom of the device and with a minimum of 12
inches side clearance. The device shall be installed so that
it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water
supplied from any point between the service connection
and the RP device shall be protected in a manner approved
by the Water Department.
(3) Double Check Valve Assembly (DC) - The approved double
check valve assembly shall be located as close as practical
to the user's connection and shall be installed above grade,
§ 23-1.25 COMPTON § 23-1.25
AO:792
if possible, and in a manner where it is readily accessible
for testing and maintenance. If a double check valve
assembly is put below grade it must be installed in a vault
such that there is a minimum of six inches between the
bottom of the vault and the bottom of the device, so that
the top of the device is no more than a maximum of eight
inches below grade, so that there is a minimum of six
inches of clearance between the other side of the device
and the side of the vault. Special consideration must be
given to double check valve assemblies of the "Y" type.
These devices must be installed on their "side" with the
test cocks in a vertical position so that either check valve
may be removed for service without removing the device.
Vaults which do not have an integrated bottom must be
placed on a three-inch layer of gravel.
3. Backflow Prevention Device Testing and Maintenance.
(a) The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which,
backflow prevention devices are installed, shall have the
devices tested by a person who has demonstrated competency
in testing of these devices to the Water Department. Backflow
prevention devices must be tested at least annually and
immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The Water
Department may require a more frequent testing schedule if it
is determined to be necessary. No device shall be placed back
in service unless it is functioning as required. A report in a
form acceptable to the Water Department shall be filed with
the Department each time a device is tested, relocated or
repaired. These devices shall be serviced, overhauled or
replaced whenever they are found to be defective, and all costs
of testing, repair and maintenance shall be borne by the water
user.
(b) The Water Department will supply affected water users with a
list of persons acceptable to the Department to test backflow
prevention devices. The Department will notify affected
customers by mail when annual testing of a device is needed
and also supply users with the necessary forms which must be
filled out each time a device is tested or repaired.
4. Backflow Prevention Device Removal.
(a) Approval must be obtained from the Water Department before
a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated or
replaced.
(1) Removal: The use of a device may be discontinued, and the
device removed from service, upon presentation of
sufficient evidence to the Department to verify that a
§ 23-1.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.25
AO:793
hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the
future.
(2) Relocation: A device may be relocated following
confirmation by the Department that the relocation will
continue to provide the required protection and satisfy
installation requirements. A retest will be required
following the relocation of the device.
(3) Repair: A device may be removed for repair, provided the
water use is either discontinued until repair is completed
and the device is returned to service, or the service
connection is equipped with other backflow protection
approved by the Department. A retest will be required
following the repair of the device.
(4) Replacement: A device may be removed and replaced
provided the water use is discontinued until the
replacement device is installed. All replacement devices
must be approved by the Department and must be
commensurate with the degree of hazard involved.
e. User Supervisor. At all premises where it is necessary, in the opinion of
the Water Department, a user supervisor shall be designated by and at
the expense of the water user. This user supervisor shall be responsible
for the monitoring of the backflow prevention devices and for avoidance
of cross-connections. In the event of contamination or pollution of the
drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the
Department shall be promptly notified by the user supervisor so that
appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination.
The water use shall inform the Department of the user supervisor's
identity on, as a minimum, an annual basis and whenever a change
occurs.
f. Administrative Procedures.
1. Water System Survey.
(a) The Water Department shall review all requests for services to
determine if backflow protection is needed. Plans and
specifications must be submitted to the Department upon
request, for review of possible cross-connection hazards as a
condition of service for new service connections. If it is
determined that a backflow prevention device is necessary to
protect the public water system, the required device must be
installed before service will be granted.
(b) The Water Department may required an on-premise inspection
to evaluate cross-connection hazards. The Department will
transmit a written notice requesting an inspection
appointment to each affected water user. Any customer who
cannot or will not allow an on-premise inspection of their
§ 23-1.25 COMPTON § 23-1.25
AO:794
piping system shall be required to install the backflow
prevention device the Department considers necessary.
(c) The Water Department may, at its discretion, require a
reinspection for cross-connection hazards of any premise to
which it serves water. The Department will transmit a written
notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected
water user. Any customer who cannot or will not allow an onpremise
inspection of their piping system shall be required to
install the backflow prevention device the Department
considers necessary.
2. Customer Notification - Device Installation.
(a) The Water Department will notify the water user of the survey
findings, listing corrective action to be taken if required. A
period of 60 days will be given to complete all corrective action
required, including installation of backflow prevention devices.
(b) A second notice will be sent to each water user who does not
take the required corrective action prescribed in the first
notice within the sixty-day period allowed. The second notice
will give the water user a two-week period to take the required
corrective action. If no action is taken within the two-week
period, the Department may terminate water service to the
affected water user until the required corrective actions are
taken.
3. Customer Notification - Testing and Maintenance.
(a) The Water Department will notify each affected water user
when it is time for the backflow prevention device installed on
their service connection to be tested. This written notice shall
give the water user 30 days to have the device tested and
supply the water user with the necessary form to be completed
and resubmitted to the Department.
(b) A second notice shall be sent to each water user who does not
have their backflow prevention device tested as prescribed in
the first notice within the thirty-day period allowed. The
second notice will give the water user a two-week period to
have the backflow prevention device tested. If no action is
taken within the two-week period, the Department may
terminate water service to the affected water user until the
subject device is tested.
g. Water Service Termination.
1. General. When the Water Department encounters water users that
represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water
supply that cannot be immediately abated, the Department shall
institute the procedure for discontinuing water service.
§ 23-1.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.25
AO:795
§ 23-1.26. Resale of Water. [Ord. #1176, § 7417]
No customer shall resell water furnished by the department without first
obtaining in writing the express permission of the department to do so.
§ 23-1.27. Waste of Water. [Ord. #1176, § 7418]
2. Basis for Termination. Conditions or water uses that create a basis
for water service termination shall include, but are not limited to,
the following:
(a) Refusal to install a required back-low prevention device.
(b) Refusal to test a backflow prevention device.
(c) Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention device.
(d) Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention.
(e) Direct or indirect connection between the public water system
and a sewer line.
(f) Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public
water system and a system or equipment containing
contaminants.
(g) Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public
water system and an auxiliary water system.
(h) A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the
public water system.
3. Water Service Termination Procedures.
(a) For conditions (a), (b), (c) or (d) above the Department will
terminate service to a customer's premises after two written
notices have been sent specifying the corrective action needed
and the time period in which it must be done. If no action is
taken within the allowed time period, water service may be
terminated.
(b) For conditions (d), (e), (f), (g) or (h) above, the Department will
take the following steps:
(1) Make reasonable effort to advise water user of intent to
terminate water service.
(2) Terminate water supply and lock service valve. The water
service will remain inactive until correction of violations
has been approved by the Department.
a. Each and every customer shall at all times maintain in good repair all
his water pipes, faucets, valves, plumbing fixtures and other water
appliances to prevent waste of water. Where any customer willfully
§ 23-1.25 COMPTON § 23-1.27
AO:796
§ 23-1.28. Unincorporated Territory. [Ord. #1176, § 7419]
Unincorporated territory outside the service area of the Compton Municipal
Water Department may be served only with the consent of and in the
manner determined by the Council of the City.
§ 23-1.29. Right to Serve. [Ord. #1176, § 7420]
The City reserves the right to supply water service, from the municipally
owned water system, to any area within the incorporated boundary of the
City, excluding any area served by a water utility holding a valid franchise
from the City to serve such area.
§ 23-1.30. Temporary Service. [Added by Ord. #1552, § 7421; Ord.
#1558]
Where temporary meters are to be set on an existing service lateral, a
charge of $10 will be made for the installation and removal of a 3/4 inch
or one inch meter. Temporary services may apply to a ten-day period. In
the event extra days are needed, a person or persons must reapply to
the Compton Municipal Water Department for regular water service. Upon
failure by that person or persons to notify the Department to terminate
temporary service or services, a charge of $1.50 a day shall be charged
before normal services, at the property for which temporary services was
requested, can be initiated by the Department.
§ 23-1.31. Field Notice Charge. [Added by Ord. #1747, § 1; Ord.
#2295 § 16]
The City Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, from time to time
determine and fix the amount to be assessed as fees if the Water
Department is required to deliver a forty-eight-hour notice on a delinquent
account. Said charge shall become due and payable on the next bill
rendered.
§ 23-1.32. Water Conservation. [Ord. #1851, § 1; Ord. #1868, § 1]
wastes water in any manner, or neglects, the water may be shut off and
sealed by the department and may not be turned on again until wasteful
practices have been discontinued or until repairs have been made to
the satisfaction of the Water Superintendent.
b. The willful or negligent waste of water within the City is prohibited.
a. Statement of Policy and Declaration of Purpose.
1. The Compton Municipal Water Department (hereinafter "Water
Department") obtains approximately 50% of the potable water
needed to serve its customers from The Metropolitan Water District
of Southern California (hereinafter "Metropolitan").
§ 23-1.27 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.32
AO:797
2. The general welfare requires that the water resources available to
the City of Compton (hereinafter "City"), be put to the maximum
beneficial use, to the extent to which they are capable and that the
waste or unreasonable uses, must be prevented. The conservation
of water must be practiced so that the limited supply of water will
be available to serve the interests of the citizens of the City of
Compton and for the public welfare.
3. The purpose of this subsection is to provide a mandatory water
conservation plan limiting the amount of water which may be
delivered to customers to protect the health, welfare and safety of
the community.
4. The Compton City Council (hereinafter "City Council"), finds that
this subsection and actions taken hereafter are exempt from the
provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970 as
specific actions necessary to prevent or mitigate an emergency
pursuant to Section 15307.
b. Water Shortage Emergency Findings.
1. The City Council finds and determines that a water shortage
emergency could exist based upon the occurrence of one or more of
the following conditions:
(a) A general water supply shortage takes place due to increased
demand or limited supplies.
(b) Distribution or storage facilities of the City become
inadequate.
(c) A major failure or contamination of the supply, storage, and/or
distribution facilities of Metropolitan or the City.
c. Authorization for a Water Conservation Ordinance. Pursuant to Section
375 et seq. of the Water Code of the State of California, the Compton
City Council is authorized to adopt and enforce the provisions of this
subsection as adopted by Ordinance 1851.
d. General Prohibition. No customer of the Compton Municipal Water
Department shall cause, use or permit the use of water from the water
system in a manner contrary to any provision of this subsection or in an
amount in excess of that use permitted by any curtailment provisions
then in effect pursuant to action taken by the City Council in
accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
e. Phase I Shortage.
1. A Phase I Shortage shall be declared when the City Council, upon
the recommendation of the City Manager and General Manager of
the Municipal Water Department, determines that it is likely that it
will suffer a shortage of 5% in water supplies.
§ 23-1.32 COMPTON § 23-1.32
AO:798
2. The following curtailments on the use of water shall be in effect
during a Phase I Shortage:
(a) There shall be no hose washing of sidewalks, walkways,
driveways, parking areas or other paved surfaces, except as is
required for sanitary purposes;
(b) Washing of motor vehicles, trailers, boats and other types of
mobile equipment shall be done only with a handheld bucket or
a hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses,
except that washing may be done at the immediate premises of
a commercial car wash or with reclaimed water.
(c) No water shall be used to clean, fill or maintain levels in
decorative fountains, ponds, lakes or other similar aesthetic
structures unless such water is part of a recycling system.
(d) No restaurant, hotel, cafe, cafeteria or other public place
where food is sold, served or offered for sale, shall serve
drinking water to any customer unless expressly requested.
(e) All customers of the Compton Water Department shall
promptly repair all leaks from indoor or outdoor plumbing
fixtures.
(f) No lawn, landscape, or other turf area shall be watered more
often than every other day. Specifically, all customers with an
even address number shall water on even calendar dates of the
month, and all customers with an odd address number shall
water on odd calendar dates of the month. On the 31st of the
month, there shall be no watering, unless reclaimed water is
used. No watering shall be done between the hours of 10:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; except that the provision shall not apply to
commercial nurseries, golf courses and other water-dependent
industries.
(g) No customer of the Compton Municipal Water Department
shall cause or allow the water to run off landscape area into
adjoining streets, sidewalks or other paved areas due to
incorrectly directed or maintained sprinklers or excessive
watering.
f. Phase II Shortage.
1. A Phase II Shortage shall be declared when the City Council, upon
the recommendation of the City Manager and General Manager of
the Water Department determines, that it is likely that it will suffer
a shortage of greater than 5%, but less than 10% in water supplies.
2. The following curtailments on the use of water shall be in effect
during a Phase II Shortage:
§ 23-1.32 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.32
AO:799
(a) The curtailments listed in Subsection 23-1.32e2 shall be in
effect, and no watering shall be done between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
(b) Commercial nurseries, golf courses and other water-dependent
industries shall be prohibited from watering lawn, landscape
or other turf areas more often than every other day; and no
watering shall be done between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m.; except that there shall be no restriction on watering
with reclaimed water.
3. No customer shall cause, use, or permit the use of water from the
Compton Water Department for any purpose in an amount in excess
of 95% of the amount used on the customers premises during the
corresponding billing period in the 1990 calendar year (Base Year).
4. Single-family residential customers who use less than 15 units per
month (i.e. billing period) are exempt from Subsection 23-1.32f3.
5. Any customer who was not a customer on the premises, for which
service was billed by the Water Department during the base period,
shall be assigned the same base for such or similar premises, and
the Water Department shall have the further discretion to adjust
such base in the event such customer's use of the premises is
substantially different from the previous use.
g. Phase III Shortage.
1. A Phase III Shortage shall be declared when the City Council, upon
the recommendation of the City Manager and General Manager of
the Water Department determines, that it is likely that it will suffer
a shortage of greater than 10% but less than 20%.
2. The following curtailments on the use of water shall be in effect
during a Phase III Shortage:
(a) The curtailments listed in Subsection 23-1.32e2 shall be in
effect, except that the restrictions on watering lawn,
landscape, and other turf areas shall be modified to prohibit
watering more often than every other day; and, no watering
shall be done between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
(b) Commercial nurseries, golf courses and other water-dependent
industries shall be prohibited from watering lawn, landscape
or other turf areas more often than every other day; and no
watering shall be done between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m.; except that there shall be no restriction on watering
with reclaimed water.
(c) The use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to fire
fighting and related activities and other uses of water for
§ 23-1.32 COMPTON § 23-1.32
AO:800
municipal purposes shall be limited to activities necessary to
maintain the public health, safety and welfare.
3. No customer shall cause, use, or permit the water from the
Compton Water Department for any purpose in an amount in excess
of 90% of the amount used on the customers premises during the
corresponding billing period in the 1990 calendar year (Base Year).
4. Single-family residential customers who use less than 14 units per
month (i.e. billing period) are exempt from Subsection 23-1.32h3.
5. Any customer who was not a customer on the premises for which
service was billed by the Water Department during the base period
shall be assigned the same base for such or similar premises, and
the Water Department shall have the further discretion to adjust
such base in the event such customer's use of the premises is
substantially different from the previous use.
h. Phase IV Shortage.
1. A Phase IV Shortage shall be declared when the City Council, upon
the recommendation of the City Manager and General Manager of
the Water Department determines, that it is likely that it will suffer
a shortage greater than 20%, but less than 30%.
2. The following curtailments on the use of water shall be in effect
during a Phase IV Shortage:
(a) The curtailments listed in Subsection 23-1.32e2 shall be in
effect, except that the restrictions on watering lawn,
landscape, and other turf areas shall be modified to prohibit
watering more often than every third day; and, no watering
shall be done between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;
except that there shall be no restrictions on watering with
reclaimed water.
(b) Commercial nurseries, golf courses and other water-dependent
industries shall be prohibited from watering lawn, landscape
or other turf areas more often than every third day; and no
watering shall be done between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m.; except that there shall be no restriction on watering with
reclaimed water.
(c) The use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to fire
fighting and related activities and other uses of water for
municipal purposes shall be limited to activities necessary to
maintain the public health, safety and welfare.
3. No customer shall cause, use, or permit the use of water from the
Compton Water Department for any purpose in an amount in excess
of 85% of the amount used on the customers premises during the
corresponding billing period in the 1990 calendar year (Base Year).
§ 23-1.32 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.32
AO:801
4. Single-family residential customers who use less than 13 units per
month (i.e. billing period) are exempt from Subsection 23-1.32h3.
5. Any customer who was not a customer on the premises for which
service was billed by the Water Department during the base period
shall be assigned the same base for such or similar premises, and
the Water Department shall have the further discretion to adjust
such base in the event such customer's use of the premises is
substantially different from the previous use.
i. Phase V Shortage.
1. A Phase V Shortage shall be declared when the City Council, upon
the recommendation of the City Manager and General Manager of
the Water Department, determines, that it is likely that it will suffer
a shortage of 30%, but less than 40%.
2. The following curtailments on the use of water shall be in effect
during a Phase V Shortage:
(a) The curtailments listed in Subsection 23-1.32e2 shall be in
effect, except that the restrictions on watering lawn,
landscape, and other turf areas shall be modified to prohibit
watering more often than every third day; and no watering
shall be done between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;
except that there shall be no restrictions on watering with
reclaimed water.
(b) Commercial nurseries, golf courses and other water-dependent
industries shall be prohibited from watering lawn, landscape
or other turf areas more often than every third day; and no
watering shall be done between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m.; except that there shall be no restriction on watering with
reclaimed water.
(c) The use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to fire
fighting and related activities and other uses of water for
municipal purposes shall be limited to activities necessary to
maintain the public health, safety and welfare.
3. No customer shall cause, use, or permit the use of water from the
Compton Water Department for any purpose in an amount in excess
of 80% of the amount used on the customers premises during the
corresponding billing period in the 1990 calendar year (Base Year).
4. Single-family residential customers who use less than 12 units per
month (i.e. billing period) are exempt from Subsection 23-1.32i3.
5. Any customer who was not a customer on the premises for which
service was billed by the Water Department during the base period
shall be assigned the same base for such or similar premises, and
the Water Department shall have the further discretion to adjust
§ 23-1.32 COMPTON § 23-1.32
AO:802
such base in the event such customer's use of the premises is
substantially different from the previous use.
j. Phase VI Shortage.
1. A Phase VI Shortage shall be declared when the City Council, upon
the recommendation of the City Manager and General Manager of
the Water Department determines, that it is likely that it will suffer
a shortage of 40% up to 50%.
2. The following curtailments on the use of water shall be in effect
during a Phase VI Shortage:
(a) The curtailments listed in Subsection 23-1.32e2 shall be in
effect, except that the restrictions on watering of lawn,
landscape, and other turf areas shall be modified to prohibit
watering more often than every fourth day; and, no watering
shall be done between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;
except that there shall be no restrictions on watering with
reclaimed water.
(b) Commercial nurseries, golf courses and other water-dependent
industries shall be prohibited from watering lawn, landscape
or other turf areas more often than every third day; and no
watering shall be done between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m.; except that there shall be no restriction on watering with
reclaimed water.
(c) The use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to fire
fighting and related activities and other uses of water for
municipal purposes shall be limited to activities necessary to
maintain the public health, safety and welfare.
3. No customer shall cause, use, or permit the use of water from the
Compton Water Department for any purpose in an amount in excess
of 75% of the amount used on the customers premises during the
corresponding billing period in the 1990 calendar year (Base Year).
4. Single-family residential customers who use less than seven units
per month (i.e. billing period) are exempt from Subsection
23-1.32j3.
5. Any customer who was not a customer on the premises for which
service was billed by the Water Department during the base period
shall be assigned the same base for such or similar premises, and
the Water Department shall have the further discretion to adjust
such base in the event such customer's use of the premises is
substantially different from the previous use.
k. Relief from Compliance.
1. A customer may file an application for relief from any provisions of
this subsection. The General Manager of the Compton Municipal
§ 23-1.32 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.32
AO:803
Water Department (hereinafter "Manager") shall develop such
procedures as he/she considers necessary to resolve such
applications and shall, upon the filing by a customer of an
application for relief, take such steps as he or she deems
reasonable to resolve the application for relief. The decision of the
City Manager shall be final.
2. The application for relief may include a request that the customer
be relieved, in whole or in part, from the water use curtailment,
provisions of Subsections 23-1.32f2, g2, h2, i2 and j2.
3. In determining whether to grant relief, and the nature of any relief,
the Manager shall take into consideration all relevant factors
including, but not limited to:
(a) Whether any additional reduction in water consumption will
result in unemployment;
(b) Whether additional members have been added to the
household;
(c) Whether any additional landscaped property has been added to
the property since the corresponding billing period of the 1990
calendar year;
(d) Changes in vacancy factors in multi-family housing;
(e) Increased number of employees in commercial, industrial,
governmental offices;
(f) Increased production requiring increased process water;
(g) Water used during new construction;
(h) Adjustments to water use caused by emergency health or
safety hazards;
(i) First filling of a permit-constructed swimming pool, and
(j) Water use necessary for reasons related to family illness or
health.
In order to be considered, an application for relief must be filed with the Compton Municipal
Water Department 15 days from the date the provision from which relief is sought becomes
applicable to the applicant. No relief shall be granted unless the customer shows that he or
she has achieved the maximum practical reduction in water consumption other than in the
specific areas in which relief is being sought. No relief shall be granted to any customer who,
when requested by the Manager, fails to provide any information necessary for resolution of
the customer's application for relief.
l. Failure to Comply.
1. The following shall occur during Phase II, III or IV:
§ 23-1.32 COMPTON § 23-1.32
AO:804
If water is used during any billing period in excess of the water use
curtailment amount as set forth in Subsections 23-1.32f2, g2, h2, i2
and j2 for that period, a surcharge shall be imposed on said excess
at double the basic rate established by the Water Department for
each billing unit (100 cubic feet) of water.
(a) If the curtailment amount is exceeded for three consecutive
billing periods during drought conditions, the Water
Department, in addition to said surcharge, may either install a
device on the meter to restrict the flow of water or discontinue
service to the account upon written notification to the
customer.
2. The following shall occur during Phase V and VI:
If water is used during any billing period in excess of the water
use curtailment amount as set forth in Subsections 23-1.32f2, g2,
h2, i2 and j2 for that period, a surcharge shall be imposed on said
excess at triple the basic rate established by the Water Department
for each billing unit (100 cubic feet) of water.
(a) If the curtailment amount is exceeded for three consecutive
billing periods during drought conditions, the Water
Department, in addition to said surcharge, may either install a
device on the meter to restrict the flow of water or discontinue
service to the account upon written notification to the
customer.
3. Violation by any customer of the water use prohibitions of
Subsections 23-1.32e2, f2, g2, h2, i2 and j2 shall be penalized as
follows:
(a) First Violation. The Compton Municipal Water Department may
issue a written notice of the fact of a first violation during a
water storage emergency whether it be Phase I, Phase II,
Phase III, Phase IV, Phase V, and Phase VI to the customer.
(b) Second Violation. For a second violation during a Phase I,
Phase II, Phase III or Phase IV water emergency shortage, the
Compton Municipal Water Department shall impose a
surcharge of $35. During Phase V and VI a surcharge if $50
shall be imposed. These charges will be added to the water bill.
(c) Third and Subsequent Violation. For a third and each
subsequent violation during any one water shortage
emergency, the Compton Municipal Water Department shall
install a flow restricting device on the service of the customer
at the premises at which the violation occurred for a period of
not less than 48 hours. The Compton Municipal Water
Department shall charge the customer the reasonable costs
incurred for installing and for removing the flow-restricting
§ 23-1.32 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.32
AO:805
devices and for restoration of normal service. The charge shall
be paid before normal service can be restored.
In addition, the surcharge provided in Subsections 23-1.321.1 and 12
shall be imposed.
4. The Compton Municipal Water Department shall give notice of
violation to the customer committing the violation as follows:
(a) Notice of violation of the water use curtailment provisions of
this paragraph or Subsections 23-1.32e2, f2, g2, h2, i2 and j2
shall be given in writing in the following manner;
(1) If the customer is absent from or unavailable at the
premises at which the violation occurred, by leaving a
copy with some person of suitable age and discretion at
the premises and sending a copy through the regular mail
to the address at which the customer is normally billed.
(2) If a person of suitable age or discretion cannot be found,
then by affixing a copy in a conspicuous place at the
premises at which the violation occurred and also sending
a copy through the regular mail to the address at which
the customer is normally billed.
(b) The notice shall contain a description of the facts of the
violation, a statement of the possible penalties for each
violation and a statement informing the customer of his right to
a hearing on the merits of the violation pursuant to Subsection
23-1.32m.
m. Hearing Regarding Violations.
1. Any customer receiving notice of a second or subsequent violation
of Subsections 23-1.32e2, f2, g2, h2, i2 and j2 shall have the right
to a hearing by the Manager of the Compton Municipal Water
Department or his or her designee, within 15 days of mailing or
other delivery of the notice of violation.
2. The customer's timely written request for a hearing shall
automatically stay installation of a flow-restricting device on the
customer's premises until the Manager renders his or her decision.
3. The customer's timely written request for a hearing shall not stay
the imposition of a surcharge unless within the time period to
request a hearing, the customer deposits with the Compton Water
Department money in the amount of any unpaid surcharge due. If it
is determined that the surcharge was wrongly assessed, the
Department shall refund any money deposited to the customer.
4. The decision of the City Manager shall be final except for judicial
review.
§ 23-1.32 COMPTON § 23-1.32
AO:806
§ 23-1.33. Adoption of Sections 490 though 495, Chapter 2.7
(Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance), Division 2, Title 23
(Waters) in the California Code of Regulations. [Added 6-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 2308]
That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of
the City Clerk, being marked and designated as "Title 23. Waters, Division
2. Department of Water Resources, Chapter 2.7. Model Water Efficient
Landscape Ordinance" (hereinafter the "Model Water Efficient Landscape
Ordinance), published in the California Code of Regulations, is hereby
adopted as the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (MWELO) for
regulating water conservation for the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy,
equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all landscapes in the City
of Compton, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
and penalties for the violation thereof; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of such Model Water Efficient Landscape
Ordinance (MWELO) and supplements thereto hereinafter published are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
chapter, except as the same may hereafter be modified or amended.
§ 23-2. SEWER REGULATIONS.
§ 23-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. #856, § 7500]
As used in this section:
n. Reservation of Rights. The rights of the Water Department hereunder
shall be in addition to any other right of the Water Department
including those to discontinue service.
o. Additional Water Shortage Measures. The City Council of the City of
Compton may order implementation of water conservation measures in
addition to those set forth in this Code. Such additional water
conservation measures shall be implemented by an ordinance passed by
the City Council.
p. Public Health and Safety Not to be Affected. Nothing in this subsection
shall be construed to require the City of Compton or the Compton
Municipal Water Department to curtail the supply of water to any
customer when such water is required by that customer to maintain an
adequate level of public health and safety.
q. Severability. If any part of this Code or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is for any reason held invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the validity of the remainder of the subsection
or the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances
shall not be affected.
§ 23-1.32 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-2.1
AO:807
BUILDING — Shall mean a structure entirely separated from any other
structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors
or windows or similar openings.
CESSPOOL — Shall mean an excavation in the ground made for receiving
crude sewage and so constructed that the solid matter of the sewage is
retained while the liquid portion is permitted to seep through the walls.
CONNECTING SEWER — Shall mean that portion of the sewer system that
extends from the "Y" or "T" branch of a lateral sewer to the curb or property
line.
FIXTURE — Shall mean any plumbing or sewer outlet requiring a trap or
vent.
HABITATION — Shall mean a room, or combination of rooms, used or
designed to be used for the occupancy of human beings.
HOUSE COURT — Shall mean the group of buildings of a housecourt which
is hereby defined to be a parcel or area of land upon which are grouped
three or more habitations used or designed to be used for occupancy by
families, and upon which parcel or area the vacant or unoccupied portion
thereof surrounding or abutting upon said habitations, is used or intended
to be used in common by the inhabitants thereof.
HOUSE SEWER — Shall mean that part of a horizontal piping beginning
at a point two feet from the outer wall of a building and extending to
its connection with the connecting sewer at curb or property line or to a
cesspool.
LATERAL SEWER — Shall mean a branch of the main sewer system
provided with "Y" and "T" branches for connecting sewers.
LOT — Shall mean any piece or parcel of land as bounded, defined or shown
upon the latest map, plat or deed recorded in the office of the County
Recorder of Los Angeles County.
OUTFALL SEWER — Shall mean a main trunk line sewer of the City,
provided to collect the sewage from the lateral sewers and conduct same to
the outlet or disposal plant.
PRIVATE SEWER — Shall mean a sewer laid by private parties to serve one
or more buildings that are not situated adjacent to a lateral sewer, and may
be constructed on either private or public property.
PUBLIC SEWER — Shall mean an outfall or a lateral sewer.
§ 23-2.2. Registration. [Ord. #856, § 7501]
a. No person shall engage in the business of constructing sewers or
cesspools, or install, alter or repair any sewer in the City unless such
person shall have first registered at the office of the Sewer Inspector of
the Department of Building and obtained a certificate of registration as
hereinafter provided.
§ 23-2.1 COMPTON § 23-2.2
AO:808
§ 23-2.3. Fee; Certificate. [Ord. #856, § 7502]
Every person before being entitled to be registered or to obtain a Certificate
of Registration shall pay to the City Council at the office of the Department
of Buildings, a registration fee of $50. The Sewer Inspector shall briefly
examine the applicant and if after such examination it appears that the
applicant has had sufficient experience and is familiar with the provisions of
this section, the Sewer Inspector shall upon payment of the registration fee
and approval of the bond as hereinbefore provided, issue to such applicant
a Certificate of Registration for a period of one year from date of issue.
§ 23-2.4. Non-Transferable. [Ord. #856, § 7503]
Every such Certificate of Registration is valid only for the person named
therein and is not transferable except upon the sale of the complete
business of the holder thereof. Every such Certificate shall be null and void
upon the second conviction of the person named therein for violating any of
the provisions of this article.
§ 23-2.5. Permits. [Ord. #856, § 7504]
No person shall do any sewer or cesspool work in connection with any
building or structure, or disconnect any building or structure from any
sanitary sewer within the City, without first obtaining from the Department
of Buildings a written permit to do so. Such permit shall state the location
by street and number of the building or structure where such work is to be
done and shall be valid only for the location so stated.
§ 23-2.6. Failure to Secure Permit. [Ord. #856, § 7505]
If any person shall do any sewer or cesspool work or shall make any
alterations or changes in or additions to any sewer or cesspool work without
b. The owner of the premises for which a cesspool is being constructed
need not be registered as provided for in Paragraph a hereof, provided
such owner actually performs the work himself, but sewer connection to
cesspools shall be governed by Paragraph a hereof.
c. Applications for registration shall be made to the Sewer Inspector and
shall state the name and business address of the applicant and such
application shall be accompanied by a Surety Bond executed to the City.
In form the bond must be "joint" and "several" in the sum of $1,000, and
the bond must be conditioned that the whole or any part thereof shall
be paid to the City or any person who has suffered damage by reason of
the violation of any of the provisions of this section. The bond shall not
be void upon the first recovery but may be used and recovered from
time to time by any person who has suffered damages as herein
referred to in his own name until the whole penalty is exhausted. The
sufficiency of the surety on any such bond shall be approved by the City
Council and every such bond shall be approved as to form by the City
Attorney.
§ 23-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-2.6
AO:809
first having obtained a permit as required by this section, no permit shall be
subsequently issued for same and no inspection of same shall be made until
double the amount of fee otherwise provided by this section is paid for such
permit and inspection.
§ 23-2.7. Permit Void After 60 Days. [Ord. #856, § 7506]
If any work authorized by any permit issued as hereinbefore provided is not
commenced within 60 days from date thereof, such permit shall thereupon
become void and a new permit must be obtained before work is commenced.
Every person engaged in constructing house or sewer connections, which
require excavating in streets in the City, shall upon obtaining a sewer permit
obtain an excavation permit as provided by § 20-3, Street Excavations.
§ 23-2.8. Permit Fees. [Ord. #856, § 7507]
Every person making application for a sewer or cesspool permit shall, at
the time such application is made, deposit with the Sewer Inspector the
amount of the fees hereinafter provided. Upon completion of the work, the
person doing such work shall make application for inspection of same. Such
inspection will be given within 24 hours from the time of filing request for
same.
For a permit to construct any connecting or house sewer or to connect to
any connecting sewer, house sewer or private sewer, any building or other
structure: $2.
Provided, that where the plumbing from a garage, outhouse or other
accessory building on the same lot containing not more than three fixtures
is to be connected to an existing house sewer, the fee shall be $1.
For a permit to construct a private sewer and connect same to an outfall
sewer the fee shall be $5.
For a permit to excavate for or construct a cesspool or septic tank: $1.
For a permit to connect a house sewer to a cesspool or septic tank: $1.
For a permit to disconnect a building from a house sewer: $1.
The above fees shall include the fee for one inspection of the work, for which
a permit was issued. For any additional inspection required, a fee of $1 for
every such additional inspection shall be charged.
§ 23-2.9. Requirements for Inspection. [Ord. #856, § 7508]
No person shall backfill any trench or excavation made for the purpose of
laying sewer of any kind, or constructing a cesspool or septic tank, until the
pipe laid therein shall be inspected by the Sewer Inspector and a certificate
of acceptance given. The entire length of the sewer and all connections from
and including the "Y" at the main sewer or entrance to cesspool or septic
§ 23-2.6 COMPTON § 23-2.9
AO:810
tank, to the joint at which cast iron soil pipe begins shall be fully exposed
for inspection.
If any section of the pipe or any portion of the work is not according to
the specifications which are a part of this section or does not conform
to the requirements of this section, the sewer builder or the cesspool or
septic tank builder shall make such changes or additions as are necessary to
conform to the provisions herein contained, and shall, after such changes or
additions are made, leave the pipe and work exposed and do no backfilling
until inspection has been made and acceptance given as above provided.
§ 23-2.10. Unlawful to Occupy. [Ord. #856, § 7509]
§ 23-2.11. Sand Traps. [Ord. #856, § 7510]
Every wash rack in a livery stable or garage must be connected with a
public sewer and shall be provided with a sand trap. The sand trap shall be
constructed of concrete and shall be not less than 12 inches by 12 inches
with a depth of not less than 18 inches and shall be constructed under the
supervision and to the satisfaction of the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 23-2.12. Repairs. [Ord. #856, § 7511]
Whenever any sewer or drain is obstructed by roots or is found to be frozen
or defective so that sewage or drainage escapes therefrom, the Sewer
Inspector shall order such sewer or drain to be repaired or replaced. If such
sewer or drain be of terra cotta or other clay product, the Sewer Inspector
may direct its replacement with cast iron, if by so doing the recurrence of
the objectionable condition may be prevented.
Whenever a pipe, joint, fitting or appurtenance is found to be broken,
defective or inoperative, its repair and replacement shall be ordered by the
Sewer Inspector.
§ 23-2.13. Surface Water. [Ord. #856, § 7512]
No roof drain or surface water drain shall be connected to any sanitary
sewer. No person, except a properly authorized official or employee of the
a. All buildings or other structures which contain any plumbing fixtures
must be connected with a public sewer when such sewer is constructed
and ready for use on any street, right-of-way or other public place upon
which the premises abut.
Where there is no public sewer as aforesaid, such building or buildings
must be connected to a sanitary cesspool or septic tank as in this Article
provided.
b. No person shall use or occupy any house or building in the City in which
or for which any sewer has been constructed unless said sewer
connection has been inspected and passed by the Sewer Inspector and
the final certificate of acceptance issued.
§ 23-2.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-2.13
AO:811
City, shall remove any covering from any manhole or flush tank connecting
with a sewer in the City.
§ 23-2.14. House Connections. [Ord. #856, § 7513]
a. No connection from any building or structure in the City shall hereafter
be made to any public sewer, which connection or any portion thereof
shall be in, under or upon any lot other than the lot or lots on which
such building or structure is located.
b. Every building or structure in or for which any plumbing affecting the
sanitary condition of such building or structure has been installed, shall
be separately or independently connected with an accepted City sewer,
if such sewer is constructed and available for use on any public street,
right-of-way, or other public place abutting upon the lot upon which
such building or structure is situated, or if no such sewer has been
constructed and ready for use as aforesaid, said building shall be
connected with a septic tank or cesspool situated on said lot as
hereinafter provided for, providing, however, that when a building or
buildings are in the rear of other building, which other building is
connected with an accepted City sewer or in case said building or
buildings so in the rear do not front upon a street in which there is an
accepted City sewer, the plumbing work of the building or buildings in
the rear may be connected with the plumbing work of the building in
front by permission of the Sewer Inspector.
c. Two houses or buildings may be connected with a public sewer through
one connection when, in the opinion of the Sewer Inspector, such
double connection is practical. Such double connection shall be made at
the curb line by the use of a "Y." Where more than two buildings are to
be connected to one house sewer and there are more than three fixtures
in each building, the house sewer from the joint where the two sewer
lines connect to the connecting sewer, shall be six inches internal
diameter.
d. All buildings constituting a house court, as defined by this Article, may
be connected to the public sewer by means of one private sewer located
upon the lot or parcel of land upon which such house court is located,
such private sewer to be not less than six inches internal diameter.
e. Where a sewer line is run under any building or where a building is
subsequently erected over an existing sewer line, that part of the sewer
line under the building, and for a distance of two feet outside the outer
walls of same shall be of cast iron pipe as required for the drain lines
within buildings and shall be laid with leaded joints by a registered
plumber. The internal diameter of any sewer pipes shall be the same as
those of the cast iron pipes leading out of the building, to which pipes
they connect, and of which they form a continuation; provided, that in
no case shall their diameter be less than four inches from the leadingout
pipe to the property line; and not less than six inches in diameter
from the property line to the main sewer line when combination curb
§ 23-2.13 COMPTON § 23-2.14
AO:812
§ 23-2.15. Oil Clogging Sewers. [Ord. #856, § 7514]
No person shall allow any oil, grease, refuse, or any other material to enter
the sewer lines, which materials will tend to clog up the sewers or have a
chemical or mechanical tendency to counteract the treatment of the sewage
in the disposal plant.
No person shall allow or permit any sewer laterals or house connections to
remain open while being laid or being connected with the main sewer line.
§ 23-2.16. Septic Tanks. [Ord. #856, § 7517]
No person shall construct any septic tank until a plan and specifications for
such septic tank shall have been submitted to and approved by the Sewer
Inspector and a permit issued therefor. Such plans shall clearly show the
proposed location of such septic tank with reference to the property lines of
all buildings on the lots which such septic tank is to serve.
and sidewalk is installed or from curb lines to main sewer line when
there is a parking space 2 1/2 feet or more between curb and sidewalk.
All connections of schools and public buildings shall be not less than six
inches in diameter from the leading-out pipe to the main sewer.
f. All outside drains shall be laid with a fall of not less than 1/4 of an inch
per foot toward the sewer or cesspool; provided, that if such rate of fall
is impracticable, and the City Sewer Inspector shall determine that
sanitary drainage can be obtained with a less rate of fall, then upon the
City Sewer Inspector's written authorization, a lesser gradient than 1/4
inch of an inch to the foot may be used, but in no case shall the rate of
fall be less than 1/8 inch per foot.
g. The joint of each section of vitrified piping shall be completely and
uniformly filled with cement composed of one part of Portland cement
of standard quality and one part of sand and shall be watertight. Every
such joint shall be thoroughly cleaned on the inside so as to permit a
smooth surface and not form any obstruction to flow. The sections shall
be laid true to line and grade. When pipe is laid in water, every joint
shall be thoroughly calked with oakum and cemented. Patent asphalt
joints will be permitted to be used.
All changes in direction in outside drains shall be made with curves or
"Y" branches and provided with cleanouts, and all connections shall be
made with "Y" branches and 1/8 bends. In all cases the line of pipe shall
be straight from the property line to the "Y" in the sewer. Where a "Y"
cannot be found, one length of pipe may be removed, and a new "Y"
joint of proper dimension shall be inserted and carefully cemented in
place by means of oakum and cement. Connections may also be made
with the main sewer by the use of a properly constructed saddle. Such
saddle shall be thoroughly cemented inside and outside to the main
pipe so as to make a smooth watertight connection.
§ 23-2.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-2.17
AO:813
§ 23-2.17. Resubdivisions. [Ord. #856, § 7518]
Whenever property already served with a public sewer is resubdivided so as
to make it necessary or convenient that a private sewer or house connection
be constructed in a different location than that anticipated when the public
sewer was constructed, the private sewer or house connection necessary or
convenient to serve such resubdivision lots as are not adjacent to the public
sewer already constructed shall be constructed along the rear line of such
lots, or in the street or parking area along the front thereof, or at some
other location designated by the Sewer Inspector. Such private sewer or
house connection shall be constructed under the supervision of the Sewer
Inspector, and the City hereby reserves the right to make extensions of, or
connections to, such private sewer or house connection at any time.
§ 23-2.18. Sewer Facilities. [Ord. #856, § 7519]
One or more property owners desiring to have public sewer facilities
constructed to serve their property and not wishing to have such sewer
facilities constructed under an assessment district and bond issue, may
deposit with the City Treasurer an amount which in the estimation of the
City Engineer will be sufficient to cover the entire cost of such construction,
including preparation of plans and specifications. Such moneys so deposited
shall not draw interest.
§ 23-2.19. Plans. [Ord. #856, § 7520]
If in the opinion of the City Engineer the sewer facilities are necessary and
the construction thereof feasible, he shall prepare plans and specifications
for the construction thereof.
§ 23-2.20. Bids. [Ord. #856, § 7521]
Immediately after the plans and specifications are prepared the City
Engineer shall call for bids and submit the same to the City Council for
acceptance or rejection.
§ 23-2.21. Additional Deposits. [Ord. #856, § 7522]
If the amount estimated by the City Engineer is not sufficient to cover
the entire cost of such sewer construction, including the preparation of
plans and specifications, either at a bid price or by force account, the
City Engineer shall notify the property owner, or owners, involved of the
additional amount necessary to do such work, and within 10 days thereafter
such property owner, or owners, shall deposit such additional amount with
the City Treasurer. Should the property owner or owners fail to deposit
such additional amount, the City Engineer shall present a statement to the
City Treasurer showing all expenditures on behalf of the proposed sewer
construction. The City Treasurer shall thereafter refund to the property
owner or owners all the money deposited by them, except that amount
shown by the City Engineer's statement to have been expended on behalf of
the proposed construction.
§ 23-2.17 COMPTON § 23-2.22
AO:814
§ 23-2.22. Account. [Ord. #856, § 7523]
When the full amount necessary to cover the entire cost of such
construction has been so deposited with the City Treasurer, it shall be
placed in a guaranteed deposit account against which only charges for the
sewer construction shall be drawn.
§ 23-2.23. Prorating Costs. [Ord. #856, § 7524]
Immediately after the completion of the sewer construction, the City
Engineer shall prorate the entire cost thereof against all lots or property
that may ultimately be benefited by direct connection to the sewer in
proportion to the frontage thereof, or if the lots be irregular in shape, then
in such manner as may, in the opinion of the City Engineer, provide an
equitable distribution of costs.
§ 23-2.24. Refunds. [Ord. #856, § 7525]
After all proper charges for the entire cost of such sewer construction have
been paid, the excess, if any, remaining on deposit with the City Treasurer
shall be refunded to the property owner, or owners in proportion to the
amount contributed by him or them.
§ 23-2.25. Connection. [Ord. #856, § 7526]
In no event shall any owner of property benefited by the sewer be permitted
to connect thereto without first paying the prorated charge placed against
said property by the City Engineer.
§ 23-2.26. Contract. [Ord. #856, § 7527]
Immediately upon the completion of such sewer construction the property
owner, or owners, who have contributed thereto shall enter into a contract
with the City as hereinafter provided.
a. The City Engineer is hereby authorized on behalf of the City to enter
into a written contract with said property owner, or owners, depositing
said funds as aforesaid, which said contract shall contain among other
things the following conditions:
1. No property owner shall be permitted to connect to the sewer
unless he has first paid the charge placed against the property as
provided in this section.
2. That the City shall endeavor to collect the charges and cause the
sum so collected to be refunded as provided in Paragraph (c)
hereof, but shall not be liable for any failure to make such collection
or refund.
3. That all sums so paid by any property owner shall be refunded to
the property owner, or owners, who deposited the amount
necessary to complete said sewer in the proportion that the amount
§ 23-2.22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-2.26
AO:815
§ 23-2.27. Notices. [Ord. #856, § 7528]
Any person entitled to any refund under the provisions of this section shall
keep on file with the City Treasurer his correct mailing address. In the
event the City Treasurer is unable to locate any person entitled to receive a
refund hereunder, he shall send a written notice to the person by registered
mail, to the last address filed by such person with him. Such written notice
shall contain a statement of the amount of such refund and shall also advise
such person that if the refund is not called for within one year from the
date of such notice, all rights of such person to that particular refund will
be forfeited. After the period of one year, the City Treasurer shall pay
said amount total to all other persons entitled to refunds in their proper
proportion as in this section provided. If there be no other persons entitled
to refunds hereinunder, the same shall be paid into the general fund of the
City.
§ 23-2.28. Connection With Public Sewer. [Ord. #856, § 7529]
No person shall connect any property with the public sewer without first
obtaining the permit and paying the connection charge required by this
section.
§ 23-2.29. Capital Improvement Program Charges. [Ord. #2183, § 2]
The following rates and charges are hereby fixed and established as the
rates and charges to be made and collected for the capital improvement
program for the sewer system:
contributed bears to the entire cost, until the property owner, or
owners, have received the entire amount deposited by them less
that portion prorated against their own property.
4. If the entire amount has not been refunded as in Paragraph 3 above
provided within a period of 15 years from the date of said contract,
the same shall terminate and be of no further force or effect.
5. No charge made or payment collected shall bear interest.
a. Capital improvement program charges for all sewer services furnished
in the City shall be billed monthly at the following rates in the following
fiscal years for each 100 cubic feet of water used as determined by the
Water Department:
FY
2008/
2009
FY
2009/
2010
FY 2010/
2011
FY
2011/
2012
FY
2012/
2013
FY 2013/
2014
Per 100
cu. feet
$ - $0.285 $0.563 $0.601 $0.617 $0.638
b. The rates and charges established pursuant to Paragraph (a) this
section are in addition to, and shall have no effect on, any other rates
§ 23-2.26 COMPTON § 23-2.29
AO:816
§ 23-3. SANITARY SEWER OVERFLOW REDUCTION PROGRAM.
§ 23-3.1. Title. [Ord. #2280]
This section shall be known as the "Sanitary Sewer Overflow Reduction
Program" Ordinance of the City of Compton.
§ 23-3.2. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. #2280]
The purpose of this section is to reduce sewer system overflow incidents
by: (1) developing and implementing a preventative maintenance program
to assure optimum functioning of the sewer system; (2) prevent illicit
discharges and obstructions to the sewer system associated with food
serving and other establishments; and (3) require the proper design and
construction of sewers and connections from such establishments. The
intent of this section is to protect the environment by minimizing the release
of pathogens contained in sewer discharges to receiving waters such as the
Los Angeles River and its tributary and Compton Creek, on which persons
depend for a variety of beneficial uses.
§ 23-3.3. Definitions. [Ord. #2280]
The following are definitions of terms used in this section:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Shall mean schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management
practices to: (1) prevent or reduce the introduction of fats, oils, and grease
to the sewer facilities; and (2) to prevent and reduce sanitary sewer
overflows to municipal storm drain system and receiving waters through
preventative maintenance.
DISCHARGER — Shall mean any person who discharges or causes a
discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer. Discharger
shall mean the same as User.
ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean commercial or industrial establishments,
as well as retail food service establishments, that may discharge fats, oils
and grease.
FOG — Shall mean fats, oils and grease. Any substance such as a vegetable
or animal product that is used in, or is a by-product of, the cooking or food
preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a
change in temperature or other condition is included in this definition.
FOOD GRINDER — Shall mean any device installed in the plumbing or
sewage system for the purpose of grinding food waste or food preparation
by-products for the purpose of disposing it in the sewer system. Also means
a garbage disposal.
and charges the City may currently levy or hereafter establish in
connection with the operation and maintenance of the sewer system.
§ 23-2.29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-3.3
AO:817
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS — Shall mean those establishments
primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making
available for consumption by individuals including, but not limited to a
restaurant, commercial kitchen, caterer, hotel, school, hospital, prison,
correctional facility, or care institution. Such establishments use one or
more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods),
baking (all methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie, cooking, broiling (all
methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching.
GREASE CONTROL DEVICE — Shall mean any grease interceptor, grease
trap or other approved mechanism, device, or process, which attaches to, or
is applied to, wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which
is to trap, collect, or treat FOG prior to it being discharged into the sewer
system.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — Shall mean a multicompartment device that
is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located,
according to the current edition of the California Plumbing Code,
underground between any establishment, including food service
establishments that generate FOG, and the connection to the sewer system.
GREASE TRAP — Shall mean a grease interceptor that is designed to
retain grease from one to a maximum of four fixtures. Grease traps serve
individual fixtures.
INFILTRATION — Shall mean water entering a sewer system, including
sewer service connections, from the ground through such means as
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls.
INFLOW — Shall mean water entering a sewer system through a direct
stormwater runoff connection to the sanitary sewer, which may cause an
almost immediate increase in wastewater flows.
MANIFEST — Shall mean that receipt which is retained by the generator of
wastes for disposing recyclable wastes or liquid wastes as required by the
City.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean any structure planned or under
construction for which a sewer connection permit has not been issued.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or public agency, including the State of California and the
United States of America.
SAMPLE POINT — Shall mean a location approved by the City, from which
wastewater can be collected that is representative in content and
consistency of the entire flow of wastewater being sampled.
SAMPLING FACILITIES — Shall mean structure(s) provided at the user's
expense for the City or user to measure and record wastewater constituent
mass concentrations, collect a representative sample, or provide access to
plug or terminate the discharge.
§ 23-3.3 COMPTON § 23-3.3
AO:818
SEWER LATERAL — Shall mean a building sewer as defined in the latest
edition of the California Plumbing Code. It is the wastewater connection
between the building's wastewater facilities and a public sewer system.
SEWER OR SEWER SYSTEM — Shall mean any and all facilities used for
collecting, conveying, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and
sludge. This definition includes, but is not limited to, any property belonging
to the City used in the treatment, reclamation, reuse, transportation, or
disposal of wastewater, or sludge.
SLUDGE — Shall mean any solid, semisolid or liquid decant, subnate or
supernate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment
establishment.
WASTE — Shall mean sewage and any and all other waste substances,
liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of
human or animal nature, including such wastes placed within containers of
whatever nature prior to and for the purpose of disposal.
WASTEWATER — Shall mean the liquid and watercarried wastes of the
community and all constituents thereof, whether treated or untreated,
discharged into or permitted to enter a public sewer.
§ 23-3.4. FOG Discharge Requirement. [Ord. #2280]
No food service establishment shall discharge or cause to be discharged
into the sewer system FOG that accumulates and/or causes or contributes
to blockages in the sewer system or at the sewer system lateral, which
connects the food service establishment to the sewer system.
§ 23-3.5. Discharge Prohibitions. [Ord. #2280]
The following prohibitions shall apply to food service establishments that
generate FOG:
a. The use of food grinders in the plumbing system of new construction or
existing food service establishments generally is not prohibited but may
be prohibited later if the Director of Public Works determines that the
food grinder causes or contributes to sanitary sewer overflows.
b. Employees shall not pour, dispose, or place any food product, prepared
or unprepared, containing FOG materials into a sink or other device
equipped with a food grinder.
c. Introduction of any additives into any establishment's wastewater
system for the purpose of emulsifying FOG is prohibited unless
approved by the Director of Public Works.
d. Disposal of waste cooking oil into drainage pipes is prohibited. All
waste cooking oils shall be collected and stored properly in receptacles
such as barrels or drums for recycling or other acceptable methods of
disposal.
§ 23-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-3.5
AO:819
§ 23-3.6. FOG Fees. [Ord. #2280]
Food service establishments must pay:
§ 23-3.7. FOG Pretreatment for Food Service Establishments
Required. [Ord. #2280]
All new food service establishments are required to install, operate and
maintain an adequately sized and type of grease interceptor or equivalent
grease control device, approved by the Director of Public Works as deemed
necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this section.
§ 23-3.8. FOG Pretreatment for Industrial and Commercial
Facilities. [Ord. #2280]
Any existing or new industrial or commercial facility, except food service
establishments, that discharges FOG materials that have the potential to
cause blockages to the sewer system shall be required, at the discretion of
the Director of Public Works, to obtain an industrial waste discharge permit
from the Sanitation District of Los Angeles County, but such industrial
or commercial facility shall not be required to pay to a monthly FOG
wastewater fee or a FOG Control fee surcharge, unless such facility fails to
install a clarifier or other device that prevents the discharge of fat, oil, or
grease to the sewer system.
e. Discharge of wastewater from dishwashers to any grease trap or grease
interceptor is prohibited.
f. Discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of 140° F. to any
grease control device, including grease traps and grease interceptors,
is prohibited.
g. The use of biological additives for grease remediation or as a
supplement to interceptor maintenance is prohibited, unless written
approval for the Director of Public Works is obtained.
h. Discharge of wastes from toilets, urinals, wash basins, and other fixture
containing fecal materials to sewer lines intended for grease
interceptor service, or vice versa, is prohibited.
i. Discharge into the sewer system of any waste which has FOG as well as
solid materials removed from the grease control device is prohibited.
Grease removed from grease interceptors shall be waste hauled
periodically as part of the operation and maintenance requirements for
grease interceptors. Licensed waste haulers or an approved recycling
facility must be used to dispose of FOG, including waste cooking oil.
a. A wastewater discharge fee that may be set by ordinance or resolution
of the City Council to offset the costs of enforcing this section.
1. Any industrial or commercial establishment required to operate a
wastewater clarifier shall not be subject to such fee.
§ 23-3.5 COMPTON § 23-3.9
AO:820
§ 23-3.9. Single Parcels. [Ord. #2280]
Property owners of commercial properties or their official designee(s) shall
be responsible for the installation and maintenance of the grease
interceptor serving multiple establishments that are located on a single
parcel or for paying the FOG fee surcharge if there is no grease interceptor.
§ 23-3.10. New Construction. [Ord. #2280]
This section shall not be interpreted to allow new construction, remodeling
or change in operations without an approved grease interceptor unless the
Director of Public Works has determined in writing that it is impossible or
impracticable to install or operate a grease interceptor for the subject food
service establishment under the provisions of this section.
§ 23-3.11. Sewer System Overflows and Cleanup Costs. [Ord. #2280]
Establishments found to have contributed to a sewer blockage, sanitary
sewer overflow, or any sewer system interferences resulting from the
discharge of wastewater or waste containing FOG, may be ordered to install
and maintain a grease interceptor, and may be subject to a plan to abate
the nuisance and prevent any future health hazards created by sewer line
failures and blockages, SSOs or any other sewer system interferences. If the
City must act to contain and/or clean up an SSO caused by blockage of a
private or public sewer lateral or system, or at the request of the property
owner or operator of the establishment, or because of the failure of the
property owner or establishment to abate the condition causing a threat
to the health, safety, welfare, or property of the public, or because of an
unauthorized discharge of FOG, the City's costs for such abatement will be
entirely borne by the property owner or operator of the establishment, and
said cost will constitute a debt to the City and become due and payable upon
the City's request for reimbursement of such costs.
§ 23-3.12. Nuisance Declared. [Ord. #2280]
Sanitary sewer overflows may cause threat and injury to public health,
safety, and welfare of life and property and are hereby declared public
nuisances.
§ 23-3.13. Grease Interceptor Requirements. [Ord. #2280]
All grease interceptors must comply with all relevant City ordinances, and
the current edition of the California Plumbing Code, if applicable.
a. Grease interceptor sizing and installation shall conform to the current
edition of the California Plumbing Code. Grease interceptors shall be
constructed in accordance with the design approved by the Director of
Public Works or the City's Building Official or his/her designee and shall
have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease
retention and a sampling box.
§ 23-3.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-3.13
AO:821
§ 23-3.14. Grease Interceptor Maintenance Requirements. [Ord.
#2280]
b. The grease interceptor shall be installed at a location where it shall be
at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of
accumulated grease.
c. Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall be
provided over each grease interceptor chamber and sanitary tee. The
access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed
and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes
shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease
removal, and wastewater sampling activities.
a. Grease interceptors shall be maintained in an efficient operating
condition by periodic removal of the full content of the interceptor
which includes wastewater accumulated FOG, floating materials,
sludge and solids. All existing and newly installed grease interceptors
shall be maintained in a manner consistent with a maintenance
frequency approved by the Director of Public Works pursuant to this
section. No FOG that has accumulated in a grease interceptor shall be
allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, sewer system, storm drain, or
public right-of-way during maintenance activities.
b. All establishments with grease interceptors may be required to submit
data and information necessary to establish the maintenance frequency
of the grease interceptors and shall be determined in one of the
following methods:
1. Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped-out and cleaned at a
frequency such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation
does not exceed 25% of the total liquid depth of the grease
interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention
time and required available volume is maintained to effectively
intercept and retain FOG discharged to the sewer system.
2. All establishments with a grease interceptor shall maintain their
grease interceptor not less than once every six months. Grease
interceptors shall be pumped out completely and cleaned quarterly
when the frequency described in above Paragraph b1. The
maintenance frequency shall be adjusted when sufficient data have
been obtained to establish an average frequency based on the
requirements described in above Paragraph b1. The Director of
Public Works may change the maintenance frequency at any time to
reflect changes in actual operating conditions. Based on the actual
generation of FOG from an establishment, including food service
establishments that generate FOG, the maintenance frequency may
increase or decrease.
3. If the grease interceptor, at any time, contains FOG and solids
accumulation that do not meet the requirements described above
§ 23-3.13 COMPTON § 23-3.14
AO:822
§ 23-3.15. Monitoring, Reporting, and Record Keeping. [Ord.
#2280]
Establishments are subject to the following compliance monitoring
requirements:
in Paragraph a, any establishment, including food service
establishments, generating FOG, shall be required to service its
grease interceptor(s) immediately to assure that all fats, oils,
grease, sludge, and other materials are completely removed from
the grease interceptor. If deemed necessary, the Director of Public
Works may also increase the maintenance frequency of the grease
interceptor from the current frequency.
a. Establishments, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works, may
be required to construct and maintain in proper operating condition, at
the establishment's sole expense, flow monitoring, constituent
monitoring and/or sampling facilities.
b. The location of the monitoring or metering facilities shall be subject to
approval by the Director of Public Works.
c. Establishments may also be required by the Director of Public Works to
submit waste analysis plans, contingency plans, and meet other
necessary requirements to ensure proper operation and maintenance of
the grease control device or grease interceptor and compliance with
this section.
d. Establishments shall not increase the use of water or in any other
manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute
for treatment to achieve compliance with this section.
e. The Director of Public Works may require periodic reporting of the
status of implementation of best management practices implemented at
establishments.
f. The Director of Public Works may require visual monitoring at the sole
expense of the establishment which generates FOG to observe the
actual conditions of any establishment's, including food service
establishments that generate FOG, sewer lateral and sewer lines
downstream.
g. The Director of Public Works may require reports for self-monitoring of
wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics of the establishment
needed for determining compliance with this section. Failure by the
establishment to perform any required monitoring, or to submit
monitoring reports required by the Director of Public Works constitutes
a violation of this section and would be cause for the City to initiate all
necessary tasks and analyses to determine the wastewater constituents
and FOG characteristics for compliance with any conditions and
requirements specified in this section. The establishment shall be
§ 23-3.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-3.15
AO:823
§ 23-3.16. Best Management Practices Required. [Ord. #2280]
All establishments shall implement best management practices in its
operation to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system and in
accordance with the requirements and guidelines established by the City in
an effort to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system, which shall,
at a minimum, include the following:
responsible for any and all expenses of the City in undertaking such
monitoring tasks and analyses, including the preparation of reports.
h. Other reports may be required, such as compliance schedule progress
reports, FOG control monitoring reports, and any other reports deemed
reasonably appropriate by the Director of Public Works to ensure
compliance with this section.
i. Establishments are required to keep all manifests, receipts and invoices
of all cleaning, maintenance, and grease removal of/from the grease
control device, disposal carrier and disposal site location for no less
than five years.
j. Establishments shall, upon request, make the manifests, receipts and
invoices available to the Director of Public Works or his/her designee.
These records may include:
1. A logbook of grease control device cleaning and maintenance
practices.
2. A record of best management practices being implemented
including employee training.
3. Copies of records and manifests of waste hauling interceptor
contents and/or waste cooking oil disposal.
4. Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG
and solids accumulation in the grease interceptors.
5. Any other information deemed appropriate by the Director of
Public Works to ensure compliance with this section.
k. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement, representation,
record, report, plan or other document that is filed with the City, or to
tamper with or knowingly render inoperable any grease control device,
monitoring device or method or access point required under this
section.
a. Installation of drain screens. Drain screens shall be installed on all
drainage pipes in food preparation and kitchen areas.
b. Segregation and collection of waste cooking oil. All employees must
comply with all provisions of this section relating to segregation,
disposal and recycling of FOG.
§ 23-3.15 COMPTON § 23-3.16
AO:824
§ 23-3.17. Inspection and Sampling. [Ord. #2280]
The Director of Public Works or his/her designee may inspect or order
the inspection and sample the wastewater discharges of any establishment
subject to this section to ascertain whether the intent of this section is being
met and the establishment is complying with all requirements.
c. Disposal of food wastes. All food waste shall be disposed of directly into
the trash or garbage, and not into sinks (unless equipped with food
grinders), or into toilets.
d. Food grinders. All employees shall not pour, dispose, or place any food
product, prepared or unprepared, containing FOG materials into a sink
equipped with a food grinder.
e. Employee training. Employees of the food service establishment shall
be trained within 180 days of the effective date of this section, and
twice each calendar year thereafter, on the following subjects:
1. How to "dry wipe" pots, pans, dishware and work areas before
washing to remove grease.
2. How to properly dispose of food waste and solids prior to disposal
in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking and odors.
3. The location and use of absorption products to clean under fryer
baskets and other locations where grease may be spilled or
dripped.
4. How to properly dispose of grease or oils from cooking equipment
into a grease receptacle such as a barrel or drum without spilling.
5. Training shall be documented and employee signatures retained
indicating each employee's attendance and understanding of the
practices reviewed. Training records shall be available for review
at any reasonable time by the Director of Public Works or his/her
designee.
f. Maintenance of kitchen exhaust filters. Filters shall be cleaned as
frequently as necessary to be maintained in good operating condition.
The wastewater generated from cleaning the exhaust filter shall be
disposed of properly.
g. Kitchen signage. Best management practices and waste minimization
practices shall be posted conspicuously in the food preparation and
dishwashing areas at all times.
h. Employee Training Verification. Employee training shall be documented
and employee signatures retained indicating each employee's
attendance and understanding of the practices reviewed. Training
records shall be available for review at any reasonable time by the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee.
§ 23-3.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-3.17
AO:825
a. Inspection of Premises. The Director of Public Works or his/her
designee shall be authorized to enter the premises where wastewater is
created or discharged during all times the establishment is open,
operating, or any other reasonable time, to determine compliance with
the provisions of this section. Such inspection may include, but not be
limited to, inspecting, sampling, metering, monitoring, reviewing,
photographing, video recording of waste generating processes,
treatment facilities, discharge locations, storage areas, storage
containers, chemicals and wastes, as well as copying any records,
reports, test results or other data.
b. Metering and Sampling Devices. The Director of Public Works or his/
her designee shall have the right to place or order the placement on the
establishment's property or other locations as determined by the
Director of Public Works or designee such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling or metering operations. Where any establishment has
security measures in force, the establishment shall make necessary
arrangements so that representatives of the City shall be permitted to
enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific
responsibilities.
c. Access to Establishment. Persons or occupants of premises where
wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the Director of Public
Works, or his/her designee, reasonable access to all parts of the
wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of
inspection, as set forth in Subsection a above, during all times the
establishment is open, operating, or any other reasonable time.
d. Access to Documents for Inspection. In order for the Director of Public
Works or his/her designee to determine compliance with the provisions
of this section, the establishment shall make available for inspection
and copying by the City all records required to be created and
maintained under this section, including, but not limited to: manifests,
receipts and invoices relating to the cleaning, maintenance and
inspection of the grease control devices or interceptors, as well as,
notices, monitoring reports, waste manifests, and records including
those related to wastewater generation, and wastewater disposal. All
such records shall be kept for a minimum of five years.
e. Sampling and Inspection Frequency. Sampling and inspection of any
establishments, including food service establishments that generate
FOG shall be conducted in the time, place, manner, and frequency
determined at the sole discretion of the Director of Public Works or his/
her designee. Any sample taken from a sample point is considered to be
representative of the discharge to the public sewer.
f. Right of entry. No person shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse
entrance to the Director of Public Works or his/her designee attempting
to inspect any facility involved directly or indirectly with a discharge of
wastewater to the City's sewer system as provided for in this section.
§ 23-3.17 COMPTON § 23-3.18
AO:826
§ 23-3.18. Notification of Spill. [Ord. #2280]
In the event an establishment is unable to comply with any permit condition
or provision of this chapter and/or section due to a breakdown of
equipment, accidents, or human error or the establishment has reasonable
opportunity to know that his/her/its discharge will exceed the discharge
provisions of this chapter and/or section, the discharger shall immediately
notify the Director of Public Works or his/her designee by telephone. If
the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or result
in sewer blockages or SSOs, the discharger shall immediately notify the
County of Los Angeles Health Department and/or other appropriate County
department and the City.
§ 23-3.19. Enforcement. [Ord. #2280]
This Chapter shall be enforced to the extent described below:
a. Agency Notification. Confirmation of this notification shall be made in
writing to the Director of Public Works no later than five working days
from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the
date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps
were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are
being taken to prevent the problem from recurring.
b. Non-Relief From Expense, Loss, Damage, or Liability. Such notification
shall not relieve the establishment of any expense, loss, damage or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the
City or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the establishment of any fees or other liability which
may be imposed by this chapter and/or section or other applicable law,
including any City ordinances or resolutions.
a. Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any provision of this
section, undertakes to conceal any violation of this section, continues
any violation of this section after notice thereof, or violates the terms,
conditions and requirements of any permit issued pursuant to this
chapter and/or section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
a fine of up to $1,000 or by imprisonment for a period of not more than
six months, or both.
b. Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any provision of this
section, undertakes to conceal any violation of this section, or continues
any violation of this section after notice thereof, shall reimburse the
City for any and all costs incurred by the City in responding to,
investigating, assessing, monitoring, treating, cleaning, removing, or
remediating any illicit discharge, illicit connection, or pollutant
discharged to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4),
causing or threatening to cause a receiving water exceedance, or
remediating any violation of this chapter and/or section. Such costs to
be paid to the City include all administrative expenses and all legal
§ 23-3.18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-3.19
AO:827
expenses, including costs and attorneys' fees, in obtaining compliance
and in litigation including all costs and attorneys' fees on any appeal.
c. Violations of this chapter and/or section may further be deemed to be a
public nuisance which may be abated by administrative or civil or
criminal action in accordance with the terms and provisions of this
Municipal Code and/or state law.
d. All costs and fees incurred by the City as a result of any violation of this
chapter and/or section which constitute a nuisance, including all
administrative fees and expenses and legal fees and expenses, shall
become a lien against the subject premises from which the nuisance
emanated and a personal obligation against the owner, in accordance
with Government Code Section 43000, et seq. The owner of record of
the premises subject to any lien shall receive notice of the lien prior to
recording, as required by Government Code Section 43000, et seq. The
City Attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or
enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for money judgment, or by
delivery to the county assessor of a special assessment against the
premises in accordance with the conditions and requirements of
Government Code Section 51800.
e. Any person acting in violation of this chapter and/or section may also be
acting in violation of the Clean Water Act or the California Porter-
Cologne Act (California Water Code Section 13000, et seq.) and the
regulations thereunder and other laws and regulations and may be
subject to damages, fines and penalties, including civil liability under
such other laws. The City Attorney is authorized to file a citizen's suit
pursuant to the Clean Water Act, seeking penalties, damages and
orders compelling compliance and appropriate relief.
f. Each separate discharge in violation of this section and each day a
violation of this section exists, without correction, shall constitute a
new separate violation punishable as a criminal offense and/or civil
violation.
g. Any person assessed a penalty under this section may dispute the
penalty by filing a written notice of appeal with the Director of Public
Works or other City official designated by the City Manager no later
than 30 days after the date of issue of the penalty. The notice of appeal
shall include any statements and evidence that the appellant wishes to
have considered in connection with the appeal. If, as a result of the
hearing, it is determined that the penalty was wrongly assessed, the
City shall refund any money previously paid in connection with the
penalty. The decision of the Hearing Examiner, appointed by the
Director of Public Works shall be final except for judicial review and
shall not be appealable to the City Council.
h. The City may utilize any and all other remedies as otherwise provided
by law.
§ 23-3.19 COMPTON § 23-3.20
AO:828
§ 23-3.20. Penalty Imposed On City By Regulatory Agency(ies).
[Ord. #2280]
Any person who discharges a waste which causes or contributes to the City
violating its discharge requirements established by any Regulatory Agency
with jurisdiction over the City incurring additional expenses or suffering
losses or damage to the facilities, shall be liable for any costs or expenses
incurred by the City, including regulatory fines, penalties, and assessments
made by other agencies or a court.
Chapter 24
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 24-1. FINDINGS. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
The City Council of the City of Compton finds and determines as follows:
a. That the City of Compton has a history and reputation for well-kept
properties and that the property values and the general welfare of this
community are founded, in part, upon the appearance and maintenance
of properties; and
b. That there appears a need for further emphasis on the maintenance of a
number of premises in that certain conditions, as described hereinafter,
have been found from place to place throughout the City; and
c. That the existence of such hereinafter described conditions are
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of
this City and contribute substantially and increasingly to the necessity
for expenditures for protection against hazards and diminution of
property values, prevention of crime and preservation of the public
health, safety and welfare and the maintenance of police, fire and
accident protection and that such problems are becoming increasingly
direct and substantial in significance and effect, and that the uses and
abuses of property as described herein reasonably relate to the proper
exercise of the police power in the protection of health, safety and
welfare of the public; and
d. That unless corrective measures are undertaken to alleviate such
existing conditions and particularly to avoid future problems in this
regard, the public health, safety and general welfare and specifically
the property values and social and economic standards of this
community will be depreciated; that the prosecution and abatement of
such conditions will enhance the appearance and value of such
properties rather than be a burden on the owners thereof and that the
prosecution and abatement of such conditions will also appreciate the
values and appearance of neighboring properties and benefit the use
and enjoyment of properties in the general area and will improve the
general welfare and image of the City; and that the abatement
§ 23-3.20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-1
AO:829
§ 24-2. MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY; NUISANCES.
§ 24-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
As used in this Chapter:
procedures set forth in this Chapter are reasonable and afford a
maximum of due process and procedural guarantees.
a. BUILDING – Shall mean any permanently located structure enclosed on
all sides by walls and having a roof.
b. CAMPER – Shall mean a structure designed to be mounted upon a
motor vehicle which provides facilities for human habitation and/or
camping purposes.
c. CITY MANAGER – Shall mean the City Manager of the City of Compton
or the City Manager's designee(s).
d. MAJOR VEHICLE REPAIR – Shall mean the repair and/or replacement
of an engine, transmission, power train, suspension, steering, or other
major automotive body components, such as fenders or other major
body parts in a car, van, truck, motorcycle, and/or other such vehicle.
e. OWNER – Shall mean any person(s) owning property, as shown on the
latest equalized property tax assessment roll and/or property profile.
For purposes of this Chapter, an owner shall also include a person(s)
having actual or apparent charge or control of real property as a tenant,
co-tenant, lessee, sub-lessee, or any other person with any right to
possession of real property, or a lease or contractual obligation to
maintain real property where a public nuisance exists on such property.
f. PERSON – Shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation,
association or other organization, however formed.
g. PROPERTY – Shall mean all personal and real property within the City
and shall include, in addition to any buildings and/or structures located
on such property, fences, walls and any other man-made device
included within the legal boundaries of the property under
consideration.
h. PUBLIC NUISANCE – Shall mean any act or condition which poses a
danger to the public health or safety, or is offensive to the senses, or an
obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property, including visual blight.
i. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE – Shall mean a motor home, trailer, truck
camper, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation
for recreational use or a park trailer designed for human habitation for
recreational or seasonal use.
§ 24-1 COMPTON § 24-2.1
AO:830
§ 24-2.2. Conditions Which Are Declared Nuisance. [Ord. #2174,
§ 1]
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, renting,
occupying or having charge or control of any property in the City of
Compton to maintain or to allow to be maintained, such property in such
manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon,
except as may be otherwise allowed by this Municipal Code:
j. STRUCTURE – Shall mean any construction other than a building which
requires location on the ground or which is attached to something
having a location on the ground.
k. TRAILER – Shall mean a vehicle designed for carrying persons or
property on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
l. UNREASONABLE PERIOD OF TIME – Shall mean, unless otherwise
specified, placing or leaving personal property or other discarded items
for a time period exceeding the maximum amount of time to correct,
remove or abate property or a condition as provided in City and/or State
laws.
m. VISUAL BLIGHT – Shall mean any unreasonable or unlawful condition
or use of premises or of building exteriors which by reason of its
appearance, as viewed at ground level from public streets or from
neighboring premises, is detrimental to the property of others.
a. Any building on which the condition of the paint or roof covering has
become so deteriorated as to permit decay, discoloration, excessive
checking, cracking or warping so as to render the building unsightly or
in a state of disrepair.
b. Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions and/or inviting
trespassers and/or malicious mischief.
c. Overgrown vegetation, cultivated or uncultivated, which is likely to
harbor rats, vermin or other nuisances, which constitutes a fire or
health hazard, danger to the public health, safety or welfare or which
causes detriment to neighboring properties or property values.
d. Trees or other vegetation obstructing visibility at an intersection, or
which restrict or impede access to public use of adjacent sidewalks or
streets, obstruct official traffic-control devices, or prevent access by
City street sweepers cleaning streets. Sidewalk access is impeded when
encroaching shrubbery, ground cover, tree branches and other such
vegetation cause less than a minimum clear area of five feet in width
and eight feet in height to be available for sidewalk traffic.
e. Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds and debris
constituting unsightly appearance, dangerous to public safety and
welfare, or detrimental to neighboring properties or property values.
§ 24-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-2.2
AO:831
f. Trailers, campers, recreational vehicles, boats and other mobile
equipment, or parts thereof, accumulated and/or stored for an
unreasonable period of time in yard areas or driveways visible from the
public right-of-way.
g. Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperable automobiles, trailers,
campers, recreational vehicles, boats or other mobile equipment, or
parts thereof, accumulated and/or stored for an unlawful period of time
in yard areas or driveways visible from the public right-of-way.
h. Any attractive nuisance dangerous to children and other persons,
including abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, machinery,
appliances, refrigerators and freezers, unfenced or otherwise
unprotected pools, spas, ponds, and excavations.
i. Broken or discarded furniture and/or household equipment remaining
in the front yard areas or side yard areas of corner lots for an
unreasonable period of time and visible from the public right-of-way.
j. Clotheslines in front yard areas and/or side yard areas of corner lots
and visible from the public right-of-way.
k. Lack of adequately maintained landscaping, turf, plant material, ground
cover or pavement so as to prevent blowing of excessive dust and/or
erosion.
l. Animals, other than permitted under Chapter 30 of this Code.
m. Open burning of trash, wood or other substances.
n. Garbage or trash containers stored in front or side yards and visible
from the public right-of-way except when placed in places of collection
at the times permitted.
o. Packing boxes, cardboard boxes, lumber, junk, trash, barrels, drums,
salvage materials or other debris stored in yards and visible from the
public right-of-way for an unreasonable period of time.
p. Maintenance of property including, but not limited to building exteriors
in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes
appreciable diminution of the property values of surrounding
properties or is materially detrimental to proximal properties and
improvement. This includes, but is not limited to the keeping, storing,
disposing of or the scattering over the property or premises any of the
following:
1. Lumber, junk, trash, debris or salvage materials;
2. Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as
automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or
containers;
3. Stagnant water or excavations;
§ 24-2.2 COMPTON § 24-2.2
AO:832
§ 24-2.3. Declaration of Public Nuisance. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
Any premises, in whole of in part, found to be maintained in violation of the
subsection 24-2.2 is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by
rehabilitation, correction, repair, demolition, removal or clearing pursuant
to the procedures set forth herein. The procedures for abatement shall not
be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the City from
enforcing other City ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other
manner as provided by law.
§ 24-2.4. Authorization of City Manager. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
The City Manager is authorized to administer the provisions of this Chapter.
The City Manager may appoint one or more City officials or other
designated individual(s) to act as his/her designee(s) in carrying out these
responsibilities.
§ 24-2.5. Service of Notices and Orders. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
Service of notices and orders required under this Chapter shall be upon the
person owning the property as such person's name and address appears
on the last equalized assessment roll and/or property profile, and upon
any person in charge, control or possession of the premises. Notices shall
be posted on the property and shall be given either by personal delivery
or by depositing a copy of the notice in the United States mail, with
postage thereon fully prepaid. If there is no such address, the notice may
be mailed to the owner in care of the property address. Service by mail is
4. Any device, decoration, design, fence, structure or vegetation
which is unsightly by reason of its condition or its inappropriate
location;
q. Maintenance of property so out of conformity with the maintenance
standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of
the enjoyment or use or property values of such adjacent properties;
r. Accumulation or storage of more than two automobiles for sale on the
property, unless authorized by law, whether public or private property;
s. Major vehicle repair and/or dismantling on any vehicle or boat in a
residential zone, where such activity can be seen from the street or
sidewalk or neighboring properties. No vehicle or boat repair may be
conducted in a customer parking lot serving an auto parts or other
store.
t. Maintenance of property in such a manner as to cause a hazard to the
public by obscuring visibility of intersections;
u. Maintenance of property in such condition as to be detrimental to the
public health, safety or general welfare or in such manner as to
constitute a public nuisance as defined by the California Civil Code
Section 3480.
§ 24-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-2.5
AO:833
complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail. Failure of any
person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings
hereunder.
§ 24-2.6. Abatement; Notice. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
Whenever the City Manager or his/her designee(s) determine that any
property within the City is being maintained in violation of the provisions of
this Chapter, he/she shall give written notice thereof to the owner(s) of the
property. The notice shall specify the condition or conditions to be corrected
or remedied and may also set forth suggested methods of correcting the
same and shall specify a reasonable period within which this must be
accomplished.
§ 24-2.7. Abatement; Hearing. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
If the owner fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the notice to correct
said violation(s), the City Manager or his/her duly authorized designee
who shall act as hearing officer, and who shall herein be referred to as
the "Hearing Officer" shall conduct a public hearing to ascertain whether
said violation(s) constitutes a public nuisance, the abatement of which is
appropriate under the police power of the City. Notice of said hearing
shall be served upon the owner thereof according to the provisions of this
Chapter.
§ 24-2.8. Abatement; Notice of Hearing. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
Notice of such abatement hearing shall be substantially in the following
form:
NOTICE OF HEARING TO DETERMINE EXISTENCE OF PUBLIC
NUISANCE AND TO ABATE IN WHOLE OR IN PART
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on the _______ day of _______________,
2_______, at the hour of _________, the Hearing Officer of the City of
Compton will hold a public hearing in the Community Meeting Room of
the Council Chambers of the Compton City Hall, located at 205 South
Willowbrook Avenue, Compton, California, to ascertain whether certain
premises situated in the City of Compton, State of California, known and
designated as ________________________, in said City, and legally described
as _________________________________, constitute a public nuisance subject
to abatement by the rehabilitation of such premises or by the correction,
repair, demolition, removal or clearing of buildings and/or structures
situated thereon. If said premises, in whole or in part, are found to
constitute a public nuisance as defined by this Chapter, and if the same
are not promptly abated by the owner, such nuisances may be abated by
municipal authorities, and the costs of rehabilitation, repair, demolition,
removal or clearing, plus incidental enforcement costs will be assessed
upon such premises and such costs will constitute a lien upon such land
until paid.
Said alleged violations consist of the following:
§ 24-2.5 COMPTON § 24-2.8
AO:834
The methods of abatement available are:
All persons having any objection to or interest in said matters are hereby
notified to attend the public hearing to be held on the ________ day of
______________, 2_______, at the hour of _______, when their testimony and
evidence will be heard and given due consideration.
Dated this ________________ day of __________, 2_______.
By:
Title of City Official:
§ 24-2.9. Abatement Hearing; Service of Notice. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
The City Manager or his/her designee(s) shall cause to be served upon the
owner of the property a copy of the notice of hearing. The notice of hearing
shall be served at least 15 days before the time fixed for the hearing. Proof
of service of the notice may be made by declaration filed with the Hearing
Officer.
§ 24-2.10. Abatement by Owner Prior To Hearing. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
Any owner shall have the right to abate the nuisance in accordance with the
notice of hearing to abate at his own expense, provided the same is done
prior to the time that the matter is set for public hearing before the Hearing
Officer. On receipt of notice from the property owner that the nuisance has
been abated in this manner, the City Manager or his/her designee(s) shall
cause the same to be inspected to verify compliance. If he/she finds that
compliance has been achieved, he/she shall terminate the proceedings.
§ 24-2.11. Abatement; Hearing Procedure. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
a. At the time stated in the notice, the Hearing Officer shall hear and
consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests, and shall receive
testimony from owners, witnesses, City personnel and interested
persons relative to the alleged public nuisance and to proposed
rehabilitation, correction, repair, demolition, removal or clearing of the
premises. The hearing may be continued from time to time. The hearing
may be informally conducted and technical rules of evidence need not
apply. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing
or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to
support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in a civil
action in a California court of competent jurisdiction. Hearings held
pursuant to this Chapter shall be recorded by a video or audiorecording
device unless the City chooses to use a court reporter.
§ 24-2.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-2.11
AO:835
§ 24-2.12. Appeal to City Council; Procedure. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
b. Upon the conclusion of such hearing, the Hearing Officer shall, based
upon such hearing, determine whether the property, or any part
thereof, as maintained, constitutes a public nuisance as defined herein.
If the Hearing Officer finds that such public nuisance does exist and
that there is sufficient cause to rehabilitate, correct, repair, demolish,
remove or clear the same, the Hearing Officer shall prepare findings
and an order requiring that the same be abated in a reasonable period
of time as set forth in the findings and order making such
determination. The order shall further inform the owner that the
administrative and incidental costs and expenses incurred so far in
abating the nuisance, and which are proved in accordance with
subsection 24-3.5, shall be assessed against the property and result in a
lien until paid. The order shall also specifically direct the owner to
abate the nuisance by rehabilitation, correction, repair, demolition,
removal or clearing in the manner set forth in the order.
The order shall state that if the nuisance is not abated, it will be
demolished, removed and/or cleared and abated by the City. The order
shall state that the additional costs and expenses of removal and
abatement by the City, including any additional administrative and
incidental expenses, together with interest on the entire amount owing,
will also be assessed and result in a lien upon the property until paid.
The order shall set forth the time within which the work shall be
commenced and completed. The order shall inform the property owners
of their right to appeal the order ordering liability for incidental and
administrative expenses incurred thus far, and ordering the abatement
of a public nuisance, to the City Council pursuant to provisions herein.
The determination of the Hearing Officer shall be final unless appealed
to the City Council in the manner provided for in this Chapter. A copy
of such determination ordering the abatement of the nuisance shall
be served upon all the owners pursuant to subsection 24-2.5 of this
Chapter.
a. Appeal. The owner of the property or premises affected by the decision
of the Hearing Officer, or any interested party, including any member of
the City Council or the City Manager, may appeal the decision of the
Hearing Officer to the City Council by filing at the office of the City
Clerk within 15 calendar days from the date of the service of such
decision, a written, dated appeal containing:
1. A heading in the words: "Before the City Council."
2. A caption reading: "Appeal of __________" giving the names of all
appellants participating in the appeal.
3. A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the
appellants in the property or the premises involved in the notice
and order.
§ 24-2.11 COMPTON § 24-2.12
AO:836
4. A statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order
or action protested, together with any material facts supporting the
contentions of the appellant(s).
5. The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official
mailing addresses.
6. The verification of at least one appellant as to the truth of the
matters stated in the appeal.
b. Hearing on Appeal. As soon as practicable after receiving the written
appeal, the City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the City
Council, which date shall be not less than 10 nor more than 30 days
following the filing of the appeal. Notice of the time and place of the
hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to
each appellant by the City Clerk, either by causing a copy of such notice
to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof,
postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his address shown on
the appeal. Upon the receipt by the City Clerk of the written appeal, the
Clerk shall prepare an administrative record which shall consist of a
transcript of the proceedings before the Hearing Officer, copies of the
written materials submitted at the hearing, if any, and a copy of the
Hearing Officer's determination. The administrative record shall be
provided to each member of the City Council. Continuances of the
hearing may be granted by the City Council on the motion of either
party for good cause shown or on the City Council's own motion. The
hearing may be informally conducted and technical rules of evidence
need not apply.
1. At the time of the hearing the City Council shall permit any
interested person to present written or oral arguments relating to
the appeal, but shall not permit the introduction of additional
evidence unless a showing is made by the offering party that the
evidence could not have reasonably been presented to the Hearing
Officer at the time and place of that hearing, or the additional
evidence is reasonably calculated to show that there has been a
substantial change in the condition of the property since the time of
the hearing held by the Hearing Officer.
c. Decision. Upon the conclusion of the hearing on such appeal, the City
Council shall, by resolution either:
1. Terminate the proceedings and overrule the findings of the Hearing
Officer;
2. Confirm the action and decision of the Hearing Officer; or
3. Modify the decision of the Hearing Officer.
§ 24-2.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-2.12
AO:837
§ 24-3. NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
§ 24-3.1. Abatement After Hearing. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
Any property owner shall have the right to abate the public nuisance in
accordance with the City Council's resolution ordering abatement, at his
own expense, provided the same is done prior to the expiration of the
time set forth in the resolution. Upon compliance with the resolution by
the owner, the proceedings hereunder shall be deemed terminated. If such
nuisance is not completely abated by the owner, as directed, within the
time set forth in the resolution, then the City Manager shall cause the same
to be abated by City forces or private contract. All expenses so incurred
by the City in connection therewith, plus a 10% charge for the City's
administrative costs shall be charged to and become an indebtedness of
the owner of such property, as well as a lien upon the affected property, as
elsewhere provided in this Chapter.
§ 24-3.2. Costs of Abatement. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
If the nuisance is not completely abated by the owner as directed within
the time frame established by the City Manager or his/her designee(s),
or as said time frame may be modified on appeal to the Hearing Officer
or City Council, all incidental enforcement costs incurred by the City in
connection therewith shall be charged to and become an indebtedness of
the owner of such property, except as provided below, as well as a lien upon
the affected property whether or not the work is performed later by the
City, by the owner or by others. "Incidental enforcement costs" include, but
are not limited to the actual expenses and costs of the City in investigating
the nuisance, obtaining title information, preparing notices and performing
inspections.
§ 24-3.3. Abatement by City; Notice. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
If the nuisance is not completely abated by the owner within the designated
abatement period, the City Manager or such other City Official as may
be designated by him/her shall serve notice on the owner of the affected
property a notice of intent to abate nuisance which shall be substantially in
the following form:
In the cases of alternative paragraphs c2 or c3 the resolution shall declare
such property to be a public nuisance and order the abatement of the
same by having such premises, buildings and/or structures rehabilitated,
corrected, repaired, demolished, removed or cleared in the time, manner
and means specifically set forth in said resolution. The decision of the City
Council shall be served on appellant(s), and any person owning, leasing,
occupying or having charge or possession of the premises by the City
Clerk and shall contain a detailed list of needed corrections and abatement
methods. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive.
§ 24-2.12 COMPTON § 24-3.3
AO:838
NOTICE OF INTENT TO ABATE NUISANCE
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that an inspection made of the premises or
property known and designated as __________ was made on the _____ day
of _____, 2_____, and a determination made that the order to abate the
nuisance at said premises or property by the Compton City Council on
_________ had not been complied with. Abatement of said nuisance will be
accomplished by either City forces or private contractor in accordance
with the specifications attached hereto and costs of such abatement will
constitute a lien upon said property until paid.
Notice is hereby given that said abatement will be undertaken 10 days
after the date of this notice, and you are forthwith notified to remove
from the area of your affected premises those articles you deem of value
within said ten-day period of time. Articles removed from the premises in
the accomplishment of said abatement will be held in storage for a period
of 30 days at ____________________. Any claim for articles removed may be
made within said thirty-day period. Articles not claimed and removed from
storage location within said thirty-day period will be discarded or will be
sold if determined to have value.
A statement of costs incurred in the abatement with charges to be assessed
will be mailed to you.
§ 24-3.4. Abatement by City; Costs; Hearing. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
a. When the City Manager causes the abatement of a public nuisance
pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, he/she shall keep an
accounting of the cost thereof, including incidental expenses of such
abatement on each separate lot or parcel of land where work is done
and shall render an itemized report in writing to the City Council
showing the costs of abatement and the rehabilitation, correction,
repair, demolition, removal or clearing of said premises, buildings and/
or structures, including any salvage value relating thereto; provided,
however, before such report is submitted to the City Council, a copy of
the same, together with a notice of the time when said report shall be
heard by the City Council shall be mailed to owners, and any other
interested person who requests notice, by United States mail or
personal delivery and posted on the property for at least five days prior
to the City Council hearing for confirmation. The term "incidental
expenses" shall include, but not be limited to the actual expenses and
costs to the City in the preparation of reports and notices, specifications
and contracts, inspection of the work and costs of printing and mailing
required hereunder.
b. At the time and place for receiving and considering the statement of
costs, the City Council shall hear and pass upon the statement together
with any objections or protests raised by any of the persons liable to be
assessed for the cost of abating the nuisance. Thereupon, the City
Council may make any such revision, correction or modification to the
statement as it may deem just, after which the statement as submitted,
or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed by resolution.
§ 24-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-3.4
AO:839
§ 24-3.5. Assessment of Costs; Lien. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
The total cost for abating such nuisance, as so confirmed by the City
Council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or
parcel of land to which it related and upon recordation in the office of
the County Recorder of a Notice of Lien, as so made and confirmed, shall
constitute a lien on said property for the amount of such assessment.
Such hearing may be continued from time to time. The decision of the
City Council shall be final.
a. After such confirmation and recordation, a copy of the lien shall be filed
with the Assessor and Tax Collector of the County, in order that the
County Assessor may add the amounts of the assessments to the next
regular tax bill levied against the respective parcel and, thereafter, the
amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as
provided for ordinary municipal taxes, and shall be subject to the same
procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency;
b. After such recordation, the lien may also be foreclosed by judicial or
other sale in the manner and means provided by law.
c. Such Notice of Lien for recordation shall be in the form substantially as
follows:
NOTICE OF LIEN
(Claim of City of Compton)
Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of this Chapter
of the Compton Municipal Code, the City Manager of the City of
Compton did on or before the _____ day __________, 2_____, cause the
premises hereinafter described to be rehabilitated or the building and/
or structure on the property hereinafter described, to be corrected,
repaired, demolished, removed or cleared in order to abate a public
nuisance on said real property hereinafter described; and the same
has not been paid nor any part thereof; and that said City of Compton
does hereby claim a lien on such rehabilitation, correction, repair,
demolition, removal or clearing in the amount of said assessment, to
wit: the sum of $ __________; and the same shall be a lien upon said real
property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record.
The real property hereinabove mentioned, and upon which a lien is
claimed, is that certain parcel of land located in the City of Compton,
County of Los Angeles, State of California, known as (street address)
and legally described as follows:
(Description)
Dated this _____ day of __________, 2_____
City Manager of the City of Compton
§ 24-3.4 COMPTON § 24-3.6
AO:840
§ 24-3.6. Limitation of Filing Judicial Action. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
An owner or other person who has an interest in the property aggrieved at
any proceeding taken on appeal by the City Council in affirming, reversing
or modifying in whole or in part either the order finding and ordering
the abatement of a public nuisance or the order determining the cost of
abatement must bring judicial action to contest such decision within 30 days
after the date of service of such decision of the City Council. Otherwise, all
objections to such decision shall be deemed waived.
§ 24-3.7. Emergency Abatement. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter with reference to
the abatement of public nuisances, whenever the City Manager or his/
her authorized designee(s) determine that a property or any building and/
or structure thereon is dangerous and constitutes an immediate threat to
the health, safety or welfare of persons or property, he/she shall, without
observing the provisions of this Chapter with reference to abatement
procedures, immediately and forthwith abate such public nuisance. Where
such condition exists, and the abatement is immediately required, a record
of and a hearing to confirm the expenses and costs of abatement shall be
held in the same manner that other abatement costs are recovered pursuant
to this Chapter.
§ 24-3.8. Alternative Remedies. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
It is the intent of the City Council that the provisions and procedures
set forth in this Chapter shall not expressly or by implication repeal or
supersede any other provisions or procedures of the Compton Municipal
Code or any other applicable law on the same or related subject matters.
This Chapter shall supplement existing procedures and will provide an
alternative, nonexclusive procedure for the abatement of a nuisance.
Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude or prohibit the City from resorting to
any appropriate legal remedy, whether civil or criminal, in the abatement of
nuisance, including any nuisance designated in this Chapter; and when such
legal remedy is utilized, the administrative hearing and appeal procedures
provided in this Chapter to determine the existence of a nuisance shall not
be applicable.
§ 24-3.9. Criminal Prosecution. [Ord. #2174, § 1]
Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter is a misdemeanor, and the
notice, hearing, appeal and other administrative procedures contained in
this Chapter shall not be a condition precedent to any criminal prosecution.
§ 24-3.10. Violations. [Ord. #2164 § 1]
a. No owner, lessee, occupant or other person having charge or control of
any property shall fail to comply with any order of abatement served as
provided by this Chapter.
§ 24-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-3.10
AO:841
§ 24-4. GRAFFITI REMOVAL SERVICES.
§ 24-4.1. Responsibility for Removal. [Ord. #1849, § 1]
That the City Council of the City of Compton declares that the removal of
graffiti from private property is the sole and exclusive responsibility of the
property owner.
§ 24-4.2. City Assistance Established. [Ord. #1849, § 1]
That the City Council of the City of Compton desires to establish a paid
subscription program to assist property owners with the removal of graffiti
from their properties.
§ 24-4.3. City Manager Authorization. [Ord. #1849, § 1]
That the City Manager or his designee is hereby authorized to establish
payment requirements; annual adjustments to these fees and charges, and
policies and procedures that may be deemed necessary for the provision of
such services.
§ 24-4.4. Graffiti Program/Voluntary Subscription Program. [Ord.
#1849, § 1]
b. No person shall remove any notice or order posted as required by this
Chapter.
c. No owner, lessee, occupant or other person having charge or control of
any property shall fail to vacate the property, building, structure or
premises in accordance with an order of abatement provided in this
Chapter.
d. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any representative of
the City or with any person who owns, leases or occupies property,
when any of them are lawfully engaged in proceedings required under
this Chapter.
a. A subscription program is offered to businesses and property owners
who place a premium upon prompt and more specialized service in the
removal of graffiti from their property. Property owners who participate
in this subscription program will receive and be assured of the
following services:
1. Graffiti will be removed within five days of their request being
called into our customer service office.
2. Graffiti will be removed using custom paint selected by our valued
customers upon signing for the service. The graffiti will be maskedoff
to prevent over spraying and to ensure a harmonious and
custom treatment of the property's existing color scheme.
§ 24-3.10 COMPTON § 24-4.4
AO:842
§ 24-5. FACILITY AND EQUIPMENT RENTAL SERVICES.
§ 24-5.1. City Manager Authorization. [Ord. #1850, § 1]
That the City Manager or his designee is hereby authorized to establish
deposit requirements; minimal service charges, and policies governing
waiver and/or fee reductions; and other procedures that may be deemed
necessary for the provision of such services.
§ 24-5.2. Emergency Board-up: Commercial and Residential
Properties. [Ord. #1850, § 1]
Emergency Board-up: In those cases where City employees are called upon
to board-up commercial buildings and dwellings units that may have been
damaged/vandalized and left open and vacant, the charge for said services
shall be as follows:
Labor Rate $42.30 per man/hour
Truck Charge $5 per hour
In addition to the aforementioned costs, the property owner shall be
charged the expense of materials and supplies needed to properly secure
said premises, including overhead and administrative costs.
§ 24-5.3. Tool Loan Rental Fees. [Ord. #1850, § 1]
The following rental fees shall be charged to renters of tool loan equipment.
The fees are assessed to recover the cost of maintaining the equipment in
safe and sound operable condition for the benefit of program participants.
Lawn Mowers $3 per hour
Edgers $3 per hour
Rotor Tillers $5 per hour
3. Structures, constructed of brick and unpainted block, may elect to
have the graffiti removed by sand or water blasting. (This
application usually leaves some residue of paint or scouring of the
masonry wall).
b. The cost of the subscription for 12 months of service is as follows:
Commercial Buildings (up to
2,000 square feet)
$400 plus a $5 trip charge for
each call
Multiple Housing Units (4 to 8
units)
$600 plus a $5 trip charge for
each call
Duplexes and Triplexes $300
Single-Family Homes $100
§ 24-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-5.3
AO:843
Other gas/electric powered
equipment
$5 per hour
Repair of Lawn Equipment: Repairs that are caused by the lack of proper
care and use of equipment shall be billed as follows:
Labor Rate $13 per man/hour
In addition to the above stated labor rate, the City shall assess a charge to
cover the cost of parts purchased to undertake needed repairs.
§ 24-5.4. Facility Rental. [Ord. #1850, § 1; Ord. #1947, § 1]
§ 24-5.5. Custodial or Staff Services. [Ord. #1850, § 1; Ord. #1947,
§ 2]
That the labor charge for providing staff services shall be billed as follows:
Security Services $19.22 per hour
Custodial Services $17.26 per hour
The staffing fee rate will be increased by the City Manager in accordance
with cost-of-living adjustments adopted by the City Council.
§ 24-6. EXTERIOR SURFACE TREATMENT OF BUILDINGS AND
STRUCTURES.77
§ 24-6.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2044, § 1]
The purpose of this section is to establish standards and procedures for the
selection of colors and materials applied to building exteriors and structures
along the City's major thoroughfares to improve architectural continuity
and to lessen the prevalence of graffiti and facilitate its removal.
a. The room rental rate for the City Council Chambers Community Room
shall be $20 per hour.
b. The room rental rate for the Martin Luther King Transit Center
Community Room shall be as follows:
Standard Rate
Day Rate — $75 per hour
Night Rate — $90 per hour
Reduced Rate
Day Rate — $35 per hour
Night Rate — $75 per hour
77.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 1907.
§ 24-5.3 COMPTON § 24-6.2
AO:844
§ 24-6.2. Applicability. [Ord. #2044, § 1]
§ 24-6.3. Definitions. [Ord. #2044, § 1]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this section shall be as follows:
ACCENT COLOR(S) — Shall mean an accessory color(s) used on 20% or less
of the building or structure facade to which it is applied.
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD (ARB) — Shall be comprised of the
City's consulting architect and City staff representatives empowered to
review and approve exterior improvements made to residential units, new
residential subdivisions, commercial, industrial and institutional projects in
the City.
BASE COLOR — Shall mean that color selected for use on 80% or more of a
building or structure facade.
BUILDING — Shall mean any permanently located structure enclosed on all
sides by walls and having a roof.
COLOR/MATERIALS SCHEDULE — Shall mean samples of paint colors and
selected materials to be used on an exterior surface, including stucco colorcoat,
concrete block, fencing, roofing, window mullions, etc., attached to
a cardboard, foam core or plywood board for presentation purposes. Paint
colors and material names and/or numbers, types and manufacturer names
are to be included.
GRAFFITI — Shall mean any writing, printing, symbol, figure, design or
other inscribed material written, sprayed, painted, scratched, etched,
engraved or otherwise applied to any exterior surface of a building, wall,
a. These regulations shall apply to all buildings and structures, whether
residential, commercial, institutional or industrial, located on those
streets listed in subsection 24-6.4, except those buildings and
structures owned/operated by other governmental agencies exempt
from the City of Compton permitting process.
b. All buildings and structures regulated by this section shall conform to
its provisions upon initiation of any new construction, exterior
modification or improvement (including painting or surface treatment),
installation of new signs, issuance of a new business license, sale or
refinance. In the absence of any of the foregoing, all nonresidential
buildings and structures shall be brought into conformance with this
section within one year of the adoption of this section.
c. Buildings and structures that were painted, stucco color-coated or
underwent exterior modifications, excluding signage, with
Architectural Review Board approval within the last five years of the
adoption of this section shall not be required to modify the exterior of
said building or structure. It shall be the responsibility of the property
owner or his agent to provide proof of such approval.
§ 24-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-6.3
AO:845
fence, tree, sidewalk, curb or other structure without the prior consent of
the owner or person in possession thereof.
PAINT — Shall mean a mixture of pigment and a suitable liquid to form a
closely adherent coating spread on a surface in a thin coat.
PALETTE — Shall mean a set of City-specified colors approved for exterior
surface treatment of buildings and structures.
PROPERTY OWNER — Shall mean the owner of record of the property
upon which the building or structure is located as such person's name
and address appears on the last equalized assessment roll of Los Angeles
County.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean any construction other than a building which
requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having
a location on the ground (e.g., sign and light standards, mechanical
equipment, trash receptacles and enclosures, fencing, planters, bollards,
tree grates, site furniture, etc.) with a vertical height exceeding seven
inches above grade. "Structure" also includes utility facilities owned by a
governmental entity, a corporation or public utility used in connection with
the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection or storage of
water, sewage, electricity, gas, oil or electronic signals (telephone lines and
supporting structures and fire safety equipment exempted).
SURFACE TREATMENT — Shall mean a material such as stucco color-coat
applied to or a veneer mounted on the exterior of a building or structure.
UNIVERSAL DESIGN THEME — Shall mean a set of architectural design
elements preapproved for use on new construction and substantial
rehabilitation projects.
VENEER — Shall mean surface mounted, decorative materials, including
but not limited to aluminum or wood siding, brick, ceramic tile, cork,
granite, marble, stone, wire mesh and wood or metal shingles, etc.
§ 24-6.4. Approved Colors and Design Theme. [Ord. #2044, § 1]
a. All buildings and structures located along the following major
thoroughfares shall be painted or surface treated using base and accent
colors selected from the approved palette adopted by resolution of the
City Council and maintained by the ARB.
Major Thoroughfares
Alameda Street
Alondra Boulevard
Artesia Boulevard
Atlantic Avenue
Central Avenue
Compton Boulevard
El Segundo Boulevard
§ 24-6.3 COMPTON § 24-6.4
AO:846
§ 24-6.5. Color/Materials Schedule- Required. [Ord. #2044, § 1]
A color/materials schedule shall be submitted to the ARB for approval.
Photographs of existing buildings and structures and blueprints of proposed
buildings and structures shall also be submitted. If the project is part of a
center or in an uninterrupted block of existing properties, photographs of
adjacent properties shall be included.
§ 24-6.6. Color/Materials Schedule-Application. [Ord. #2044, § 1]
§ 24-6.7. Color/Materials Schedule-Approval. [Ord. #2044, § 1]
Major Thoroughfares
Greenleaf Boulevard
Long Beach Boulevard
Rosecrans Avenue
Santa Fe Avenue
Willowbrook Avenue
Wilmington Avenue
b. All new construction and substantial exterior rehabilitation projects
shall employ a universal design theme. Specific examples, provided by
the ARB, shall be employed and reviewed for compliance prior to
approval of projects.
a. Prior to issuance of any permit for exterior construction or approval for
exterior painting, an application for color/materials schedule approval
shall be submitted to the ARB. Such application may be reviewed
separately or as part of a total project review including architectural
design, landscaping, signage, etc.
b. At the time of submittal, all applicants except those submitting color/
material schedules for residential structures of two units or less shall
pay a filing fee. The amount of such fee shall be set by an ordinance of
the City Council and shall be adjusted periodically to reflect changes in
processing costs borne by the City.
a. The ARB shall approve the color/materials schedule if it finds that the
schedule complements the design of the project, is compatible with
adjacent existing and ARB-approved future projects and is consistent
with the provisions of this section and applicable guidelines.
b. The ARB may consider exceptions from the provisions of this section
provided the applicant has signed and had notarized an affidavit
acknowledging the City-approved colors and requesting a variance
from the use of said colors and/or architectural design. Exceptions may
be granted based on compatibility with ARB-approved projects or
existing building design or national identification requirements. The
§ 24-6.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-6.7
AO:847
§ 24-6.8. Compliance and Enforcement. [Ord. #2044, § 1]
ARB shall have the discretion to forward projects deemed significantly
out of compliance with this section to the Community Development
Director and/or City Council for approval.
c. A decision by the ARB may be appealed in writing, within 15 calendar
days of said decision, to the Community Development Director, who
may rule on the appeal or refer it to the City Council for resolution.
d. Use of alternative colors or materials, where approved by the ARB, the
Community Development Director or the City Council, shall absolve the
City of all responsibility for the removal of graffiti from the property.
a. Compliance.
1. All buildings and structures on a major thoroughfare, as defined
herein, shall be painted or surface treated in accordance with this
section. No building or structure shall be painted nor materials
applied, installed or otherwise used without prior approval by the
ARB and issuance of any required permits.
2. All buildings and structures shall be maintained in good repair and
in a clean and sanitary condition, free of all cracked, chipped,
peeling or discolored paint, unpainted or untreated surfaces,
deteriorated surface treatment and graffiti.
3. It shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner to maintain
all buildings and structures in accordance with this section.
b. Enforcement.
1. The City may, from time to time, conduct beautification programs in
which graffiti is removed from private buildings and structures
without charge to the property owner. Such programs do not
absolve any property owner from the obligation to maintain
property free of graffiti nor do they obligate the City to remove
graffiti from any building or structure.
2. When the City identifies a building or structure that fails to comply
with this section it shall issue an official Notice of Violation to the
tenant, business and property owner that a violation exists and that
abatement is required.
3. The notice shall be provided by registered or certified mail to the
property owner and shall be posted in a conspicuous location on
the property.
4. Painting and Surface Treatment.
(a) When an abatement notice is served for the unauthorized
(without ARB approval) exterior painting and/or surface
treatment of a building or structure, the property owner shall
§ 24-6.7 COMPTON § 24-6.8
AO:848
§ 24-7. ACCUMULATION OF AUTOMOBILES FOR SALE. [Ord.
#1973, § 1]
have 15 calendar days to submit an application to the ARB for
retroactive approval.
(b) The ARB shall review the application for exterior paint and/or
surface treatment within five working days or at its next
regularly scheduled meeting.
(1) If the project complies with the provisions of this section,
the ARB shall approve the application and notify the owner
of any other required permits.
(2) If the project does not comply with the provisions of this
section, the ARB shall provide the owner with a list of
required corrections.
(3) The owner shall have 30 calendar days to complete all
corrections required by the ARB or file an appeal in
compliance with subsection 24-6.7c.
(c) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, when an
abatement notice is served that a building or structure does
not comply with subsection 24-6.8a2, the property owner shall
have 15 calendar days to submit an application to the ARB in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
(d) Applications and/or corrections required under this subsection
24-6.8b must be made prior to the first inspection after an
abatement notice is served. If compliance is not met,
reinspections shall be subject to the provisions of subsection
7-20.10 of the Compton Municipal Code.
c. Penalty.
(a) Failure by the responsible party, whether person, firm, corporation,
nonprofit organization or other group, to abate a violation of this
section or comply with required corrections of the ARB within the
specified time limit shall be a misdemeanor.
(b) A misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Such violations may also be redressed by civil
action.
a. Intent and Definitions. The City Council makes the following findings
and declarations: The accumulation of automobiles for sale, on public or
private property, is hereby found to create a condition tending to
reduce property values, to promote blight and deterioration, to promote
loitering, to promote illegal vending, to constitute an attractive
nuisance creating a hazard to health and safety of citizens, to be
§ 24-6.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-7
AO:849
§ 24-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1973, § 1]
ACCUMULATION — Shall mean more than two automobiles.
AUTOMOBILE — Shall mean a vehicle for the transportation of persons or
property on the highway, carrying its own motive power and not operated
upon fixed tracks.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Shall mean property belonging to an individual and
of which he has the exclusive right of disposition; property of a specific,
fixed and tangible nature, capable of being had in possession and
transmitted to another such as houses, lands, and other real estate
structures.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Shall mean owned by the public, the entire state,
community or municipality and not restricted to the dominion of a private
person.
§ 24-7.2. Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. #1973, § 1]
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the provisions of this section
shall be administered and enforced by the City Manager, the Chief of Police,
the Fire Chief or their designees. In the enforcement of this section, the
City Manager, the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief or their designees may
enter upon public or private property to examine an automobile, or to obtain
license or vehicle identification information, and to issue citations or cause
the removal of a vehicle, only after such automobile has been declared to be
a nuisance pursuant to this section.
§ 24-7.3. Liability. [Ord. #1973, § 1]
In the event that more than two automobiles are left standing on any
public or private property for the purpose of sale or rent, the owner of the
automobile or the property shall be responsible and liable.
§ 24-7.4. Authority. [Ord. #1973, § 1]
Upon discovering the existence of more than two automobiles for sale or
rent, on public or private property within the City, the City Manager, the
Chief of Police, the Fire Chief or their designees, shall have the authority to
cause the abatement thereof in accordance with the procedure set forth in
subsections 24-2.3 through 24-2.11 and Section 24-3.
aesthetically detrimental to the community and to be injurious to the
health, safety and general welfare of the community. Therefore, the
accumulation of automobiles for sale, on private or public property, is
hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 24-7 COMPTON § 24-7.5
AO:850
§ 24-7.5. Procedure. [Ord. #1973, § 1]
Upon discovering the existence of an automobile for sale or rent, on public
or private property within the City, the City Manager, the Chief of Police,
the Fire Chief or their designee, shall have the authority to issue a parking
citation upon said vehicle. If said vehicle is determined to have been
previously cited, the City Manager, the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief or
their designees may cause the abatement of said vehicle by lawful tow and
according to the procedure set forth in subsections 24-2.3 through 24-2.11
and Section 24-4.
§ 24-7.6. Assessments for Automobile Removal Hearings. [Ord.
#1973, § 1; Ord. #1989, § 1]
a. Upon the abatement and removal of any vehicle located on public or
private property within the City, the City Manager, the Chief of Police,
the Fire Chief or their designees, shall notify the owner thereof, (if the
same can be ascertained) by mailing a notice of abatement to the last
known address of the owner. Such notice shall state the date the
automobile was removed from public or private property, the location
and procedure for retrieval of the automobile and a statement that, in
order to receive a hearing with regard to the removal of said
automobile, the owner or its agent shall submit a request for such
hearing either in person or in writing, within 10 days of the date
appearing on the notice. The automobile shall be released to the owner
thereof, if claimed within 30 days after such a removal and upon
payment of reasonable administrative, towing, storage and impound
fees. Such administrative fees shall be waived if, after a hearing has
been requested and a determination is made at such hearing, that upon
a finding of good cause, the administrative fees should be waived.
b. Administrative fees for removal and storage, plus the proportional
share of administration costs in connection therewith, shall be assessed
on a case-by-case basis. The citation bail amount shall be set forth in
subsection 24-7.7c of this Code.
c. Any hearing which is requested shall be conducted within five working
days of the receipt of the request for such a hearing, excluding
weekends and holidays, by the City Manager, the Chief of Police, the
Fire Chief or their designees, who shall be designated as the hearing
officer. If the owner or its agent does not request a hearing within 10
days of the date appearing on the notice of abatement, he shall have
waived the right to such a hearing.
d. Any vehicle which is not retrieved by the owner within the 30 days after
the mailing of written notice of abatement, when such owner has not
requested a hearing in accordance with this section, shall be deemed to
be permanently abandoned and may be sold at public auction or
otherwise disposed of at the end of the 30 days following such notice.
§ 24-7.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-7.7
AO:851
§ 24-7.7. Unlawful Sales of Automobiles Prohibited. [Ord. #1973,
§ 1; Ord. #1989, § 2]
§ 24-8. CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
§ 24-8.1. Purpose. [Ord. #1978, § 1]
The purpose of this section is to establish standards and procedures which
will facilitate the physical refurbishment of the structures and the economic
revitalization of the businesses along the designated corridors in order to
enhance the City's image and economic viability.
§ 24-8.2. Findings. [Ord. #1978, § 1]
The City Council hereby finds and determines the following:
§ 24-8.3. Applicability. [Ord. #1978, § 1]
a. No person or persons shall display, for the purpose of sale or rent, or
shall rent, advertise or offer for sale or rent, or sell or rent any vehicle
which is subject to registration under the California Vehicle Code, from
or upon any public or private property, which is not the place of
business of a duly licensed vehicle dealer.
b. The provisions of paragraph a hereof shall not apply to the registered
owner of a vehicle when displaying, advertising, offering, selling or
renting such vehicle upon property of which he is the owner, lessee or
lawful occupant, not to exceed any more than two automobiles per year,
nor when displaying, advertising or offering such automobile for sale or
rent while in the act of driving such vehicle.
c. Penalty. Violation of this section is an infraction punishable by a sum of
$250, for each vehicle, plus administrative fees and costs assessed
pursuant to subsection 24-7.6b of this Code.
a. That the City has a history and reputation for well-kept properties and
that the property values and the general welfare of the community are
founded, in part, upon the appearance and maintenance of properties;
b. That conditions exist on many of the properties along the designated
corridors such that the properties constitute a public nuisance as
defined in Section 24-2 of the Compton Municipal Code; and
c. That unless corrective measures are undertaken to alleviate such
existing conditions and unless each of the major design components of
this section and the Corridor Improvement Plan are implemented, the
general welfare and specifically the property values and the social and
economic standards of this community will be depreciated.
a. These requirements shall be applicable to all real property and
improvements located along the designated corridors including
buildings, utilities, and vacant lots.
§ 24-7.7 COMPTON § 24-8.3
AO:852
§ 24-8.4. Definitions. [Ord. #1978, § 1]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the
terms used in this section shall be as defined herein.
ARCHITECTURAL THEMES — Shall mean those building design
characteristics set forth for each designated corridor in the Corridor
Improvement Plan, the Compton Design Manual, and the Compton General
Plan, specifically African-Egyptian, Futuristic-Contemporary, Spanish-
Mediterranean, and Universal.
BUFFER AREAS — Shall mean any area of property which lies between the
public right-of-way and the exterior of any building.
CAFE ZONES — Shall mean designated areas in front of buildings which
contain restaurants that have a high volume of pedestrian traffic. These
zones may be used for outdoor activities such as dining, music events, and
art displays.
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT OR CBD — Shall mean that area between
Acacia Avenue to the west, Magnolia Street to the north, Alameda Street
to the east, and Myrrh Street to the south, with Compton Boulevard as the
major thoroughfare.
COMPTON CORRIDOR — Shall mean those properties along that 1.75 mile
segment of Compton Boulevard from Willowbrook Avenue to the western
City boundaries, the architectural character of which shall be Universal
with a hint of African-Egyptian style.
CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT PLAN — Shall mean the planning and design
document entitled the Corridor Improvement Plan for Compton Boulevard,
Long Beach Boulevard, and Rosecrans Avenue.
DESIGNATED CORRIDOR — Shall mean any of the corridors which are
defined in this section and are jointly the subject of the Corridor
Improvement Plan.
FINANCIAL INCENTIVE PROGRAM — Shall mean any City policy which
offers economic assistance for the purpose of encouraging compliance with
this section.
GATEWAY MONUMENT — Shall mean any of the commemorative obelisks
which inform a traveller of entrance to the City or other significant place
(e.g., The Renaissance Plaza).
b. These requirements shall be applicable to all new construction and any
rehabilitation of an existing building or property.
c. Full compliance with all property maintenance and design criteria as
specified in the Compton Municipal Code, the Compton Design Manual,
the Uniform Paint Ordinance, the Corridor Improvement Plan, and all
other applicable ordinances must be met within 18 months of the
adoption of this section.
§ 24-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-8.4
AO:853
HARDSCAPING — Shall mean fixed, private property and public street
improvements such as walls, sidewalks, driveways, monuments, plazas, and
other paving treatments.
LANDSCAPING — Shall mean the decorative modification of existing plant
covering for human use and enjoyment.
LONG BEACH CORRIDOR — Shall mean those properties along that 2.14
mile segment of Long Beach Boulevard running north and south between
Orchard Avenue and Greenleaf Boulevard within the City limits, the
architectural character of which shall be Universal with a hint of Futuristic-
Contemporary style.
PARTICIPANTS — Shall mean any property owner or tenant along a
designated corridor who chooses to accept the benefits of enrollment in the
Financial Incentive Program authorized by this section.
PAVERS — Shall mean any of the stone, brick, or clay segments which
are set in place to form a decorative outdoor passage or lane designated
for pedestrian and occasional vehicular traffic (e.g., sidewalks, crosswalks,
driveways, and plaza areas).
RENAISSANCE GARDENS — Shall mean any of the same plots of ground
located on each corner of major intersections along designated corridors
which are landscaped with ground covering, shrubs, and trees.
ROSECRANS CORRIDOR — Shall mean those properties along that 3.35
mile segment of Rosecrans Avenue running east and west between City
boundaries, the architectural character of which is Universal with a hint of
Spanish-Mediterranean style.
SECTION — Shall mean Section 24-7 et seq. of the Compton Municipal Code
entitled Corridor Improvement Plan.
§ 24-8.5. Specific Program. [Ord. #1978, § 1]
§ 24-8.6. Hardscaping Design Guidelines. [Ord. #1978, § 1]
a. All applicants seeking to become participants in the Financial Incentive
Program shall be subject to the criteria established in the City's policy
for the evaluation and approval of applicants to the Program.
b. All building and site approvals shall be subject to the criteria
established in the City's policies for building exteriors and site
improvements. Participants shall give priority to curing existing and
incipient code violations including, but not limited to, the following:
graffiti and general clutter removal; the repair or replacement of
windows and doors on existing structures; exterior repair, cleaning,
painting, and/or stuccoing; and the repair, addition, or replacement of
site security lighting and/or light standards on the property.
a. Driveways. Enriched paving treatment shall be used for driveway
approaches, on-site sidewalks, and plaza entrances. Recommended
materials shall include scored patterns in smooth or rock salt finish
§ 24-8.4 COMPTON § 24-8.6
AO:854
§ 24-8.7. Landscaping Design Guidelines. [Ord. #1978, § 1]
Owners of property along the designated corridors shall use lowmaintenance,
drought-resistant landscaping with an irrigation system to
improve the appearance of the designated corridors including the
concrete, rectangular brown granite or brick colored pavers in
irregular sizes, natural stone pavers (flat) set in mortar, pre-cast pavers,
poured in place colored concrete, natural stones, brick pavers, and
other materials consistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) requirements.
b. Cafe Zones. Cafe Zones may be considered in areas where existing and
proposed restaurants have space and appropriate design capacity. Cafe
Zones shall be subject to existing planning codes and Architectural
Review Board approval.
c. Walls and Fences. Walls and fences shall be a design component to
improve the designated corridors. Distinct treatments are required for
construction sites, industrial properties, commercial, and residential
properties which face a designated corridor, and residential properties
whose rear yards abut a designated corridor. All walls and fences shall
be subject to approval by the Architectural Review Board.
1. Construction sites shall be screened from public view with either a
wood panel fence which may include an approved artist rendering/
mural or a chainlink fence which must include slats or green
polyurethane screening. Where required by the Compton
Municipal Code, a construction site fence must include a protective
shelter covering the sidewalk passageway.
2. Industrial properties which face the designated corridors may be
enhanced with walls of up to eight feet in height. A solid masonry
block wall shall be placed along the rear and side property lines
and a wrought iron fence or a combination of wrought iron and
masonry block wall shall be placed along the front property line.
Chainlink fences may be utilized along rear and side property lines
which are not visible from the street.
3. Commercial and residential properties which face the designated
corridors may be enhanced with wall of up to six feet in height. A
solid masonry block wall shall be placed along the rear and side
property lines and a wrought iron fence or a combination of
wrought iron and masonry block wall shall be placed along the
front property line.
4. All residential properties with rear yards abutting a designated
corridor shall have a six-foot high solid masonry block wall. In
addition, nonresidential property owners whose property abuts a
residential property shall place and maintain walls between the two
properties of six feet in height.
§ 24-8.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-8.7
AO:855
maintenance of the Renaissance Gardens and the landscaping of walls and
fences, vacant lots, and buffer areas.
a. Renaissance Gardens. The City shall supply all landscaping materials.
With the exception of the Date Palm trees, the owner of the property
shall maintain the Renaissance Gardens which shall include:
1. Sod (One Only):
Marathon Sod
Raoulia australis
2. Ground Cover (Three Minimum):
Aster species
Gazania species
Geranium icanum
Lobularia maritima - "Sweet Alyssum"
Vinca - "Periwinkle"
3. Shrubs (One Only):
Arctostaphylos species - "Manzanita"
Hebe species
Lantana species
Nandina domestica - "Heavenly Bamboo"
Picea abies - "Nidiformis"
Skimmia species
Xylosma congestum
4. Trees:
Phoenix dactylifera (Date Palm)
b. Walls and Fences. The three types of walls and fences which require
landscaping are solid masonry block walls, wrought iron fences, and
combination masonry and wrought iron fences. Solid masonry walls
along the front and rear property lines which abut the designated
corridors shall be enhanced with Oleander plants and clinging vines in
order to improve the corridor appearance and discourage graffiti.
Wrought iron fences and walls of both masonry and wrought iron shall
be landscaped with clinging vines and/or shrubs. Oleander plants shall
also be used along walls and fences which separate nonresidential uses
from residential uses and shall be the responsibility of the
§ 24-8.7 COMPTON § 24-8.7
AO:856
nonresidential property owner. The clinging vines and shrubs shall be
selected from the following:
1. Vines:
Bougainvillea species
Tecomaria capenesis - "Cape Honeysuckle"
Wisteria sinensis - "Chinese Wisteria"
2. Shrubs:
Arctostaphylos species - "Manzanita"
Hebe species
Lantana species
Nandina domestica - "Heavenly Bamboo"
Picea abies - "Nidiformis"
Skimmia species
Xylosma congestum
c. Vacant Lots. The interior of vacant or abandoned lots shall be planted
with wild shrub flowering plants and ground cover which are to be
maintained by the owner of the property. The perimeter of vacant or
abandoned lots shall be planted with any low-maintenance shrubs,
including the following:
1. Shrubs:
Chrysanthemum species
Nerium oleander "Oleander"
d. Buffer Areas. Buffer areas can be used for transition landscaping from
the hardscape improvements to the architectural themes. The following
are guidelines and a list of recommended plants for buffer area
landscaping.
1. The use of drought tolerant plant species is desirable, especially in
large areas next to buildings and parking lots.
2. Trees and shrubs should be trimmed and maintained to expose the
major branch structure.
3. Earth mounding should be used to imitate small hills and knolls in
the setback areas not used as usable open space.
4. Lighting should be used to highlight landscaping features such as
trees and pedestrian areas.
§ 24-8.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-8.7
AO:857
5. Ground Cover:
Ajuga reptans
Aptenia cordifolia
Carpobrotus species - "Sea Fig"
Lantana montevidensis - "Trailing Lantana"
Liriope species - "Lily Turf"
Ophiopogon japonicus - "Mondo Grass"
Pachysandra terminalis - "Japanese Spurge"
Trachelospermum jasminoides - "Star Jasmin"
Zinnia species
6. Shrubs:
Agapanthus africanus - "Lily-of-the-Nile"
Agave attenuata
Aloe species
Alpinia species - "Ginger"
Bamboo species
Calliandra tweedii - "Trinidad Flame Brush"
Carissa grandiflora - "Natal Plum"
Dietes species - "African Iris/Fortnight Lily"
Hermerocallis species - "Daylily"
Hibiscus species
Juniperus chinensis 'Torulosa' - "Hollywood Juniper"
Juniperus sabina species
Nandina domestica - "Heavenly Bamboo"
Nerium oleander - "Oleander"
Philodendron selloum
Pittosporum tobira
Strelitzia nicolai - Giant Bird of Paradise"
7. Trees:
§ 24-8.7 COMPTON § 24-8.7
AO:858
§ 24-8.8. Signage Guidelines. [Ord. #1978, § 1]
The Signage Guidelines along the designated corridors shall be those set
forth in the Corridor Improvement Plan and the Compton Design Manual.
Albizia julibrissin - "Silk Tree"
Arecastrum romanzoffianum - "Queen Palm"
Chorisia speciosa
Cupanniopsis anacardiodes - "Carrot Wood"
Erythrina caffra - "Kaffirboom Coral Tree"
Feijoa sellowiana - "Pineapple Guava"
Ficus species
Grevillea robusta - "Silk Oak"
Jacaranda mimosifolia
Koelreuteria paniculata - "Goldenrain Tree"
Liquidambar species - "Sweet Gum"
Metroisideros excelsus - "New Zealand Christmas Tree"
Palm species
Pinus species - "Pine"
Pistacia chinensis - "Chinese Pistache"
Podocarpus macrophyllus - "Yew Pine"
Salix babylonica - "Weeping Willow"
8. Vines:
Beaumontia grandiflora - "Herald's Trumpet/Easter Lily Vine"
Bougainvillea species
Hedera species - "Ivy"
Jasminum grandiflorum - "Jasmine"
Mandevilla species
Tecomaria capenesis - "Cape Honeysuckle"
Wisteria sinensis - "Chinese Wisteria"
§ 24-8.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-8.9
AO:859
§ 24-8.9. Enforcement Procedures. [Ord. #1978, § 1]
If after the time limit specified by this section any real property and/
or improvements along the designated corridors are found to be in less
than full compliance with all property maintenance and design criteria as
specified in this section, the Compton Design Manual, the Uniform Paint
Ordinance, and the Compton Municipal Code, the City Manager shall take
any and all appropriate measures established by the Compton Municipal
Code to bring about full compliance.
§ 24-9. ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION
PROGRAM.
§ 24-9.1. Title. [Ord. #2209]
This section shall be known as the "Abandoned Residential Property
Registration Program" and may be so cited.
§ 24-9.2. Purpose. [Ord. #2209]
It is the intent and purpose of the City Council, through the adoption of
this section, to establish a mechanism to protect residential neighborhoods
from becoming blighted through the lack of maintenance and security
of abandoned properties; to establish an abandoned property registration
program to set forth directives for the maintenance of abandoned
properties; and, to impose civil penalties for violation of same.
§ 24-9.3. Definitions. [Ord. #2209]
For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future; words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directive.
ABANDONED — Shall mean any building, structure or real property that
is vacant or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy, and
subject to a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending
Tax Assessors lien sale and/or any real property conveyed via a foreclosure
sale resulting in the acquisition of title by an interested beneficiary of a
deed of trust, and/or any real property conveyed via a deed in lieu of
foreclosure/sale.
ABATEMENT NOTICE — Shall mean an enforcement officer's notice to
abate a public nuisance.
ABATEMENT ORDER — Shall mean the Hearing Officer "Order to Abate" or
written final order decision.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY — Shall mean real property that is accessible to
the public, either, in general or through an open and/or unsecured door,
window, gate, fence, wall, or the like.
§ 24-8.9 COMPTON § 24-9.3
AO:860
ACCESSIBLE STRUCTURE — Shall mean a building or structure that is not
secured or is open in such a way as to allow public or unauthorized access
to the interior.
AGREEMENT — Shall mean any written instrument that transfers or
conveys title to residential real property from one owner to another after a
sale, trade, transfer or exchange.
ASSIGNMENT — Shall mean an instrument that transfers the beneficial
interest under a deed of trust from one lender or entity to another.
BENEFICIARY — Shall mean a lender participating in a real property
transaction that holds a secured interest in the real property in question
identified in a deed of trust.
BUYER — Shall mean any person, partnership, association, corporation,
fiduciary or other legal entity that agrees to transfer anything of value in
consideration for real property via an "agreement" shall mean as that term
is defined in this section.
DANGEROUS BUILDING — Shall mean any building or structure
reasonably deemed by qualified City staff to represent a violation of any
provision specified in Chapter 14 of this Code.
DAYS — Shall mean calendar days.
DEED IN LIEU OF FORECLOSURE — Shall mean a recorded instrument
that transfers ownership of real property between parties to a particular
deed of trust as follows: from the trustor, borrower, to the trustee upon
consent of the beneficiary, lender.
DEED OF TRUST — Shall mean an instrument whereby an owner of real
property, as trustor, transfers a secured interest in the real property in
question to a third party trustee, said instrument relating to a loan issued in
the context of a real property transaction. This definition applies to any and
all subordinate deeds of trust, such as second trust deed, third trust deed,
and the like.
DEFAULT — Shall mean the material breach of a legal or contractual duty
arising from or relating to a deed of trust, such as a trustor's failure to make
a payment when due.
DISTRESSED — Shall mean any building, structure or real property that is
subject to a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending
Tax Assessors lien sale and/or any real property conveyed via a foreclosure
sale resulting in the acquisition of title by an interested beneficiary of a
deed of trust, and/or any real property conveyed via a deed in lieu of
foreclosure/sale, regardless of vacancy or occupancy by a person with no
legal right of occupancy.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — Shall mean the City Manager or his
designee, the Building Official, the Municipal Law Enforcement Services
Director, Public Works Director, and/or any employee or agent of the City
designated and/or charged with enforcing the Compton Municipal Code,
including but not limited to applicable codes adopted by reference therein.
§ 24-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-9.3
AO:861
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY — Shall mean any real property condition that
independently, or in the context of the totality of circumstances relevant to
that real property would lead a reasonable enforcement official to believe
that a property is vacant or occupied by a person without a legal right
of occupancy. Such real property conditions include but are not limited
to: overgrown or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars,
flyers or mail; past due utility notices or disconnected utilities;
accumulation of trash, junk or debris; the absence of window coverings such
as curtains, blinds or shutters; the absence of furnishings or personal items
consistent with residential habitation; and/or statements by neighbors,
passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is
vacant.
FORECLOSURE — Shall mean the process by which real property subject
to a deed of trust is sold to satisfy the debt of a defaulting trustor, borrower.
LEGAL OWNER — Shall mean any person, partnership, association,
corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity having a legal or equitable title
or any interest in real property.
LOCAL — Shall mean within 40 driving miles of the building, structure or
real property in question.
NEIGHBORHOOD STANDARD — Shall mean the condition of real property
that prevails in and through the neighborhood where an abandoned
building, structure or real property is located. When determining the
neighborhood standard no abandoned or distressed building, structure or
real property shall be considered.
NOTICE OF DEFAULT — Shall mean a recorded instrument that reflects
and provides notice that a default has taken place with respect to a deed of
trust, and that a beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's sale.
OUT OF AREA — Shall mean in excess of 40 road or driving miles of the
subject property.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, partnership, association, corporation,
fiduciary or other legal entity having a legal or equitable title or any interest
in real property.
OWNER OF RECORD — Shall mean the person holding recorded title to
the real property in question at any point in time when official records are
produced by the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office.
PROPERTY — Shall mean any unimproved or improved real property, or
portion thereof, including but not limited to buildings or structures located
on said real property, regardless of condition.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Shall mean any improved real property, or
portion thereof, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes,
including buildings and structures located on such improved real property.
This includes any real property being offered under any circumstances for
sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as "residential," shall mean whether or not
said property is legally permitted and zoned for such use.
§ 24-9.3 COMPTON § 24-9.3
AO:862
SECURING — Shall mean such measures as may be directed by an
Enforcement Official that assist in rendering real property inaccessible to
unauthorized persons, including but not limited to repairing fences and
walls, chaining/pad locking gates, the repairing or boarding doors, windows
or other openings.
TRUSTEE — Shall mean any person, partnership, association, corporation,
fiduciary or other legal entity holding a deed of trust securing an interest in
real property.
TRUSTOR — Shall mean any owner/borrower identified in a deed of trust,
who transfers an interest in real property to a trustee as security for
payment of a debt by that owner/trustor.
VACANT — Shall mean any building, structure or real property that is
unoccupied or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupation.
VECTOR — Shall mean any animal capable of transmitting the causative
agent of human disease or capable of producing human discomfort or
injury, including, but not limited to, mosquitoes, flies, mites, ticks, other
arthropods, and rodents and other vertebrates
WEEDS — In excess of six inches shall mean all weeds growing upon
streets, alleys, or sidewalks, or any of the following:
§ 24-9.4. Enforcement Authority. [Ord. #2209]
The City Manager or his designee, the Building Official, the Municipal
Law Enforcement Services Director, the Public Works Director and/or any
employee or agent of the City designated and/or charged with enforcing
the Compton Municipal Code, are authorized to administer and enforce the
provisions of this section.
§ 24-9.5. Duty to Record Transfer of Loan/Deed of Trust Assignment
of Rents. [Ord. #2209]
Within 10 days of a property transaction involving a change in the identity
of an owner or the owner of record, or alternatively a transfer/assignment of
a loan or deed of trust secured by residential property, each beneficiary and
trustee engaged in said transaction or transfer/assignment shall record, via
the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office, an assignment of rents, or similar
instrument. This instrument shall reflect the identity, mailing address and
telephone number of the trustee and beneficiary responsible for receiving
payments associated with the loan or deed of trust in question. This duty/
1. Weeds which bear or may bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature;
Weeds and indigenous grasses which may attain such large growth as
to become, when dry; a fire menace to adjacent improved property;
2.
3. Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous; and
Poison oak, poison ivy and/or castor beans when the condition or
growths are such as to constitute a menace to the public health.
4.
§ 24-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-9.5
AO:863
obligation shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and
beneficiaries and their respective agents.
§ 24-9.6. Initial Inspection. [Ord. #2209]
Each beneficiary and trustee, who holds a deed of trust on a property
located within the City, shall perform an inspection of the property in
question prior to recording a notice of default or similar instrument with
the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office. If the property is found to be
vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, as defined by this section, it is hereby
deemed to be abandoned. One or more photographs shall be taken of the
residential property accurately portraying the condition of the exterior of
the premises. Photographs shall be dated and submitted to the Building and
Safety Department upon registration of the property where applicable.
§ 24-9.7. Regular Inspections. [Ord. #2209]
Each beneficiary and trustee shall perform a reinspection of the property
subject to foreclosure proceedings at least once a month following the initial
inspection until the property is no longer in default or is subject to the
conditions outlined below in subsection 24-9.10b.
§ 24-9.8. Registration. [Ord. #2209]
a. Timing of Registration. Registration of abandoned property shall be
made within five business days from the inspection in accordance with
subsection 24-9.6. The beneficiary and trustee shall register the
property with the Building and Safety Department on specified forms.
b. Content of Registration. The registration shall include information
identifying the location of the property, the last known owner(s) of the
property, the identity of the beneficiary and trustee, the direct mailing
address of the beneficiary and trustee and, in the case of a corporate or
out of area beneficiary or trustee, the local property management
company, if any, responsible for the security, maintenance and
marketing of the property in question.
c. Occupied Property. If the property is occupied but remains in default, it
shall be inspected by the beneficiary/trustee, or an agent/designee of
the beneficiary/trustee, on a monthly basis until:
1. The trustor or another party remedies the default; or
2. The foreclosure is completed and ownership is transferred to a new
owner who is not the former beneficiary or trustee; or
3. The property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, at
which time it is deemed abandoned. Hence the beneficiary/trustee
shall within 10 days of that inspection register the property with
the Building and Safety Department on forms provided by the City.
§ 24-9.5 COMPTON § 24-9.8
AO:864
§ 24-9.9. Maintenance Requirements. [Ord. #2209]
4. One or more photographs shall be taken at each reinspection and
shall be dated and submitted to the Building and Safety
Department within 10 days of the inspection in the same manner as
is required upon initial inspection.
d. Registration Fee. An annual registration fee shall accompany the
registration form. The fee and registration shall be valid for the fiscal
year, or remaining portion of the fiscal year in which the registration
was initially required. Subsequent registrations and fees are due July
1st of each year. If the registration is received after July 31 of the same
year, a late fee will be charged.
e. Foreclosure and Deed in Lieu of Foreclosure. This section shall also
apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale
wherein title has been transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust
involved in the foreclosure, and to any properties transferred under a
deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale.
f. Annual Registration Requirement. Properties subject to this section
shall remain subject to the annual registration requirement, security
and maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain
vacant.
g. Report. Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or
other legal entity that has registered a property under this section must
make a written report to the Building and Safety Department of any
change of information contained in the registration within 10 days of
the change.
h. Joint and Several. The duties/obligations specified in this section shall
be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries
and their respective agents.
a. Public Nuisance. It is declared a public nuisance for any person,
partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity,
that owns, leases, occupies, controls or manages any property subject
to the registration requirement contained in subsection 24-9.8, to
cause, permit, or maintain any property condition contrary to any
provision of this section. Consequently, the following maintenance
requirements as to any property subject to the registration requirement
contained in subsection 24-9.8 are adopted:
1. Chapter 14. Any property subject to this section must comply with
subsections 14-1.3 et seq., (Unsafe Buildings and Structures) and
14-3 (Dangerous and Substandard Residential Buildings).
2. Weeds and Rubbish. In addition to complying with Weed Abatement
sections 8-11.8 (Owner to Maintain Property Free of Weeds and
Rubbish) and 8-11.9 (Owner to Maintain Sidewalk and Parkway
Free of Weeds and Rubbish), the property shall be kept free of
§ 24-9.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-9.9
AO:865
§ 24-9.10. Security Requirements. [Ord. #2209]
weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building
materials, any accumulation of newspaper, circular, flyers, notices
(except those required by federal, state or local law), discarded
personal items including but not limited to, furniture, clothing,
large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that
give the appearance that the property is abandoned.
3. Property Maintenance. Any property subject to this section shall
not fall within the definition of a public nuisance in accordance with
the Property Maintenance Standards Chapter, subsection 24-2.2
(Conditions Which Are Declared a Public Nuisance).
4. Graffiti. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or
similar markings. Any removal or painting over of graffiti shall be
with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior
of the structure.
5. Landscaping. Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and
maintained to the neighborhood standard. Landscaping includes,
but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges
or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod
designed specifically for residential installation. Landscaping does
not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, plastic
sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material.
6. Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so that water remains
clear and free of pollutants, debris or from becoming a breeding
place for vectors, or alternatively shall be drained and kept dry. In
either case, properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the
minimum security fencing requirements of the State of California.
7. Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions. Adherence to this section
does not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or property owner of
obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions and restrictions
and/or homeowners association rules and regulations which may
apply to the property.
8. Joint and Several. The duties/obligations specified in this section
shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and
beneficiaries and their respective agents.
a. Secure Manner. Properties subject to this section shall be maintained in
a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
Secure manner includes, but is not limited to, closing and locking of
windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other
opening that may allow access to the interior of the property and or
structure(s). In the case of broken windows, securing means reglazing
or boarding the window.
§ 24-9.9 COMPTON § 24-9.10
AO:866
§ 24-9.11. Additional Authority. [Ord. #2209]
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this section, the
City shall have the authority to require the beneficiary, trustee, legal owner
or owner of record of any property affected by this section, to implement
additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited
to securing any and all doors, windows or other openings, installing
additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency,
employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be
reasonably required to secure and reduce the visual decline of the property.
§ 24-9.12. Recovery of Attorneys' Fees. [Ord. #2209]
b. Property Management Company. If the property is owned by a
corporation and/or out of area beneficiary/trustee/owner, a local
property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly
inspections to verify that the requirements of this section, and any
other applicable laws, are being met.
c. Twenty-Four-Hour Contact Information. The property shall be posted
with the name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the local
property management company. The posting shall be no less than 18
inches by 24 inches, shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of
45 feet, and shall contain the following verbiage: "THIS PROPERTY
MANAGED BY __________," and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR
CONCERNS CALL (name and phone number)".
d. Posting. The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing
the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or it
may be secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the
street on the front of the property so it is visible from the street. If no
such area exists, the posting shall be on a stake of sufficient size to
support the posting. The posting shall be in a location that is visible
from the street to the front of the property, and to the extent possible,
not readily accessible to potential vandalism. Exterior posting must be
constructed of, and printed with, weather resistant materials.
e. Weekly Inspections. The local property management company shall
inspect the property on a weekly basis to determine if the property is in
compliance with the requirements of this section. If the property
management company determines the property is not in compliance, it
is the company's responsibility to bring the property into compliance.
f. Joint and Several. The duties/obligations specified in this section shall
be joint and several among and between all owners, trustees and
beneficiaries and their respective agents.
a. In accordance with Government Code Section 38773.5(b), the
prevailing party in any proceeding conducted pursuant to this section
and associated with the abatement of a public nuisance shall be entitled
to recovery of attorneys' fees incurred in any such proceeding.
§ 24-9.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-9.12
AO:867
§ 24-9.13. Enforcement Remedies. [Ord. #2209]
§ 24-9.14. Civil Penalties. [Ord. #2209]
b. The recovery of attorneys' fees by the prevailing party is limited to
those individual actions or proceedings in which the City elects, at the
initiation of that action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own
attorneys' fees.
c. An award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party in an action or
proceeding shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the City in the action or proceeding.
a. Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other
legal entity, that owns, leases, occupies, controls or manages any
property subject to the registration requirement contained in
subsection 24-9.8 and causes, permits, or maintains a violation of this
section, as to that property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or
by imprisonment in the County jail for six months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
b. This section is intended to be cumulative to, and not in place of, other
rights and remedies available to the City pursuant to the Compton
Municipal Code. Above and beyond the violation and penalty specified
in this section, the City Attorney or a duly authorized enforcement
official may pursue any other right or remedy permitted by the
Compton Municipal Code, including but not limited to commencement
of any civil action, or administrative action. Civil penalties may also be
sought in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Civil and
Penal Codes of the State of California.
a. Civil Fine. The City may impose a civil fine of up to $1,000 per day for a
violation of this section in accordance with California Civil Code Section
2929.3. The fine will be imposed upon the legal owner (including
beneficiaries, trustees and/or record owner) who purchased the
property at a foreclosure sale or acquired it through foreclosure under
a mortgage or deed of trust.
b. Abatement Notice Requirements. If the City elects to impose a fine
pursuant to this section, it shall give notice of the alleged violation
which shall include:
1. A description of the conditions that gave rise to the allegation;
2. Notice of the City's intent to assess a civil fine if action to correct
the violation is not commenced within 14 days from the date of the
notice and completed within 30 days from the date of the notice;
3. City's Right to Abate; a statement that, if the conditions which
constitute the nuisance are not abated by the legal owner within
the time specified, the City shall have the right to abate such
§ 24-9.12 COMPTON § 24-9.14
AO:868
§ 24-9.15. Less Than Thirty-Day Notice. [Ord. #2209]
The City may provide less than 30 days' notice to remedy the condition
before imposing a civil fine, if it is determined that a specific condition of
the property threatens the imminent public health or safety, provided that
notice of that determination is given and time for compliance is given.
§ 24-9.16. Abatement Notice — Service. [Ord. #2209]
conditions with the cost, thereof, to be assessed against the owner
of the property;
4. Legal Owner's Right to Request Hearing. A statement that the legal
owner has the right to request a hearing before a Hearing Officer,
and that such request must be made in writing and must be made
within 15 calendar days from the date of service of the Abatement
Notice; and
5. Mailing Address for Notice. The notice shall be mailed to the
address provided in the deed or other instrument. Every deed or
instrument executed to convey fee title to real property shall have
noted across the bottom of the first page thereof the name and
address to which future tax statements may be mailed in
accordance with California Government Code Section 27321.5. If
there is no address listed, the notice shall be sent to the return
address provided on the deed or other instrument. In addition to
service by mail, the notice may also be served by personal delivery
in accordance with subsection 24-9.16.
c. Not Less Than 30 Days to Remedy Violation. The City shall provide a
period of not less than 30 days for the legal owner to remedy the
violation prior to imposing a civil fine. In determining the amount of the
fine, the City shall take into consideration any timely and good faith
efforts by the legal owner to remedy the violation.
d. Maximum Civil Fine; the maximum civil fine authorized by this section
is $1,000 for each day that the owner fails to maintain the property. This
commences on the day following the expiration of the period to remedy
the violation established by the City. This date would be specified in the
notice.
a. The written notice shall be served upon the legal owner of the property
upon which the nuisance exists, at least 35 calendar days before the
abatement deadline date specified in said notice.
b. The written notice shall be served by mailing to the address provided in
the deed or other instrument in accordance with subsection 24-9.14b5
by United States Mail, postage prepaid, as certified, first class mail,
return receipt requested. In addition, the notice may also be served by
personal delivery upon the legal owner.
§ 24-9.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-9.16
AO:869
§ 24-9.17. Abatement Notice — Posting. [Ord. #2209]
If the owner's address is unavailable, such service may be made by posting
the notice in a conspicuous place either upon or in front of the property of
which the nuisance exists, as follows:
§ 24-9.18. Duty to Abate — Time Frame. [Ord. #2209]
The legal owner shall abate the public nuisance within 30 calendar days
from the date of service of the abatement notice.
§ 24-9.19. Fines. [Ord. #2209]
Fines collected from enforcement of Section 24-9 et seq. will be placed
in the general fund and used for the purposes of enhancing the Code
Enforcement Program.
§ 24-9.20. Appeals. [Ord. #2209]
Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this section may appeal
a determination made hereunder in the manner set forth below.
§ 24-9.21. Request for Appeal. [Ord. #2209]
c. The failure of the legal owner to receive such notice shall not affect the
power of the City or its officers or employees to proceed as provided in
this section.
d. Proof of service of the notice shall be certified by written declaration
under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service. It
shall declare the time, date and manner in which service was made. The
declaration, together with any receipt returned in acknowledgment of
receipt by certified mail shall be made part of the City's permanent
record.
a. One notice shall be posted on or in front of each separately owned
parcel;
b. Not more than two notices to any such parcel of 50 feet to 100 feet
frontage are required; and
c. Notices shall be placed at intervals of not more than 100 feet if the
frontage of a parcel is greater than 100 feet, with one notice for each
100 feet of frontage.
a. After the written notice has been served, it shall be the duty of the legal
owner to whom the notice has been directed, to abate such nuisance
within the time specified by the notice. However, within 15 days of
being served with this notice, the owner or occupant may request a
hearing before a Hearing Officer.
§ 24-9.16 COMPTON § 24-9.21
AO:870
§ 24-9.22. Appeal Hearing Notice — Service. [Ord. #2209]
§ 24-9.23. Appeal Hearing — Procedure. [Ord. #2209]
b. The request must be made in writing, and must set forth the reasons
why the abatement is not necessary. The request must be made within
15 calendar days from the date of service of the abatement notice and
filed by delivering the request to the Building and Safety Department.
c. The appeal hearing shall be set not less than 15 calendar days and not
more than 30 calendar days from the date the legal owner filed a
request for a hearing with the Building and Safety Department.
a. Upon receipt of a timely, written request for a hearing, the Building
Official shall serve on the legal owner, who has appealed, a copy of the
notice of hearing by certified mail. In addition to certified mail, the
notice may also be served by personal service. The appeal hearing
notice shall be served at least 10 calendar days before the hearing.
Service shall be completed in the same manner as set forth in
subsection 24-9.16b through d.
b. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the
validity of any proceedings under this section.
a. At the time stated in the notice, the Hearing Officer shall hear and
consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests, and shall receive
testimony from owners, witnesses, including City personnel, and
interested persons relative to the alleged public nuisance and to the
proposed abatement of the premises. The hearing may be continued
from time to time without further notice.
b. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall determine
whether the premises, or any part thereof, as maintained, constitutes a
public nuisance as defined in subsection 24-9.9. If the Hearing Officer
finds that a public nuisance does exist, it shall determine how the
nuisance is to be abated and shall establish a time, not to exceed 10
calendar days, within which abatement shall take place. In the event
the owner fails to correct the nuisance within the time prescribed, the
City shall cause the nuisance to be abated. The cost incurred by the
City, including incidental enforcement costs, plus any prescribed
penalties, shall become a lien upon the property.
c. A copy of the Hearing Officer's determination, noted as the Abatement
Order, shall be served by mail upon the owner of the affected property.
The service shall be in accordance with subsection 24-9.16.
d. The decision of the Hearing Officer is final. The appellant may seek
judicial review of the Hearing Officers determination.
e. Failure to attend the appeal hearing by the person appealing shall
constitute a waiver of his or her rights to an appeal hearing. It shall also
§ 24-9.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-9.23
AO:871
§ 24-9.24. Abatement Order. [Ord. #2209]
Once the Hearing Officer determines that a public nuisance exists, he shall
issue an Abatement Order upon those who have submitted written requests
for a hearing. The order shall state that unless the nuisance is abated within
10 calendar days from the date of mailing, the designated enforcement
official or his designee will abate the nuisance and will, if necessary, enter
onto private property of said person without further notice in order to abate
the nuisance.
§ 24-9.25. Abatement Order — Service. [Ord. #2209]
The Abatement Order shall be served in the same manner as set forth in
subsection 24-9.16.
§ 24-9.26. Abatement by City. [Ord. #2209]
In the event the nuisance is not abated by the time specified in either the
abatement notice or the Abatement Order after a hearing is held, then the
designated enforcement official or his designee may enter onto any private
property and abate any nuisance found on or in front of the property.
§ 24-9.27. Recovery of Costs. [Ord. #2209]
Any legal owner of real property who causes, maintains or permits a public
nuisance to continue on his property after such person is given written
notice to abate the nuisance, and such continuation goes beyond the time
set for such abatement in the written notice, shall be liable to the City for
the expenses incurred in detecting, investigating, abating the violation and
the costs of monitoring compliance. If the owner fails to reimburse City
within 30 calendar days from the date of billing, the City may recover such
costs by either; instituting a civil action, imposing a nuisance abatement
lien or by a special assessment or any other remedy available under the law.
§ 24-9.28. Costs of Abatement as Lien Against Private Property.
[Ord. #2209]
The Building Official shall, after abating the nuisance, compute all
expenses, so incurred by the City in connection therewith, including the
applicable processing fees and all incidental enforcement costs plus any
prescribed penalties. All expenses may be charged as a lien against the
property on which the nuisance existed.
§ 24-9.29. Abatement Cost Report. [Ord. #2209]
The Building Official, upon completion of abatement under the direction
of the City, shall prepare an Abatement Cost Report which provides an
accounting of the costs, including incidental expenses, incurred as a result
constitute an adjudication of the abatement notice, or any portion of the
notice.
§ 24-9.23 COMPTON § 24-9.29
AO:872
of abating the public nuisance. The Abatement Cost Report shall itemize all
costs associated with the abatement as well as:
§ 24-9.30. Filing of Abatement Cost Report with City Clerk. [Ord.
#2209]
On a periodic basis, as determined by the Building Official, the original
Abatement Cost Report shall be filed with the City Clerk. It will reference
those properties which the owner has not fully reimbursed the City within
30 calendar days from the date of billing.
§ 24-9.31. Posting of Notice of Abatement Cost Report and
Assessment List. [Ord. #2209]
a. A description of the real property where the abatement activity took
place;
b. The names and addresses of the persons entitled to receive notice;
c. A description of the work completed;
d. Notice of the opportunity to appeal the amount and the reasonableness
of the abatement costs; and
e. Notice of the manner in which the City intends to collect the final and
approved abatement costs including, but not limited to special
assessment against the property.
a. The City Clerk shall post a copy of the Abatement Cost Report,
assessment list, notice of the filing of the report and the time and place
where said documents will be submitted to the City Council for
confirmation and hearing.
b. Said documents shall be posted on the bulletin board adjacent to the
entrance to City Hall notifying property owners of the time and location
of the hearing at which they may be heard.
c. The posting and first publication of said notice shall be made and
completed at least 15 days before the time such report shall be
submitted to the Council. Such notice, as so posted and published, shall
be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE OF HEARING ON ABATEMENT COST REPORT AND
ASSESSMENT
Notice Is Hereby Given that on _____________, 2________, the Building
Official of the City of Compton filed with the City Clerk of said City
a report and assessment on the abatement within said City, a copy
of which is posted on the bulletin board adjacent to the entrance to
Compton City Hall.
§ 24-9.29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-9.31
AO:873
§ 24-9.32. Mailing of Notice of Hearing on Abatement Cost Report
and Assessment. [Ord. #2209]
§ 24-9.33. Hearing on Report and Confirming Cost Assessment.
[Ord. #2209]
§ 24-9.34. Nuisance Abatement Lien. [Ord. #2209]
If the Council orders that the abatement costs be deemed a nuisance
abatement lien, the same may be recorded and enforced against the
Notice Is Further Given that on _____________, 2________, at the hour
of ________ p.m. in the Council Chambers of said City Hall, said report
and assessment list will be presented to the City Council of said City
for consideration and confirmation. Any and all persons interested or
having any objections to said report and assessment list, or to any
matter or thing contained therein, may appear at said time and place
and be heard.
Date Posted_______________, 2________.
d. A similar notice shall also be published twice in a newspaper of general
circulation which is published and circulated within the City.
a. Abatement Costs Assessed Against Owner. The City Clerk shall also
mail a notice to each property owner identified in the report at the
address as set forth in subsection 24-9.14b5. Said notice shall provide a
description of the real property at which the work was performed, the
nature of the work performed, and the expenses incurred by the City in
performing the work and shall notify the owner that said costs shall be
assessed against the owner of the property.
b. Time and Location of Hearing. The notice shall also specify the time and
location where the proposed assessment will be presented to the City
Council for hearing and confirmation. The notice shall be mailed at
least 10 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing.
a. Public Hearing Before City Council. At the time and place fixed for
hearing and confirming the proposed assessments, the City Council
shall hear the same. The Building Official shall attend the hearing with
a record of all the abatement costs.
b. Proposed Assessment May Be Modified. At the hearing, the City Council
may correct, modify or eliminate any proposed assessment which it may
deem excessive or otherwise incorrect. Thereafter, by resolution, the
Council shall confirm each assessment and the amount, as proposed or
as corrected and modified.
c. Assessment Made Personal Obligation. The Council may order that the
costs of abatement be made a personal obligation of the property owner
and either a nuisance abatement lien or a special assessment against
the property.
§ 24-9.31 COMPTON § 24-9.34
AO:874
property pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Section
38773.1.
§ 24-9.35. Special Assessment. [Ord. #2209]
§ 24-9.36. Notice of Special Assessment. [Ord. #2209]
Notice shall be given to the property owner at the time of imposing the
assessment and shall specify that the property may be sold after three years
by the Tax Collector for unpaid delinquent taxes. The Tax Collector's power
of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive
notice.
§ 24-9.37. Collection on Tax Roll. [Ord. #2209]
After confirmation of the report, the City Clerk shall submit a certified
copy of the report to the County Auditor Controller. The County Auditor
Controller shall enter each assessment on the County Tax Roll opposite the
parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the same
time and in the same manner as general municipal taxes. The assessment
shall be subject to the same interest and penalties and same procedure and
sale in case of delinquency. All laws and ordinances applicable to the levy,
collection, and enforcement of City taxes are hereby made applicable to
such special assessments.
§ 24-9.38. Abatement Cost Constitutes a Civil Debt. [Ord. #2209]
Final abatement costs shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the City and
may be deemed a personal obligation of the legal owner by the City Council.
An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of
competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any delinquent
or unpaid abatement costs. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be
cumulative, and the use of an action to collect such an amount as a debt
by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by the
Municipal Code or by law.
a. As an alternative to a nuisance abatement lien, in accordance with
California Government Code Section 38773.5, the costs of abatement
may be made a special assessment against the property. Once the
special assessment is recorded in the Office of the County Recorder, it
shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the special
assessment and a lien will attach against the property until the
assessment, and all interest and penalties due and payable have been
paid.
b. The special assessment and lien shall be subject to the same penalties
as are provided for other delinquent taxes or assessments of the City.
§ 24-9.34 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-9.39
AO:875
§ 24-9.39. Fees. [Ord. #2209]
The fee for a) registering; b) reregistering and c) late payment of the
registration fee for an abandoned property shall be set, from time to time,
by resolution of the City Council.
Chapter 25
STREET LIGHTING MAINTENANCE DISTRICT
§ 25-1. PURPOSE. [Added by Ord. #918, § 7600]
There hereby is established and provided a procedure for the formation
of street lighting maintenance districts in the City including the method
of assessing the costs for the same upon the benefited property and the
enforcement thereof by the sale of properties against which such
assessment has become a lien.
§ 25-2. STATUTORY REFERENCES.
§ 25-2.1. Adoption of Street Lighting Act of 1919. [Added by Ord.
#918, § 7601; Ord. #1117]
For the purpose of carrying out the intent and purpose of this Chapter there
hereby is adopted the Street Lighting Act of 1919 (being Part 1 of Division
14 of the Streets and Highways Code of the State of California) as amended
and in force and effect on August 19, 1958, except those portions of said
Act designated in said Code respectively as Sections 18030, 18031, 18042,
18061, 18062, 18090, 18091, 18092, 18094, 18097, 18098, 18120, 18123,
18127, 18170, 18174 and 18175.
§ 25-2.2. Adoption of Sections 18150 Through 18155, Inclusive of
the Street Lighting Act of 1919. [Added by Ord. #972, § 7601.1]
Sections 18150 through 18155, both inclusive, of the Street Lighting Act of
1919 (being Part 1, Division 14, of the Streets and Highways Code of the
State of California) as amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1954, are
hereby adopted.
§ 25-3. DEFINITIONS. [Added by Ord. #918, § 7602]
As used in this Chapter:
COMPANY — Shall mean any privately or publicly owned utility furnishing
the agency for lighting or illumination.
SERVICE AND ANY OF ITS VARIANTS — Shall mean the furnishing of
electric current or energy or other illuminating agent to all or part of any
street lighting system, and luminaries, poles or lighting standards when
such luminaries, poles, or lighting standards are owned by the company
furnishing the service and are furnished by said company for a rental fee.
§ 24-9.39 COMPTON § 25-4
AO:876
§ 25-4. INITIATION OF WORK; DESIGNATION OF DISTRICT.
[Added by Ord. #918, § 7603]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18030 of said Streets
and Highways Code. Whenever in the opinion of the City Council the public
interest or convenience may require that body may do one or more of the
following:
§ 25-5. RIGHT TO MAINTAIN PRIVATELY-OWNED UTILITY
PROPERTY. [Added by Ord. #918, § 7604]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18031 of the Streets
and Highways Code. The City shall not be limited by the provisions of this
Chapter to the maintenance or servicing of street lighting systems, or any
part thereof, owned only by the City, but the City Council also may order
such maintenance or service to be furnished upon street lighting systems,
either in whole or in part, installed by and remaining the property of any
public utility, public corporation or other person with whom a contract is
entered into for such maintenance or service and may assess the costs and
expenses thereof, including the rental of poles, luminaries, standards and
other facilities from the company furnishing such service, luminaries, poles
and facilities, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
§ 25-6. PRESENTATION OF REPORTS TO COUNCIL. [Added by Ord.
#918, § 7605]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18042 of the Streets and
Highways Code. When the report is filed with the Clerk he shall present it
to the City Council for consideration and that body shall approve or reject
the report. Prior to approval the Council may modify it in any respect.
The report as approved shall stand as the report for the purpose of all
subsequent proceedings.
a. Order any street lighting system to be maintained in or along the whole
or any part of any one or more of the streets in the City.
b. Order electric current or energy or other illuminating agent to be
furnished for such street lighting system.
For any of the purposes expressed in paragraphs a or b of this section, the
City Council may determine and declare the district to be benefited by any
such improvement and fix the exterior boundaries thereof and assess, either
partly or wholly, the costs and expenses (including all incidental expenses) of
such improvement, or any one or more of the items thereof, upon the lands
in the district. The district as determined by the Council may be composed of
noncontiguous parts.
§ 25-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-7
AO:877
§ 25-7. CONTENTS OF RESOLUTION OF INTENTION. [Added by
Ord. #918, § 7606]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18061 of said Streets
and Highways Code. The Resolution of Intention:
§ 25-8. FIXATION OF DATES FOR COMMENCEMENT AND
EXPIRATION OF PERIOD OF IMPROVEMENT. [Added by Ord. #918,
§ 7607]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18062 of said Streets
and Highways Code. The dates of commencement and ending of the
improvement shall be fixed by the City Council on or before the date of
execution of any contract as provided in this Chapter, or, in the event that
no contract is let and the maintenance or servicing is furnished by the
City, those dates shall be fixed by the City Council on or before the date
of ordering the maintenance or servicing by the City. The City Council
may subsequently postpone the dates of commencement and ending of the
period for a reasonable time upon good and sufficient reason appearing
therefor and may, in any advertisement for bids and in any contract entered
into, reserve the right to make such postponement for such reason.
§ 25-9. AMOUNT OF LEVY; SUCCESSIVE LEVIES; REPORT. [Added
by Ord. #918, § 7608]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18090 of said Streets
and Highways Code. After acquiring jurisdiction to proceed with the
improvement, the City Council shall levy the assessment for the portion
a. Shall describe briefly the proposed improvement;
b. Shall designate the assessment district by describing the exterior
boundaries thereof, or by referring to a plat or map on file in the office
of the City Clerk at the time of passing the Resolution of Intention,
which shall indicate by a boundary line the extent of the territory
included in the proposed district, and shall govern for all details as to
the extent of the assessment district;
c. May order that a certain portion or percentage of the costs and
expenses of the improvement, the amount of which portion or
percentage shall be specified in the Resolution, shall be paid out of the
City Treasury from such fund as the City Council may designate;
d. Shall set the time and place for hearing protests in relation to the
proposed improvement, which time shall not be less than 20 days from
the date of the passage of the Resolution of Intention and, further, shall
direct the Clerk to give notice of the hearing in the manner provided in
Sections 18071 and 18072 of said Streets and Highways Code;
e. Shall provide that the improvement of the street lighting system shall
be for a period of time stated in the Resolution of Intention, which
period of time shall not exceed six years.
§ 25-7 COMPTON § 25-9
AO:878
or percentage required to pay for the improvement for the period of time
beginning with the date of commencement of the improvement fixed by the
City Council and ending with the close of one twenty-four-month period
thereafter upon all the respective lots or parcels of land in the assessment
district. The assessment shall be divided into two annual installments.
Thereafter during the period of time provided in the Resolution of Intention,
the City Council shall, on or before the beginning of the next succeeding
twenty-four-month period, levy in like manner and on the same lots or
parcels of land the assessment for the portion or percentage required to pay
for such improvement for such twenty-four-month period, and said board,
commission, or officer of the City authorized therefor shall, on or before 21
days prior to the commencement of each such period, make and file with
the City Council a report in writing.
§ 25-10. CONTENTS OF REPORT. [Added by Ord. #918, § 7609]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18091 of said Streets
and Highways Code. Such report shall contain:
§ 25-11. DISPOSITION OF UNEXPENDED BALANCES; REFUNDS;
REVERTER TO GENERAL FUND. [Added by Ord. #918, § 7610]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18092 of said Streets
and Highways Code. Any unexpended balance remaining in the fund
devoted to the improvement at the expiration of any preceding assessment
period shall be credited to the fund to be raised for the next ensuing
assessment period and the assessment to be levied for such ensuing period
shall be only for the amount required therefor after deducting from such
estimated amount the amount of any such unexpended balance. Any
unexpended balance remaining in such fund at the expiration of the period
of time provided for in the Resolution of Intention, upon demands therefor
made in accordance with the provisions of Section 1416 of the Charter of
the City, shall be repaid pro rata to the persons by whom such assessments
were paid, unless a new district is formed for furnishing service to said
lands in the manner provided in this Chapter, then, and in such event, any
unexpended balance remaining in such fund shall be credited to the fund
a. An estimate of the cost and expense of the improvement for the ensuing
twenty-four-month period.
b. A diagram showing the assessment district referred to in the Resolution
of Intention, also the boundaries and dimensions of the respective lots
or parcels of land within the district as it existed at the time of the
making of the last mentioned diagram, each of which lots or parcels
shall be given a separate number on the diagram.
c. A schedule showing the proportionate amount of the assessment to be
charged in proportion to the benefits to be received by each lot or
parcel shown on the diagram required by paragraph b of this section;
such amount shall be shown as two annual installments which need not
be equal in amount.
§ 25-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-11
AO:879
to be raised for the next ensuing assessment period for said new district.
Any such unexpended balance remaining in such fund at the expiration of
such period, and not demanded as provided in this section, shall revert to
the general fund of the City or be placed in such fund as the City Council
may order.
§ 25-12. TRANSMISSION OF DIAGRAM AND ASSESSMENT TO
COLLECTOR. [Added by Ord. #918, § 7611]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18094 of said Streets
and Highways Code. Upon the levying of any assessment, the City Clerk
shall transmit the diagram and assessment upon which such levy is based,
or a certified copy of said diagram and assessment upon which such levy
is based, or a certified copy of said diagram and assessment to the City
Tax Collector or to such other City officer or employee as the City Council
designates in the resolution levying the assessment or in the case the City
has adopted a method for collection of taxes by County officers then at the
option of the City to the County Tax Collector, and such County Tax Collector
shall have full power to perform the duties required in this section of the
City Tax Collector.
§ 25-13. PUBLICATION OF NOTICE OF RECORDATION; CONTENTS
OF NOTICE. [Added by Ord. #918, § 7612]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18097 of said Streets
and Highways Code. The Tax Collector shall, upon the recording of such
diagram and assessment, give notice by publication for five days in a daily
newspaper, published and circulated in the City, or by two insertions in
a weekly newspaper so published and circulated, that the diagram and
assessment has been recorded in his office and that the first installment of
said assessment is due and payable immediately and the second installment
will be due one year thereafter and that payment of said first installment
shall be made to him within 60 days after the date of the first publication
or posting and that said second installment shall be paid to him within one
year and 60 days after the date of the first publication or posting, which
date shall be stated in the notice. The notice shall also contain the statement
that all first installments of said assessment not paid before the expiration
of the 60 days shall be delinquent and that all second installments not paid
before the expiration of said one year and 60 days shall be delinquent.
Upon any such installment becoming delinquent 5% of the amount thereof
shall be added thereto. The Tax Collector shall mail bills to the owners of
property within the district as such owners are shown on the last equalized
assessment roll of the County of Los Angeles, or as known to the Tax
Collector.
§ 25-14. MARKING OF PAYMENT AND DELINQUENCY. [Added by
Ord. #918, § 7613]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18098 of said Streets
and Highways Code. When payment of any assessment or installment is
§ 25-11 COMPTON § 25-14
AO:880
made, the Tax Collector shall mark opposite such assessment or installment
the word "paid," with the date of payment thereof, and shall give a receipt
therefor. Upon the expiration of the period of 60 days in the case of the
first installment, or upon the expiration of said period of one year and 60
days in the case of a second installment, all assessments or installments
then unpaid shall become delinquent, and the Tax Collector shall mark
each such assessment or installment "delinquent," and shall add 5% to the
amount thereof, and, in addition thereto, 1% per month to each delinquent
installment until the same, including the penalties thereon, is paid.
§ 25-15. NOTICE OF SALE; PUBLICATION; TIME OF SALE. [Added
by Ord. #918, § 7614]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18120 of said Streets
and Highways Code. If either the first or second installment is delinquent
and unpaid the Tax Collector shall, within 30 days after the date of
delinquency of the second installment, begin the publication of a notice of
sale of the land upon which the assessments or any installment thereof have
not been paid, which publication shall be made by two insertions in a daily
or weekly newspaper published and circulated in the City. The dates fixed
for the sale of such land shall be not less than 10 days nor more than 30
days after the last publication of said notice of sale, or after the completion
of posting, as the case may be.
§ 25-16. CONDUCT OF SALE; FEE FOR CERTIFICATE; SALE TO
CITY. [Added by Ord. #918, § 7615]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18123 of said Streets
and Highways Code. At the time and place fixed in the notice of sale the
Tax Collector shall proceed with such sale, commencing at the head of the
list of lands contained in such notice and continuing in the numerical order
thereof until all land is sold, except that he may postpone or continue the
sale from day to day until the sale is completed. The Tax Collector shall
separately sell each lot or parcel of land described in such notice, or so
much therefor as is necessary to realize the amount assessed against the lot
or parcel, together with the penalties and costs, and $0.50 for a certificate
of sale. The City shall have prior rights to purchase any land to be sold at
said auction for the amount of the assessment, including penalties, costs
and interest against any parcel and if there is no other purchaser the lot or
parcel shall be struck off to the City as purchaser.
§ 25-17. EXECUTION OF DEED; TIME OF EXECUTION; RECITALS;
FEE FOR DEEDS. [Added by Ord. #918, § 7616]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18127 of said Streets
and Highways Code. At any time after the expiration of 12 months from
the date of sale, the Tax Collector shall execute to the purchaser, or his
assignee, on his application, if such purchaser or assignee has complied
with the provisions of this Chapter, a deed of the land sold, in which shall
be recited substantially the matters contained in the certificate, also any
§ 25-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-17
AO:881
assignment thereof and the fact that no person has redeemed the land. The
Tax Collector shall receive from the applicant for a deed $1 for making such
deed, unless the City is the purchaser, in which case no charge shall be
made therefor. In the event, however, the City is the purchaser then no deed
shall be executed to the City without a notice of sale and a public auction as
provided in Sections 23-15 and 23-16 of this Code.
§ 25-18. TIME FOR AWARD; ABANDONMENT OF PROJECT. [Added
by Ord. #918, § 7617]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18176 of said Streets
and Highways Code. At any time after the transmission of the diagram and
assessment to the City Tax Collector or City Auditor, the City Council may
let the contract for making such improvement. If the installation of such
proposed lighting system is abandoned, then the proceedings under this
section shall be abandoned.
§ 25-19. LIMITATION ON COSTS; PAYMENT OF EXCESSES. [Added
by Ord. #918, § 7618]
The following shall be in lieu of the deleted Section 18175 of said Streets
and Highways Code. If the work of the improvement, or any part thereof,
is executed by the City, then the amount appropriated and used from the
special fund to pay the costs and expenses of the work or part thereof
executed by the City shall not exceed the amount of the respective lowest
valid bid received for such work or for such part thereof, or, if no bids
have been received or the work of the improvement is executed by the City
the amount appropriated and used from the special fund to pay the costs
and expenses of such work shall not exceed the amount of the respective
estimate thereof provided for in Section 18041 of said Streets and Highways
Code. If such costs and expenses exceed the amount of the said bid, or of
the said estimate in case no bids are received, then such excess costs and
expense shall be paid out of any moneys in the general fund in the City
Treasury.
Chapter 26
UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES FACILITIES
§ 26-1. DEFINITIONS. [Added by Ord. #1325, § 7700]
As used in this Chapter:
COMMISSION — Shall mean the Public Utilities Commission of the State.
PERSON — Shall mean and include individuals, firms, corporations,
partnerships, and their agents and employees.
POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES, AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES
— Shall mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs,
platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches,
§ 25-17 COMPTON § 26-1
AO:882
communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances
located above ground within a District and used or useful in supplying
electric, communication, or similar or associated service.
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT OR DISTRICT — Shall mean that area
in the City within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead
structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted
pursuant to the provisions of Section 26-4.
UTILITY — Shall include all persons or entities supplying electric,
communication, or similar or associated service by means of electrical
materials or devices.
§ 26-2. PUBLIC HEARINGS BY COUNCIL. [Added by Ord. #1325,
§ 7701]
The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether
the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires the removal of poles,
overhead wires, and associated overhead structures within designated
areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities
for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The
City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners, as shown on the last
equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned by mail of the time and
place of such hearings at least 10 days prior to the date thereof. Each such
hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time.
At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to
be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive.
§ 26-3. REPORT BY CITY ENGINEER. [Added by Ord. #1325,
§ 7702]
Prior to holding such public hearing, the City Engineer shall consult all
affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing
containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities'
participation and estimated total costs to the City and affected property
owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to
complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities.
§ 26-4. COUNCIL MAY DESIGNATE UNDERGROUND UTILITY
DISTRICTS BY RESOLUTION. [Added by Ord. #1325, § 7703]
If, after any such public hearing, the Council finds that the public necessity,
health, safety, or welfare requires such removal and such underground
installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution,
declare such designated area an Underground Utility District and order
such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a
description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within
which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished
and within which affected property owners shall be ready to receive
underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal
and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of
§ 26-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-4
AO:883
labor, materials, and equipment necessary for such removal and for the
installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.
§ 26-5. UNLAWFUL ACTS. [Added by Ord. #1325, § 7704]
Whenever the Council creates an Underground Utility District and orders
the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures
therein as provided in Section 26-4, it shall be unlawful for any person
or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ, or
operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in the
District after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be
removed by such resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be
required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to
the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work
necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service
as provided in Section 26-10, and for such reasonable time required to
remove such facilities after such work has been performed, and except as
otherwise provided in this Chapter.
§ 26-6. EXCEPTIONS; EMERGENCIES OR UNUSUAL
CIRCUMSTANCES. [Added by Ord. #1325, § 7705]
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, overhead facilities may
be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed 30 days, without
authority of the City Engineer, in order to provide emergency service. The
City Engineer may grant special permission, on such terms as he may deem
appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as
to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use, or operate
poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures.
§ 26-7. OTHER EXCEPTIONS. [Added by Ord. #1325, § 7706]
In any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 26-4 of this
Chapter the City may authorize any or all of the following exceptions:
a. Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision
and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer;
b. Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
c. Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a District within which overhead wires have been prohibited,
or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a District, where such
wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires, and
associated overhead structures are not prohibited;
d. Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used for the
transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500
volts;
e. Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means
of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the
§ 26-4 COMPTON § 26-7
AO:884
§ 26-8. NOTICES TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY
COMPANIES. [Added by Ord. #1325, § 7707]
Within 10 days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant
to the provisions of Section 26-4, the City Clerk shall notify all affected
utilities and all persons owning real property within the District thereby
created of the adoption of the resolution. The City Clerk shall further
notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any
person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric,
communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall
provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive
such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new
location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the
respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.
Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the
resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 26-4, together with
a copy of the provisions of this Chapter, to affected property owners as such
are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities.
§ 26-9. RESPONSIBILITY OF UTILITY COMPANIES. [Added by Ord.
#1325, § 7708; Ord. #1510]
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within
a District created by any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of
Section 26-4, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits,
conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under
its applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs on file with the Commission.
The supplying utility shall furnish the City Engineer with six complete sets
of plans and specifications indicating the exact location and sizes of such
underground facilities.
§ 26-10. RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS. [Added by Ord.
#1325, § 7709; Ord. #1510]
building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent
building without crossing any public street;
f. Antennae, associated equipment, and supporting structures used by a
utility for furnishing communication services;
g. Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surfacemounted
transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter
cabinets, and concealed ducts; and
h. Temporary poles, overhead wires, and associated wires and associated
overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction
projects.
a. Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a
building or structure within a District shall construct and provide that
§ 26-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-10
AO:885
portion of the utility's service connections totally on his property
between the facilities referred to in Section 26-9 and the termination
facility on or within such building or structure being served, subject
to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility
on file with the Commission. If such connection is not provided by any
person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant
to Section 26-4, the City Engineer shall give notice in writing to the
person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to
the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to
provide the required underground facilities within 10 days after the
receipt of such notice.
b. The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given
by personal service or by mail, or both. In the case of service by mail,
such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to
whom it was sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof.
c. When notice is given by mail to the owner or occupant, the City
Engineer shall file a copy of each notice with the Building Official and
shall request the Building Official to inspect the premises and post a
notice on a card, not less than eight inches by 10 inches in size, in a
conspicuous place on each of the affected properties. The posting shall
be accomplished within 48 hours after the time of the mailing of the
notices.
d. The notice posted by the Building Official requiring approved
underground connections between the utilities off-site and the on-site
terminal at the building or structure shall specify precisely what work
shall be done, shall state that if such work is not completed within 30
days after the posting of such notice the Building Official shall cause the
required facilities to be completed, and shall state that the cost and
expense of such undergrounding of facilities will be assessed against
the property benefited and may become a lien upon the property.
e. If, upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, such approved
underground facilities have not been provided for unoccupied premises
and no electric or communication services are being, furnished thereto,
the Building Official, in lieu of providing the required underground
facilities, shall have the authority to order the disconnection and
removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated
equipment supplying utility service to the subject property.
f. If, upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, such approved
underground facilities have not been provided for occupied premises,
the Building Official shall forthwith cause the work to be done. Upon
the completion of the work, the Building Official shall file a written
report with the Council declaring that the required underground
facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal
description of each of the properties against which such cost is to be
assessed.
§ 26-10 COMPTON § 26-10
AO:886
§ 26-11. RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY. [Added by Ord. #1325, § 7710]
The City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all
poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner
or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the
resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 26-4.
§ 26-12. EXTENSIONS OF TIME. [Added by Ord. #1325, § 7711]
In the event any act required by the provisions of this Chapter or by a
resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 26-4 cannot be
performed within the time provided on account of shortages of materials,
war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil
disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor,
the time within which such act shall be accomplished shall be extended for
a period equivalent to the time of such limitation.
§ 26-13. VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. [Added by Ord. #1325, § 7712]
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter. Any person violating
any provision of this Chapter or failing to comply with any of its
requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be liable to the penalty stated in Section 1-6. Each such
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any
portion of which any violation of any provision of this Chapter is committed,
g. Upon receiving the report of the Building Official, the Council shall set a
time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the costs.
The City Clerk shall provide notice in writing to the persons owning
each of the properties affected, giving the time and place the Council
will pass upon the report of the Building Official and hear protests
against the report. Such notice shall give the address and legal
description and shall set forth the amount of the proposed assessment
on each property.
h. Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council shall
hear and consider the report and all protests, if there are any, and then
proceed to affirm, modify, or reject the assessment.
i. If any assessment is not paid within 15 days after its confirmation by the
Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the
property against which the assessment is made by the City Engineer,
and the City Engineer is directed to turn over to the Assessor and Tax
Collector a notice of lien on each of such properties on which the
assessment has not been paid, and the Assessor and Tax Collector shall
add the amount of such assessment to the next regular bill for taxes
levied against the premises upon which such assessment was not paid.
Such assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as property
taxes are due and payable and, if not paid when due and payable, shall
bear interest at the rate of 6% per year.
§ 26-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-13
AO:887
continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable therefor as
provided for in this Chapter.
Chapter 27
TRAILER CAMPS
Editor's Note: This Chapter was originally adopted by Ord. #645.
§ 27-1. DEFINITIONS. [Added by Ord. #968; Ord. #1041, § 5100]
As used in this Chapter:
CABANA — Shall mean any permanent cabin, small house, room enclosure,
or other building erected, constructed, or placed on any trailer space within
six feet of any trailer on the same trailer space in a trailer camp and used
for human habitation.
CAMP CAR OR CAMP TRAILER — Shall mean any unit for living or sleeping
purposes and which is equipped with wheels or similar devices used for the
purpose of transporting it from place to place, whether by motive power
or other means, and said unit, so equipped shall be capable of being safely
operated as a vehicle over the public thoroughfares of the State at a speed
limit of 45 miles per hour. Any such vehicle that is incapable of such safe
operation, as aforesaid, is hereby declared to be a dwelling, as defined in
the State Housing Act, and shall be subject to the provisions thereof relating
to dwellings.
CAMP GROUND OR TRAILER CAMP — Shall mean any place, area or tract
of land upon which is located any camp car or trailer used for human
occupancy; and for the purposes of this Chapter is hereinafter referred to
as "Camp Ground."
CAMP TRAILER SPACE — Shall mean a space in a "Camp Ground or Trailer
Camp" for the accommodation only of one camp car or trailer coach, one
automobile, and one cabana as permitted in Section 27-5.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Health Office of the City, and
shall include the County Health Officer and his duly authorized
representatives and deputies if the City shall have contracted for services
of said County Health Officer.
§ 27-2. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. #856, § 5101]
It shall be the duty of the Building Department, Health Department, and
Fire Department to enforce all of the provisions of this Chapter and for the
purpose of securing enforcement thereof, the Building Inspector, the Health
Officer, and the Chief of the Fire Department, or any of their authorized
representatives, shall have the right and are hereby empowered to enter
upon the premises of any camp ground within the City to inspect the same
and all accommodations connected therewith.
§ 26-13 COMPTON § 27-3
AO:888
§ 27-3. APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS. [Ord. #856, § 5102]
No camp ground hereafter established shall be located within the City until
a special use permit has been applied for and granted by the Planning
Commission. In addition to the matters required to be stated in an
application for a special use permit such application shall give the location
by street number and legal description of the property on which such
camp ground is to be established, the dimensions of said property, the
number of camp trailer spaces in said camp, and such other information
as the Planning Commission may require. A plot plan shall accompany
all applications drawn to such scale as will adequately show the location
and dimensions of all unit spaces, roads, buildings, sewer and water lines,
electrical outlets, incinerators and fire protection equipment, and other
essential requirements of this Chapter. The Building, Health and Fire
Departments shall examine such application and report to the Planning
Commission in writing relative to conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter, and any other matters which, in their opinion, pertain to such
application in relation to the proposed site. Any permit granted to operate a
camp ground is for the exclusive use of the person named in the application
involved. Any such permit shall become null and void if actual construction
of the improvements required is not commenced within 60 days from date
of issue. No permit granted to operate a camp ground shall be transferred
unless the transferee first obtains an occupancy permit as provided in this
Chapter.
§ 27-4. OCCUPANCY PERMIT. [Ord. #856, § 5103]
Upon the completion of any such camp ground and prior to the use thereof,
the owner or renter of such camp ground shall make application to the
Building Department for an Occupancy Permit. The application for
Occupancy Permit shall be in writing and shall contain such information as
may be required by said Department with respect to the operation of the
camp ground, and it shall be accompanied by an inspection fee of $5.
The Building Department, Health Department and Fire Department shall
thereupon make an inspection of the camp ground referred to in said
application, and if it is found to be in conformity with this Chapter and
Code, and all applicable laws of the State, said Department shall issue to
the owner or operator thereof a written Occupancy Permit, which permit
shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous place at said camp ground.
The Occupancy Permit shall expire annually on June 30 following the date
of issue, and may be renewed upon written application accompanied by an
inspection fee of $5 to the Building Department; provided, that no such
renewal will be issued if upon inspection the camp ground is not in strict
conformity with all provisions of this Chapter and Code and all applicable
laws of the State.
§ 27-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-5
AO:889
§ 27-5. CONSTRUCTION PERMITTING USE OF CABANA. [Ord.
#856, § 5104; Ord. #1041]
No cabana shall be permitted in any camp trailer space except when in
compliance with all the following conditions:
a. The applicant shall show that he has received any and all approvals and
permits as required by the departments of the State of California having
jurisdiction.
b. A complete, legible scaled and dimensional plot plan of the entire trailer
camp with all the trailer spaces numbered shall be presented to the
Building Department for retention as a permanent record. Within the
trailer camp itself, trailer space boundaries as shown on the plot plan
must be clearly and permanently marked. Provided that this subsection
shall not apply if such a plot plan has been submitted pursuant to the
provisions of Section 27-3 or if such a plot plan has been filed with the
Building Department by a previous cabana applicant.
c. A building permit must be obtained from the City of Compton,
Department of Building and Safety before any work is commenced.
Before a permit is granted two sets of plans shall be submitted to and
approved by the Building Official. The plans as submitted must show
compliance with the following:
1. A scaled and dimensioned plot plan of the trailer space showing
locations of trailer coach, and/or automobile, and location of
proposed cabana.
2. Foundation plan, floor plan, construction details, and three
elevations, showing compliance with all requirements for dwellings
in the Building Code.
3. Copy of engineering analysis when required by the Building
Official.
§ 27-5 COMPTON § 27-5
AO:890
§ 27-6. CLEANLINESS; CARETAKER. [Ord. #856, § 5105; Ord.
#1041]
Every person owning or operating a camp ground shall maintain such camp
ground and all permanent equipment in connection therewith in a clean and
sanitary condition and maintain said equipment in a state of good repair. No
person shall operate a camp ground in which three or more families reside
unless such camp ground be provided at all times with a resident caretaker.
Application for permit shall be signed by the owner of the trailer camp or
by an agent possessing proof of authorization to act for the owner.
If the Building Official is of the opinion, notwithstanding technical
compliance on the part of the applicant with the applicable building
regulations of the City of Compton, that the proposed cabana will be
inconsistent with the Master Zoning Plan (comprehensive general plan)
because of its appearance, structure or location, he may deny the
application. If the application is denied for said reason, the applicant may
petition the Planning Coordinator for approval. If the Planning Coordinator
approves the proposed structure in writing, the Building Official shall issue
the building permit forthwith. If the Planning Coordinator refuses to give
the written approval or fails to act within 10 days of the filing of the
petition, the applicant may file an application for review by the Planning
Commission. Such application shall be filed, heard and determined
pursuant to the provisions of Sections 30-9 through 30-12 of Chapter 30,
Zoning.
d. The trailer space shall contain a minimum of 900 square feet if no
automobile is parked or stored thereon; a minimum of 1,044 square feet
if an automobile is stored or parked thereon.
e. A cabana shall be erected, constructed and occupied only as an
accessory to a trailer coach.
f. No cabana shall be located, constructed, or maintained closer than six
feet from any trailer coach other than the one to which it is an
accessory, cabana, awning, or any existing building or structure on the
same or an adjacent trailer space; no closer than three feet to any
boundary line enclosing the trailer space.
g. A cabana shall consist of only one room having a minimum superficial
floor area of 80 square feet; shall not exceed 12 feet in width nor longer
than the trailer coach it serves; shall be constructed so that it is
adjacent only to one side of the trailer coach.
h. No plumbing or plumbing fixtures shall be installed in any cabana. No
gas piping shall be installed except for space heating appliances
complying with the Building Code.
i. Electrical work shall comply with the electrical ordinance of the City of
Compton. No electrical equipment or fixtures shall be energized from
the trailer coach or any other source other than the public utility.
§ 27-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-7
AO:891
§ 27-7. REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION. [Ord. #856, § 5106; Ord.
#1041]
Whenever it is found that any camp ground is not being conducted in
conformity with the provisions of this Chapter and Code, or applicable laws
of the State, the permit to operate same shall be subject to revocation or
suspension by the City Council in the following manner:
A notice shall be served by the Building Department on the person holding
said permit specifying wherein he has failed to comply with this Chapter,
and ordering him to appear before the City Council, at a day and hour
therein specified, not less than five days nor more than 15 days after the
service of said notice on such permit holder, requiring him to show cause at
said time and place why said permit should not be revoked or suspended.
Such a notice shall be served personally or by registered mail. At the time
and place mentioned in said notice, the person holding said permit shall
have the right to appear in person or by counsel, and to introduce such
evidence as he may desire, and the City Council shall confront said permit
holder with any charges that may have been filed against him, and after
said hearing, the City Council may, at its discretion, revoke or suspend the
permit. Revocation of any permit shall be final, and before any new permit
is issued all requirements of this Chapter and the laws of the State shall
be complied with. Reinstatement of a suspended permit shall be upon such
conditions and within such time limits as the City Council may impose in its
discretion.
§ 27-8. CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. [Ord. #856, § 5107; Ord. #1041]
It shall be the duty of the operator of any camp ground to report
immediately to the Health Department any person residing therein having,
or reasonably suspected of having, any infectious or contagious disease.
Immediately upon such notice the Health Department shall investigate
such report and take such action as is required under health laws and
regulations.
§ 27-9. RAT-PROOFING. [Ord. #856, § 5108; Ord. #960; Ord. #1041]
All buildings, and all portions of every camp ground shall be rat-proofed,
and shall conform to the requirements of the Health Department.
§ 27-10. GROUND AREAS. [Ord. #856, § 5109; Ord. #1041]
No application shall be accepted, nor shall any permit be issued for the
operation of any camp ground on an area of less than two acres; provided,
however, that any camp ground of lesser area being operated on February
11, 1947, under a permit previously issued by the City Council shall be
allowed to continue in operation until such use is discontinued or until such
permit is revoked for cause.
Each trailer space shall have an area of not less than 900 square feet, and
no more than one camp car or camp trailer shall be located on each such
§ 27-7 COMPTON § 27-10
AO:892
trailer space. No camp trailer shall be located within six feet of any other
camp trailer, nor within three feet of the outer boundaries of any camp
ground. All trailer spaces shall front on a driveway of not less than 15 feet
in width, which driveway shall at all times be kept clear and unobstructed
for the passage of vehicles, and which shall have free and unobstructed
access to a public street or alley. All roadways shall be properly drained
and shall be maintained dust-free by means of adequate surfacing. The
whole property included within the boundaries of a camp ground shall be
adequately fenced.
§ 27-11. DRAINAGE OF PREMISES. [Ord. #856, § 5110; Ord. #1041]
Every camp ground hereafter established shall be located on a well drained
area and the premises of every such camp ground or of any existing camp
ground shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and shall be properly
graded so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or casual waters.
§ 27-12. WATER SUPPLY. [Ord. #856, § 5111; Ord. #1041]
An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall
be supplied to meet the requirements of any camp ground. The water supply
shall be obtained from faucets only, conveniently located in said camp
grounds, and no dipping vessels or common cups shall be permitted.
§ 27-13. REMOVAL OF WHEELS. [Ord. #856, § 5112; Ord. #1041]
No person owning or operating any camp ground or camp trailer located
in a camp ground shall remove or permit to be removed the wheels or any
similar transporting device from the camp trailer, or otherwise permanently
fix it to the ground in a manner that would prevent the ready removal of
the camp trailer, or alter it in any way so as to make it incapable of being
safely operated over the public thoroughfares of the State at a speed limit
of 45 miles per hour without first obtaining a permit so to do from the
Building Department. Any alteration to any camp trailer as above set forth
shall be construed as removing it from the requirements of this Chapter
and converting it into a dwelling, and it shall thereupon be subject to the
requirements of the Building Code of the City and the State Housing Act.
No habitation, shelter, shed or other building shall be constructed in any
camp ground until a permit therefor shall have been issued by the Building
Department.
§ 27-14. ANIMALS NOT ALLOWED AT LARGE. [Ord. #856, § 5113;
Ord. #960; Ord. #1041]
No animals shall be allowed to run at large at any time in any camp ground.
§ 27-15. TOILETS. [Ord. #856, § 5114; Ord. #960; Ord. #1041]
There shall be provided in every existing camp ground and every camp
ground which may hereafter be established one water-closet for each sex,
one of such water-closets to be distinctly marked "For Men" and one to be
§ 27-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-15
AO:893
distinctly marked "For Women," and there shall be provided an additional
water-closet for each sex for every 10 camp trailer spaces or fractional part
thereof in excess of 10 camp trailer spaces.
§ 27-16. BATHS. [Ord. #856, § 5115; Ord. #1041]
There shall be provided in every existing camp ground and every camp
ground which may hereafter be established a stationary bathtub or shower
bath equipped with hot and cold running water. Such bathtub or shower
bath shall be installed in a separate compartment from any water-closet unit
and there shall be provided an additional bathtub or shower bath for every
10 camp car or trailer spaces or fractional part thereof in excess of 10 camp
car or trailer spaces in said camp ground. Every shower bath stall shall be
vented directly to the open air, or through a duct which is connected to the
open air, such vent to be not less than 36 square inches in area.
§ 27-17. WALLS AND FLOORS. [Ord. #856, § 5116; Ord. #1041]
The floors of every water-closet, bathtub or shower bath compartment
and laundry room hereafter installed shall be constructed of cement or
some other nonabsorbent material; the walls shall be a smooth waterproof
material, and the interiors of all water-closets, bathtub or shower
compartments and laundry rooms shall be maintained in a sanitary
condition at all times.
§ 27-18. GARBAGE RECEPTACLES. [Added by Ord. #1041, § 5117]
There shall be provided in every camp ground heretofore or hereafter
established, such number of metal receptacles with close-fitting metal
covers for garbage, refuse, ashes and rubbish as may be deemed necessary
by the Health Department, and such receptacles shall at all times be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Suitable locations shall be
provided for all garbage receptacles and all such receptacles shall be
placed on raised platforms. Provisions shall be made for washing garbage
receptacles in a sanitary manner.
§ 27-19. REFUSE AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL. [Ord. #856, § 5118]
No waste water, drainage or material from plumbing fixtures, including
any such fixtures within any camp car or trailer shall be deposited on
the surface of any camp ground. All such fixtures, when in use, must be
connected to the City sewer system.
§ 27-20. LAUNDRY. [Ord. #856, § 5119; Ord. #960]
A laundry room shall be provided in every camp ground with at least two
laundry trays located therein.
§ 27-15 COMPTON § 27-21
AO:894
§ 27-21. LIGHTING. [Ord. #856, § 5120]
Every camp ground and all public buildings therein shall be provided with
adequate lighting, and such lighting shall be kept in continuous operation
from 1/2 hour after sunset until 1/2 hour before sunrise. All branch circuits
supplying camp grounds and public buildings or camp trailers therein shall
be protected by approved circuit breakers in place of fuses.
§ 27-22. EXISTING CAMP GROUNDS. [Ord. #856, § 5122]
Every camp ground in operation at the date of the passage of Ordinance No.
645 shall comply in every respect with the provisions of this Chapter, except
that such camp grounds which do not have the required two acres need not
comply with the requirements of this Chapter.
Chapter 28
LAND SUBDIVISION
§ 28-1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 28-1.1. Purpose. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9300.1]
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for and promote the conservation,
stabilization, and protection of land values through orderly growth,
development, and redevelopment, to provide for the necessary public
facilities and improvements, and to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare in the City.
§ 28-1.2. Authority for Local Regulations. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9300.2]
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2, Part 2 of Division 4 of the Business
and Professions Code of the State, referred to in this Chapter as the
"Subdivision Map Act," and in addition to any other regulations provided
by law, the regulations in this Chapter shall apply to all divisions of land
or parts of divisions of land hereafter made wholly or partially within the
incorporated limits of the City, and to the preparation of tentative maps,
final maps, parcel maps, and other maps provided for by the Subdivision
Map Act for approval. Each division of land and each part thereof lying
within the incorporated limits of the City shall be made, and each map shall
be prepared and presented for approval, as provided for and required by
the provisions of the Chapter.
§ 28-1.3. References to Other Laws. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9300.3]
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this Chapter, or to any other
ordinance of the City, or to a statute of the State, such reference shall apply
to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made.
§ 27-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-1.4
AO:895
§ 28-1.4. Severability Clause. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9300.4]
If any provision of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of the provisions of this Chapter and the application of such
provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
§ 28-1.5. Compliance Required; Subdivisions. [Added by Ord.
#1330, § 9300.5]
A person shall not sell, lease, finance, or transfer title to a portion of a
subdivision or of a resubdivision, or offer to do so, or contract to do so,
until a final map thereof in full compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter and of the Subdivision Map Act has been filed in the office of the
County Recorder, except that a person, at his sole option, may elect to file a
parcel map to satisfy the provisions of this section when at least one of the
following applies:
§ 28-1.6. Compliance Required; Minor Land Divisions. [Added by
Ord. #1330, § 9300.6]
A person shall not sell, lease, finance or transfer title to a minor land
division, or portion thereof, until a parcel map or final map thereof has
been filed in the office of the County Recorder in full compliance with the
provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and all applicable provisions of this
Chapter, or until a Certificate of Exception has been issued in compliance
with the provisions of subsection 28-1.7. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell provided such offer or
contract is conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this section
and such provisions are fully completed prior to passage of title or right
of possession to the buyer. The provisions of this section shall not apply
to any parcel of land or parcels of land of a minor land division sold,
transferred, leased, or financed in full compliance with or exempt from any
law, including the provisions of this Chapter or any other ordinance of the
City regulating the design and improvement of such divisions in effect at the
time the division was established.
In each modification, the officer or department shall first find that a special
individual reason makes observance of the strict letter of the regulation
impossible or impractical and that the modification is in conformity with
the spirit and purpose of the Subdivision Map Act and of this Chapter. The
a. The division results in parcels of land having a minimum gross area of
20 acres;
b. The subdivision or resubdivision contains an area of less than five acres,
each parcel of land created by the division abuts upon a public street or
highway, and no dedications or improvements are required; or
c. All of the land shown on the parcel map is zoned for industrial or
commercial development.
§ 28-1.4 COMPTON § 28-1.6
AO:896
officer or department recommending the modification shall transmit to the
Planning Commission with the tentative map of the subdivision his or its
report in writing, setting forth each modification recommended and the
facts relied upon by him or it for the recommendation.
§ 28-1.7. Certificates of Exception Permitted. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9300.7]
Providing there is no conflict with the provisions of Chapter 30, Zoning, of
this Code setting forth the zoning regulations, a subdivider may obtain a
Certificate of Exception in lieu of filing a parcel map for the following minor
land divisions:
§ 28-1.8. Modifications. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9300.8]
Whenever, in the opinion of any officer or department whose jurisdiction
is affected by any regulations contained in this Chapter, the land involved
in the division of land is of such size of shape, or is subject to such
title limitations of record, or is affected by such topographical location
or conditions, or is to be devoted to such usage that it is impossible or
impractical for the subdivider to conform fully to such regulation, the officer
or department may recommend any modification which in his or its opinion
is reasonably necessary.
§ 28-1.9. Building Permits. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9300.9]
No building shall be constructed, nor shall a permit for the construction of
a building be issued, nor shall any portion of a parcel of land be used for
construction upon any parcel which does not conform to the provisions of
this Chapter.
a. Subdivisions in which each resulting parcel of land contains a minimum of 2 1/
2 acres gross area; or those in which each resulting parcel of land
contains a minimum of 2 1/4 acres gross area, and any one of the
following conditions applies:
1. The parcel of land comprising the subdivision was a parcel of record
prior to September 3, 1968; or
2. The parcel of land comprising the subdivision is a lot shown on a final
map or parcel map filed in the office of the County Recorder or a
parcel shown on an approved record of survey map; or
3. The parcel of land comprising the division is the result of the
normal breakdown of an undersized section of land;
b. Those in which the resulting number of parcels of land remains the
same or is decreased; and
c. The leasing of land provided no street or highway openings or
widenings or sanitary sewer or drainage easements are required.
§ 28-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-1.10
AO:897
§ 28-1.10. Penalties for Noncompliance. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9300.10]
Any person, firm, or corporation, or any officer or employee of a firm or
corporation, violating any of the provisions of this Chapter, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for
a period of not more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each such person, firm, or corporation, or any officer or employee of a firm
or corporation, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day
during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Chapter
is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, firm, or corporation,
or any officer or employee of a firm or corporation, and shall be punishable
therefor as provided for in this Chapter.
§ 28-1.11. Transactions Voidable. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9300.11]
Any deed of conveyance, mortgage, deed of trust, or other lien, lease,
or sale, or contract to sell, mortgage, lien, or lease made contrary to
the provisions of this Chapter shall be voidable at the sole option of the
grantee, buyer, tenant, mortgagee, beneficiary, or person contracting to
purchase, or to accept a lien or mortgage, or to lease as a tenant, his
heirs, personal representatives, or trustees in insolvency or bankruptcy
within one year after the date of the execution of the deed of conveyance,
mortgage, deed of trust, other lien, lease, or sale, or contract agreeing
thereto, but such deed of conveyance, sale, mortgage, deed of trust, lien,
lease, or contract shall be binding upon any assignee or transferee of
the grantee, mortgagee, beneficiary, tenant, buyer, or person contracting
therefor, other than those enumerated in this section, and upon the grantor,
vendor, mortgagor, trustor, landlord, or person so contracting, his assignee,
heir, or devisee.
§ 28-1.12. Other Remedies. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9300.12]
The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to prohibit any legal,
equitable, or summary remedy to which the City, or other political
subdivision, or any person may otherwise be entitled; and the City, or other
political subdivision, or person may file suit in any court of competent
jurisdiction to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed division of land
in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or of this Chapter.
§ 28-1.13. Falsifications. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9300.13]
Fraudulent misrepresentations of pertinent information shall be sufficient
reason to invalidate an approval obtained pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter.
§ 28-1.14. Subdivision Committee. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9300.14]
§ 28-1.10 COMPTON § 28-1.14
AO:898
§ 28-1.15. Advisory Agency. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9300.15]
The Planning Commission is hereby designated as the Advisory Agency as
that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act. The Planning Commission
shall make reports, investigations, and recommendations on the design and
improvement of proposed divisions of land.
§ 28-2. DEFINITIONS. [Added by Ord. #1330, §§ 9301 — 9301.38;
Ord. #1425]
As used in this Chapter:
APPLICATION OF ACT — Shall mean all of the provisions of the Subdivision
Map Act which apply to subdivisions as defined in that Act and all of the
provisions of this Chapter which apply to subdivisions as defined in this
Chapter.
APPROVED RECORD OF SURVEY MAP — Shall mean a map prepared as
provided in the Subdivision Map Act for approval by the Council, including
all maps referred to in subsections (b) and (c) of Section 11535 thereof, and
conforming to the provisions of Chapter 15 of Division 3 of the Business and
Professions Code of the State.
BUILDING SITE — Shall mean that portion of a lot or parcel of land upon
which buildings and appurtenances are to be placed or are already existing.
CENTER LINE — Shall mean a line established by the City Engineer or the
County Engineer and designated as "center line," "proposed center line,"
"adopted center line," or "construction center line" on a series of maps
a. Personnel. The Subdivision Committee is hereby created to act in an
advisory capacity to the Planning Commission. The Subdivision
Committee shall consist of the following members or their authorized
representatives:
1. The Planning Director;
2. The City Engineer;
3. The Chief of the Fire Department;
4. The Water Superintendent;
5. The Director of Parks and Recreation;
6. The County Health Officer; and
7. The Superintendent of Schools.
b. Meetings Open to Public. Subdivision Committee meetings shall be
open to the public. Any officer, person, or subdivider and any authorized
representative of any public utility company having an interest in the
division of land shall have the privilege of presenting any appropriate
matter at such meetings.
§ 28-1.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-2
AO:899
filed in the office of the City Engineer or the County Engineer. Where two
or more such designations are shown on any map in said series, the line
labeled "adopted center line" shall be deemed to be the official center line.
CITY ENGINEER — Shall mean the City Engineer of the City of Compton.
CONDOMINIUM — Shall mean an estate in real property consisting of
an undivided interest in common in a parcel of real property, together
with a separate interest in space in a residential, commercial, or industrial
building.
Intent: Because there is a lack of guaranteed effective and continuous
centralized management of condominium developments, and because
the accompanying lack of adequate construction and organizational
performance standards may create and perpetuate conditions having
an especially harmful effect upon the occupants of contiguous
condominium units, or upon other occupants and owners of a unit or
units, or upon the health, welfare, and safety of the general public,
the Council hereby declares that each condominium presents special
land use problems involving potential slum and blight conditions which
would be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. These
ill effects may be especially magnified in view of the fact that such
condominium occupants are the owners of such individual units and
may be less able to freely transfer ownership to others, particularly
at times when undesirable conditions are in existence. These factors
may result in all, or parts of the same building and all, or parts of, the
common area being neglected. The intent of the Council is to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare by preventing such conditions
from occurring.
a.
Condominiums and Community Apartment Projects.
The design, improvement, and construction of a condominium or
community apartment project shall conform to and be in full
accordance with all the requirements of all building, fire, and
housing Codes, the zoning provisions, and all other applicable State
statutes and local laws and regulations in effect at the time of the
filing of the tentative map.
1.
All private streets, driveways, and parking areas for condominiums
and community apartment projects shall be improved and
constructed with a structural section in accordance with the
standards of the City and shall be designed to ensure that access
for municipal services will not be denied any dwelling unit therein
by reason of deteriorated or impassable private streets, driveways,
and parking areas.
2.
Each unit in a condominium subdivision shall have the utility
services to be connected to the unit individually metered so that
the metering will measure separately utility service usage by each
unit.
3.
b.
§ 28-2 COMPTON § 28-2
AO:900
DEDICATION — Shall mean the setting aside of real property or an
easement by an owner for public use.
DEFINITIONS IN ACT — Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter,
all terms used in the Subdivision Map Act are used in this Chapter as so
defined in the Subdivision Map Act unless from the context of this Chapter
it is apparent that a different meaning is intended.
DESIGN — Shall mean the minimum area, width, grading, and general
layout of lots and the alignment, grades, and widths of alleys, streets,
highways, easements, and rights-of-way for drainage facilities, water mains,
sanitary sewers, and other public purposes.
DESIGN UNIT — Shall mean a parcel of land shown on a tentative map for
which the subdivider requests approval of design.
DIVISION OF LAND — Shall mean subdivisions, resubdivisions, and minor
land divisions.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Shall mean any drainage device or structure which
may be used to control the flow of water and/or alleviate flood hazards,
including, but not limited to, berms, channels, culverts, curbs, ditches,
gutters, pavement, and pipes.
EASEMENT — Shall mean the right of passage or use, or the right to
prevent the use of land by a person other than the owner of the land.
FINAL MAP — Shall mean a map or a proposed division of land prepared in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Subdivision Map Act
which map is prepared in a manner to be filed in the office of the County
Recorder.
FLOOD HAZARD — Shall mean a potential danger to life, land, or
improvement due to inundation or a storm water runoff having sufficient
velocity to transport or deposit debris, scour the surface soil, dislodge or
damage buildings, or erode the banks of watercourses.
FRONTAGE — Shall mean that portion of a lot or parcel of land which abuts
a public street or highway.
GEOLOGICAL HAZARD — Shall mean a hazard inherent in the earth, or
artificially created, which is dangerous or potentially dangerous to life,
property, or improvements due to the movement, failure, or shifting of
earth.
The Director of Planning may require, at the time of and as a
condition of filing, written agreements executed by the subdividers
of condominium parcels and their transferees, such agreements
undertaking to reimburse the City for its maintenance services,
if any, to the private condominium grounds or structures held in
common by the owners of condominium units if not maintained
diligently and to generally accepted community standards by the
condominium owners. The landscaping shall be clean and healthy.
The roads and driveways shall be safe and sound.
4.
§ 28-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-2
AO:901
HIGHWAY — Shall mean a thoroughfare of primary importance in the City
street, County highway, or State highway system, excluding freeways, and
shown on the Circulation Element of the General Plan of the City.
IMPROVEMENTS — Shall mean such structures or facilities to be installed,
or agreed to be installed, by a person on land to be used for public or private
alleys, streets, highways, or other easements as a condition precedent to the
approval and acceptance of the final map or parcel map, including, but not
limited to, street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street trees, street
lights, street signs, sanitary sewers, water mains, and drainage facilities.
LOT — Shall mean a parcel of real property shown as a delineated parcel
of land, with a separate and distinct number or other designation, on a plat
recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
MASTER PLAN OF HIGHWAYS — Shall mean the Master Plan of Highways
of the County.
MAY — Shall be permissive.
MINOR LAND DIVISION — Shall mean any parcel of land or contiguous
parcels of land which are divided for the purpose of transfer of title, sale,
lease, or financing whether present or future, into two, three, or four
parcels, except that "minor land division" shall not include:
Land dedicated for cemetery purposes pursuant to the provisions of the
Health and Safety Code of the State;
a.
The leasing, owning, or financing of apartments, offices, stores, or
similar space within an apartment building, condominium, industrial
building, commercial building, or trailer park;
b.
c. The division by agricultural, gas, oil, or mineral leases;
The division for the purpose of financing of land zoned for industrial or
commercial development;
d.
e. The leasing of vehicle parking areas or space for outdoor advertising;
The leasing or financing of land or buildings which serve as a functional
unit of a hospital, school, or church;
f.
g. The conveyance or transfer of land required by court decree;
A division of land defined by this Chapter as a subdivision or
resubdivision;
h.
Divisions of land created by the acquisition of land by governmental
agencies, including, but not restricted to, those divisions created by
the opening or widening of a public street, flood control channel, or
purchase;
i.
The division or redivision of land which results in parcels of land having
a minimum gross area of 40 acres; and
j.
§ 28-2 COMPTON § 28-2
AO:902
OWNER — Shall mean any person holding a proprietary interest in the land
proposed to be divided pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
PAD — Shall mean a natural level building site or an approximate level
building site prepared by grading.
PARCEL MAP — Shall mean a map showing the division of land prepared in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Subdivision Map Act
which map is prepared in a manner to be filed in the office of the County
Recorder.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, firm,
association, partnership, joint venture, joint stock company, receiver,
syndicate, club, estate, business trust, the United States government, any
State, County, City, district, or other political subdivision, or any other group
or combination acting as a unit.
PLANNING DIRECTOR — Shall mean the Planning Director of the City.
RESUBDIVISION — Shall mean any portion of a subdivision designated as
a lot or as contiguous lots on a final map or parcel map filed in compliance
with the provisions of subsection 27-1.5 of this Chapter in the office of the
County Recorder which subdivision is divided or realigned for the purpose
of sale, lease, or financing, whether immediate or future.
SECTION — Shall mean a section of this Chapter unless otherwise
specified.
SHALL — Shall be mandatory.
STREET — Shall mean a right-of-way designed primarily to provide access
to abutting properties.
STREET PLAN — Shall mean the Street Plan of the City.
SUBDIVIDER — Shall mean a person who causes real property to be divided
into a division of land for himself or for others, or who submits a tentative,
final, or parcel map for approval, or who requests a certificate of exception.
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean any real property, improved or unimproved,
or portion thereof, shown on the last preceding tax roll as a unit or as
contiguous units, which property is divided for the purpose of sale, lease,
rent, or lien, whether immediate or future; provided, however, the
provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the leasing or renting of
apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within an apartment building,
commercial building, or industrial building. "Subdivision" shall not include
any land dedicated for cemetery purposes pursuant to the provisions of the
Health and Safety Code of the State.
SUBDIVISION MAP ACT — Shall mean Chapter 2, Part 2, Division 4 of the
Business and Professions Code of the State.
SUBSECTION — Shall mean a division of a section of this Chapter.
The division of land for operating public utility purposes and the
conveyance of land by a public utility to a contiguous ownership.
k.
§ 28-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-2
AO:903
TENTATIVE MAP — Shall mean a preliminary plan of a proposed division
of land prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the
Subdivision Map Act.
§ 28-3. TENTATIVE MAPS.
§ 28-3.1. Tentative Maps; General. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9302.1]
Tentative maps shall be prepared and processed in accordance with the
provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and, unless otherwise provided by
subsection 28-9.1 of this Chapter, with the provisions of this Chapter.
§ 28-3.2. Map Numbers. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9302.2]
The subdivider shall obtain a map number prior to filing a tentative map.
The map number shall be assigned by the County Engineer.
§ 28-3.3. Tentative Map Preparation. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9302.3]
Each tentative map shall be prepared in accordance with the following
requirements:
§ 28-3.4. Tentative Map Contents. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9302.4]
Each tentative map shall show and contain the following information:
a. Tentative maps shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, and
signed by a registered civil engineer or a licensed surveyor.
b. Each tentative map shall be eight inches by 12 inches or any multiple
thereof. Each tentative map shall clearly show the details of the plan
thereon. Whenever practicable, tentative maps shall be drawn to a
scale of one inch to 100 feet. In no case shall the scale be less than one
inch to 200 feet.
c. The subdivider shall file with the Planning Department 15 copies of the
tentative map.
a. The map number assigned by the County Engineer;
b. The date of preparation, North point, and scale;
c. The boundary of the division of land and the legal description to show
such boundary;
d. The name and address of the owner, subdivider, and the registered civil
engineer or licensed land surveyor who prepared the map;
e. A key map indicating the location of the proposed division of land in
relation to the surrounding area;
f. The approximate contours showing existing topography;
§ 28-2 COMPTON § 28-3.4
AO:904
§ 28-3.5. Written Statements Attached. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9302.5]
Each tentative map shall be submitted with written statements attached
containing the following information and acknowledgements:
g. The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or storm
water overflow and the location, width, and direction of flow of each
watercourse;
h. The approximate location of all trees standing within the boundaries of
the division of land;
i. The location, width, approximate grade, and center line radius of
existing and proposed streets, alleys, highways, ways, and easements
which are within or adjacent to the proposed division of land. Existing
electric transmission line easements shall be delineated as a separate
lot or made not a part of the division of land;
j. The existing street improvements, including drainage structures;
k. The names of existing streets or highways and an identifying letter for
proposed streets or highways;
l. A label or identifying note for existing or proposed easements other
than streets or highways;
m. The approximate layout of lots, including approximate dimensions and
lot numbers, and, where pads are proposed for building sites, the
approximate finish grade;
n. The proposed public areas, if any;
o. The approximate location of existing structures, shown to scale, within
or immediately adjacent to the division of land showing the house
numbers and labeling each structure with the proposed disposition; and
p. The names of public utility companies authorized to furnish services to
the division of land.
a. The name and address of the subdivider;
b. The name, address, and license or registration number of the person
who prepared the tentative map or who directed the preparation of the
tentative map;
c. A statement by any person holding a proprietary interest in the parcels
of land comprising the division of land consenting to the submission of
the tentative map;
d. The proposed use of the parcels of land shown on the tentative map;
e. The interest which the subdivider proposes to convey in parcels of land
shown on the tentative map;
§ 28-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-3.5
AO:905
§ 28-3.6. Reversion to Acreage. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9302.6]
Prior to the submission of a final map for the purpose of reverting to
acreage land previously subdivided, a tentative map shall be prepared and
processed in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map and this
Chapter.
§ 28-3.7. Preliminary Processing. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9302.7]
The tentative map and required written statements shall be submitted to
the Planning Director. The Planning Director shall distribute copies of the
tentative map and, where appropriate, required written statements to the
following:
f. A copy of conditions, covenants, and restrictions proposed by the
subdivider, if any;
g. A statement detailing the arrangements which the subdivider proposes
to make for the operation and maintenance of common parcels and
easements, if any,
h. The source of water supply, if any, and the proposed method of sewage
disposal;
i. The results of percolation tests, if required, performed in accordance
with the standards of the County Health Officer, where a private system
of sewage disposal is proposed; and
j. A geological and/or soils report, if required by the City Engineer,
prepared by a geologist qualified by the Geological Qualifications Board
of the County, stating the effect of geological or soil conditions on the
proposed development.
Any of the information required by paragraphs a, b, c, d, and h of this section
may be shown on the tentative map. The written statements required by this
section shall become a part of the tentative map upon submission to the
Planning Director.
a. Each member of the Subdivision Committee;
b. The County Regional Planning Commission;
c. A city requesting extra territorial review of tentative maps pursuant to
the provisions of Section 11528 of the Subdivision Map Act;
d. The Real Estate Commissioner of the State;
e. All the public utility companies having an interest in the proposed
division of land; and
f. The District Engineer of the Division of Highways of the Department of
Public Works of the State, if the proposed division of land is traversed or
bounded by a State highway.
§ 28-3.5 COMPTON § 28-3.8
AO:906
§ 28-3.8. Subdivision Committee Review. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9302.8]
The Subdivision Committee shall meet to confer and make
recommendations on tentative maps within 15 days subsequent to the date
of submission thereof. Subdivision Committee meetings shall be open to the
public, and the subdivider, his authorized agent, and any other interested
party may appear and present any matters relevant to the proceedings.
§ 28-3.9. Planning Director's Report. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9302.9]
The Planning Director shall prepare a written report setting forth the
recommendations of the Subdivision Committee and the contents of
departmental reports submitted to the Planning Director at or prior to
Subdivision Committee meetings by City officers or departments or other
interested agencies. The Planning Director shall transmit his report,
together with a copy of the tentative map, to the Planning Commission
within 15 days subsequent to receiving the recommendation of the
Subdivision Committee.
The Planning Director shall provide the subdivider with a copy of his report
prior to final action on the tentative map by the Planning Commission. If
the subdivider or his authorized representative does not receive the report
in person, this provision shall be deemed accomplished when the report of
the Planning Director is placed in the mail bearing the proper postage and
directed to the subdivider at his designated address.
§ 28-3.10. Planning Commission Action. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9302.10]
The Planning Commission shall review the Planning Director's written
report and shall determine whether the tentative map is in conformity with
the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this Chapter. The Planning
Commission shall, within 15 days after receipt of the Planning Director's
report, recommend to the Council that the tentative map be approved,
conditionally approved, or disapproved. Action on the tentative map shall
be taken at a public hearing at which the subdivider, his authorized
representative, or any other interested party may appear and present any
matters relevant to the proposed division of land.
§ 28-3.11. Council Action. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9302.11]
The Council shall act upon the Planning Commission's recommendation
within 15 days after receipt of the Planning Commission's recommendation
and shall report such action directly to the subdivider. Action on the
tentative map shall be taken at a public hearing.
The Council may sustain, modify, reject, or overrule any recommendations
of the Planning Commission and may make such findings which are not
§ 28-3.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-3.11
AO:907
inconsistent with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or of this
Chapter.
§ 28-3.12. Modifications. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9302.12]
The Planning Commission may recommend and the Council may grant
modifications to the provisions of this Chapter which it determines are
warranted because of the size or shape of the division of land, unusual
physical conditions, title restrictions, the proposed use of one or more lots,
or the nature of the interest to be conveyed in lots created by the proposed
division of land. The Planning Commission shall report its findings on all
modifications in writing, stating the grounds for each modification. The
report on any modifications shall be attached to the Planning Commission's
report on the tentative map and shall become a part thereof. No
modification shall be granted which has the effect of negating the provisions
of an ordinance of the City or this Code, other than the provisions of this
Chapter, or which is inconsistent with the provisions of State laws.
§ 28-3.13. Time Limits. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9302.13]
The time limits for acting and reporting on tentative maps specified in this
Chapter and by the Subdivision Map Act may be extended by the mutual
consent of the subdivider and the Planning Commission or the Council, as
the case may be.
§ 28-3.14. Criteria for Rejection. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9302.14]
The Planning Commission may recommend rejection and the Council may
reject a tentative map if:
§ 28-4. HIGHWAY AND STREET DESIGN.
§ 28-4.1. Dedications; General. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9303.1]
A division of land shall have adequate access to a dedicated and improved
street or highway and shall make provisions for the dedication of necessary
a. The only practical use which can be made of the property, as proposed
to be divided, is a use prohibited by any ordinance, statute, law, or other
valid regulation;
b. Any portion of the property within the division of land is subject to flood
hazard, inundation, or geological hazard;
c. The Planning Commission or Council determines that the public health
or safety justifies such action;
d. The tentative map does not conform to the design standards or criteria
set forth or referred to in this Chapter; or
e. Access roads to the division of land lack adequate rights-of-way or
improvements.
§ 28-3.11 COMPTON § 28-4.1
AO:908
public rights-of-way, including but not limited to, streets, utility easements,
or dedications required by the provisions of subsection 28-6.4 of this
Chapter within or adjacent to the division of land. Dedications may be
required as a condition of approval of a tentative map submitted for the
purpose of reverting to acreage land previously subdivided.
§ 28-4.2. Major and Secondary Highways. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9303.2]
If the Master Plan of Highways, the Street Plan, or the Circulation Element
of the General Plan of the City shows any highway so located that any
portion thereof lies within any proposed division of land, such portion shall
be shown as a highway or part of a highway within such division of land
in the general location shown on such Master Plan of Highways, Street
Plan, or Circulation Element unless the Planning Commission determines
that there is a reasonable probability that one or more of such plans will
be so amended as to remove or change the location of any portion of such
highway within the proposed division of land.
§ 28-4.3. Conformity with the General Plan, the Master Plan of
Highways, and the Street Plan. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9303.3]
§ 28-4.4. Part Width Highways. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9303.4]
Any part width major or secondary highway or any reservation thereof lying
adjacent along and adjacent to any boundary of a division of land shall
have such width as will conform to the lines shown, on the Master Plan of
Highways, the Street Plan, or the Circulation Element of the General Plan
of the City covering the same portion of such division of land.
§ 28-4.5. Highway and Street Grades. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9303.5]
No highway or street shall have a grade of more than 6% except where
evidence, which is satisfactory to the Planning Commission, is given that
a. Each major or secondary highway shall conform in width and
substantially in alignment with that known or indicated in the
Circulation Element of the General Plan of the City, the Master Plan of
Highways, or the Street Plan.
b. A major highway shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 100 feet
and a minimum roadway width of 80 feet.
c. A secondary highway shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 80
feet and a minimum roadway width of 60 feet.
d. The center line curve radius of a major highway shall be not less than
1,500 feet.
e. The center line curve radius of a secondary highway shall be not less
than 1,000 feet.
§ 28-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-4.5
AO:909
a lower grade is not possible due to topography. The Planning Commission
shall base its decision on the report prepared by the City Engineer.
§ 28-4.6. Highways Adjacent to Rear Lot Lines. [Added by Ord.
#1330, § 9303.6]
Wherever it is proposed to subdivide for residential purposes so that the
rear lot limits are adjoining a major or secondary highway as shown on
the Circulation Element of the General Plan of the City, the Master Plan
of Highways, or the Street Plan, a concrete block wall six feet in height
shall be erected on such rear lot lines, and vehicular access rights to such
street or highway shall be dedicated to the City. Vehicular access to and
from a major or secondary highway which abuts a rear lot line and exists on
October 3, 1968, shall be prohibited.
The prohibitions against access to or from a major or secondary highway
which abuts a rear lot line shall not apply to the north side of Greenleaf
Boulevard between Wilmington Avenue and a point lying 300 feet easterly
from the center line of Central Avenue.
§ 28-4.7. Right-of-Way and Roadway Widths for Local Streets and
Alleys. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9303.7]
a. Residential entrance streets from a major or secondary highway,
through collector streets, streets adjacent to schools, and mediumdensity
and high-density residential streets shall have a minimum rightof-
way width of 60 feet, a minimum roadway width of 40 feet, and a
minimum sidewalk width of four feet.
b. Interior collector streets, including dead-end streets, in a division of
land to be used for low-density residential use, except as provided
herein, shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 54 feet, a minimum
roadway width of 40 feet, and a minimum sidewalk width of four feet.
c. Dead-end streets designed to remain as such in residential divisions of
land shall have a minimum right-of-way turning radius of 40 feet at the
dead end thereof.
d. Service roads adjacent to major or secondary highways shall have a
minimum right-of-way width of 42 feet, a minimum roadway width of 34
feet, a minimum sidewalk width of four feet, and a minimum parkway
width of two feet on the highway side of such service road.
e. All alleys in a residential division of land shall have a minimum right-ofway
and roadway width of 25 feet, and all alleys in a commercial or
industrial division of land shall have a minimum right-of-way and
roadway width of 30 feet.
f. Commercial and industrial entrance streets from a major or secondary
highway shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 74 feet and a
minimum roadway width of 64 feet.
§ 28-4.5 COMPTON § 28-4.7
AO:910
§ 28-4.8. Street Frontage Radius. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9303.8]
On any street or highway, other than a major or secondary highway, a center
line curve radius of not less than 200 feet shall be provided unless sufficient
evidence is offered to the Planning Commission by the subdivider to show
that a 200-foot radius is not applicable.
§ 28-4.9. Street Frontage. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9303.9]
The alignment of streets shall be such as to provide frontage for all lots
in a division of land and, where necessary, for the future development of
adjacent properties.
§ 28-4.10. Intersecting Streets. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9303.10]
Any highway or street intersecting any other highway or street shall
intersect it at an angle as nearly a right angle as practicable.
§ 28-4.11. Alley Intersections. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9303.11]
Where two alleys intersect, a cutoff of not less than 15 feet along each alley
shall be provided.
§ 28-4.12. Alleys in High Density Districts. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9303.12]
Except as may be provided in subsection 28-4.13, an alley 30 feet in width
shall be provided at the rear of all lots in a division of land fronting on a
major or secondary highway where such lots are to be used for, or zoned
for medium-density or high-density residential uses, commercial uses, or
industrial uses.
§ 28-4.13. Alleys in Lieu of Service Roads. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9303.13]
Whenever it is proposed to subdivide property abutting and facing a major
or secondary highway, a service road or other local street shall be provided
unless the circumstances of such property or of adjoining property render it
inadvisable or undesirable. If a service road or local street is not required,
the subdivider shall dedicate the right of vehicular access to such major or
secondary highway to the City and shall provide an alley not less than 25
feet in width at the rear of such lots unless the Planning Commission finds
g. Commercial and industrial collector streets, including dead-end streets,
shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 56 feet and a minimum
roadway width of 46 feet.
h. Dead-end streets designed to remain as such in commercial and
industrial divisions of land shall have a minimum right-of-way turning
radius of 45 feet at the dead end thereof.
§ 28-4.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-4.13
AO:911
it inadvisable, undesirable, detrimental to adjoining property, or contrary to
the best community design.
§ 28-4.14. Property Line Radii; Intersections. [Added by Ord.
#1330, § 9303.14]
§ 28-4.15. Approved Access; Certificates of Exception. [Added by
Ord. #1330, § 9303.15]
Each parcel of land created by a minor land division described by paragraph
a of subsection 28-1.7 shall be provided with a means of vehicular access
as provided by this subsection. For the purposes of this subsection and
subsection 28-9.1, the term "on-site access" shall refer to a proposed
easement for vehicular access which is located within the boundaries of a
minor land division, and the term "off-site access" shall refer to an easement
for vehicular access which is located outside the boundaries of a minor land
division and is not an improved or maintained public street or highway. Offsite
access shall be documented by either a recorded easement or a policy
from a title insurance company which delineates and insures the existence
of a valid easement. A parcel of land shall be deemed to have approved
access when either of the following conditions applies:
a. Intersections of local residential streets shall have a minimum property
line radius of 15 feet.
b. Intersections of local residential streets with secondary highways shall
have a minimum property line radius of 20 feet.
c. Intersections of local residential streets with major highways shall have
a minimum property line radius of 25 feet.
d. Intersections of two secondary highways or intersections of secondary
highways with major highways shall have a minimum property line
radius of 30 feet.
e. Intersections of two major highways shall have a minimum property
line radius of 35 feet.
f. Intersections of two industrial streets, two commercial streets, or of
industrial and commercial streets shall have a minimum property line
radius of 27 feet.
a. The parcel of land has a frontage on an improved or maintained public
street or highway or on an approved off-site access which connects with
an improved or maintained public street or highway; or
b. The parcel of land has frontage on a proposed easement for on-site
access, as shown on an approved plot plan map, and such proposed
easement connects directly or by means of approved off-site access with
an improved or maintained public street or highway.
§ 28-4.13 COMPTON § 28-4.15
AO:912
§ 28-4.16. Access; Exceptions. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9303.16]
In case of undue hardship, the Planning Director may determine that an
acceptable alternate access to an improved or maintained public street or
highway is a proposed street or highway shown on the Master Plan of
Highways, the Street Plan, or the Circulation Element of the General Plan
of the City unless the Planning Director finds that there is a reasonable
probability that any of such plans will be amended so as to remove or
relocate that portion of the proposed highway which would serve as the
alternate access to an improved or maintained public street or highway.
§ 28-4.17. Grade Separations. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9303.17]
Whenever any highway within a division of land intersects a railroad rightof-
way, and such highway is shown as a major or secondary highway upon
the Circulation Element of the General Plan of the City, the Street Plan,
or the Master Plan of Highways and provision is made in such plans of
highways for the location of a separation of grades at such intersection, the
street layout of the division of land shall be such as to conform to the plan
of such separation.
Each lot abutting upon a proposed cut or fill necessary for the approach to
such grade separation shall be given suitable access elsewhere.
Whenever it is proposed to divide property abutting an approach to an
existing or proposed bridge, the division shall be arranged so that any lot
abutting such approach has suitable access elsewhere, and the street layout
adequately provides for such approach.
§ 28-4.18. Future Streets. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9303.18]
Whenever the Planning Commission shall have determined that a street is
necessary for the future division of land of the property as shown on the
tentative map or for adjoining property, but the present construction of
such street is not warranted, the Planning Commission may require that the
location, width, and extent of such street be shown on the final map as a
street. No improvement of such street shall be required of the subdivider.
§ 28-4.19. Land Subject to Overflow, Ponding, or High Ground
Water. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9303.19]
If any portion of the division of land, including streets and highways, is
subject to sheet overflow or ponding of local storm water, or should the
depth of ground water be less than 10 feet from the ground surface, the
Planning Commission shall so inform the Real Estate Commissioner of the
State.
Proposed easements for on-site access shall be located so as to provide
for the future development of parcels adjacent to them.
§ 28-4.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-4.20
AO:913
§ 28-4.20. Public Utility Easements. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9303.20]
Public utility easements may be required upon the recommendation of the
serving utilities. Such easements shall be shown on the final map.
§ 28-4.21. Subordination of Easements. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9303.21]
Subsequent to filing a tentative map and prior to filing the final map or
parcel map, easements granted or recorded within the proposed rightsof-
way shown on the tentative map shall be subordinated to the road
easements.
The provisions of this section shall cease to have effect upon lapse of the
approval or conditional approval of the tentative map or after withdrawal of
the tentative map.
§ 28-4.22. Dedication of Land for School Purposes. [Added by Ord.
#1365, § 9303.22]
Any subdivider who, within three years or less, develops or completes
the development of one or more subdivisions comprised of a single parcel
or contiguous parcels having more than 400 dwelling units within the
Compton Unified School District, which maintains an elementary school,
shall dedicate to the school district such land as the Council shall deem to
be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon schools necessary to
assure the residents of the subdivision adequate elementary school service.
The provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable to the subdivider
who has owned the land being subdivided for more than 10 years prior to
the filing of the tentative map in accordance with the provisions of Article
4 (commencing with Section 11550), Chapter 2, Part 2, Division 4 of the
Business and Professions Code of the State.
The requirement of dedication shall automatically terminate unless the
school district offers to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider
to accept the dedication within 30 days after the requirement is imposed
by the City. The required dedication may be made at any time prior to the
construction of the 401st dwelling unit,
If the land is not used by the school district as a school site within 30
years after dedication, the subdivider shall have the option to repurchase
the property from the school district for the amount paid therefor.
The school district to which the property is dedicated shall record a
certificate with the County Recorder. Such certificate shall contain the
following information:
a. The name and address of the subdivider dedicating the property;
b. A legal description of the real property dedicated;
§ 28-4.20 COMPTON § 28-4.22
AO:914
§ 28-4.23. Park and Recreation Areas: Residential Subdivisions.
[Added by Ord. #1376, § 9303.23; Ord. #1722, § 1]
The Planning Commission may, as a condition precedent to the approval
of a residential subdivision map, require the dedication of land, or fees in
lieu thereof, for park or recreational purposes wherever it is reasonable
to do so in view of its studies and investigations and in consideration of
the circumstances surrounding or within the portion of the City in which
such subdivision is located and the size and character of such subdivision
provided that the land, fees, or combination thereof is to be used for the
purpose of providing park or recreational facilities to serve the subdivision.
The size, shape, and location of the land so dedicated shall be approved
by the Planning Commission as to the suitability of the land for park and
recreational purposes.
The amount of the land so dedicated shall be a proportion of the total land
contained in the subdivision. Such proportion shall be determined by the
application of the following table:
Net Density at Which Land May or
Will be Developed
Percentage of Gross Area To Be
Dedicated
5 dwelling units per acre or less 2.0%
6 through 9 dwelling units per acre 3.5%
10 through 14 dwelling units per acre 5.3%
15 through 20 dwelling units per acre 7.4%
21 through 27 dwelling units per acre 9.7%
28 or more dwelling units per acre 12.3%
c. A statement that the subdivider dedicating the property has an option
to repurchase the property if it is not used by the school district as a
school site within 30 years after dedication; and
d. Proof of the acceptance of the dedication by the school district and the
date of the acceptance.
The certificate shall be recorded not more than 10 days after the date of
acceptance of the dedication. The subdivider shall have the right to compel
the school district to record such certificate, but until such certificate is
recorded, any rights acquired by any third party dealing in good faith with the
school district shall not be impaired or otherwise affected by the option right
of the subdivider.
"Dwelling unit," as used in this section, shall mean a place of residence and
may be located in either a single or multiple dwelling unit building.
If any subdivider is aggrieved by, or fails to agree to the reasonableness of,
any requirement imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section, he may
bring a special proceeding in the superior court as provided by law.
§ 28-4.22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-4.23
AO:915
The Planning Commission shall require the subdivider to dedicate land
in accordance with the table set forth in this subsection, based on the
maximum density permitted within the zone wherein the land to be
subdivided is located.
EXCEPTION: Where a subdivider proposes to develop land at less than the
maximum density permitted for the zone and has executed and recorded in
the office of the County Recorder a covenant running with the land, binding
upon all the future owners thereof, that such land shall not be developed
in such a manner as to create a higher density than that proposed, the
Planning Commission shall base the required dedication upon the proposed
density. Any covenant executed in accordance with this exception shall be
approved by the Planning Commission prior to its recordation.
The Planning Commission may, on its own initiative or upon a request by the
subdivider, require fees in lieu of the dedication of land. The amount of such
fees shall be equal to the fair market value of the land otherwise required
to be dedicated. "Fair market value," as used in this section, shall mean:
a. The average square foot costs of the land within the subdivision based
on the assessed value of the land, modified to equal market value in
accordance with the current practice of the County Assessor, multiplied
by the number of square feet which would otherwise have been
dedicated; or
b. If, after a sufficient showing, the assessed valuation, as modified, in all
probability does not substantially reflect the current market value of
the land within the subdivision, the Commission may approve fair
market value to mean appraised value, which appraisal shall be
prepared by a qualified real estate appraiser who is approved by the
Planning Commission employed by the subdivider at his own expense.
The fees required by the provisions of this subsection shall be used only for the
purpose of developing park and recreational facilities.
In subdivisions containing 50 lots or less, only the payment of fees may be
required.
Land dedicated for park and recreational facilities may be used for another
purpose, provided that, City Council commits an amount equal to the required
in lieu of fee for park and recreational facilities in order to meet the expanded
needs due to the subdivision development.
Any dedicated land shall be developed and any in lieu of fees shall be allocated
as City Council determines the need to arise, provided that dedicated land shall
be developed within 10 years, and in lieu fees shall be allocated within 10 years.
The Planning Commission may recommend and the Council may waive the
requirements of this subsection for subdivisions filed in conjunction with
planned residential developments in which open space is provided and owned
jointly by the residents of the development.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to minor land divisions.
§ 28-4.23 COMPTON § 28-5
AO:916
§ 28-5. LOT DESIGN.
§ 28-5.1. Area and Width. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9304.1]
§ 28-5.2. Lots; Private Sewage Disposal. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9304.2]
Where public sewers are not available and private sewage disposal is to be
used, every lot shall be of sufficient size to provide for satisfactory sewage
disposal for the land use intended.
§ 28-5.3. Lot Side Line Angles. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9304.3]
In all cases where practicable, the side lines of lots shall be at an
approximate right angle to the street upon which such lots front.
§ 28-5.4. Lots Abutting Certain Rights-of-Way. [Added by Ord.
#1330, § 9304.4]
Wherever practicable, divisions of land abutting rights-of-way for freeways,
highways, railroads, transmission lines, and flood control channels shall be
so designed as to create lots which back up to such rights-of-way.
§ 28-5.5. City Boundary Lines. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9304.5]
No lot shall be divided by a City boundary line. A City boundary line shall be
made a lot line.
a. Each lot in a division of land shall have an area not less than that
required, and shall have an average width not less than that required,
for the land use zone in which the lot, or any portion hereof, is located
except as set forth in subsection 28-5.5. The required area and the
required width shall be the same as set forth in Chapter 30, Zoning,
setting forth the zoning regulations. Where such regulations do not
specify a required area or a required width in a particular land use
zone, the required area shall not be less than 10,000 square feet, and
the required width shall not be less than 70 feet.
b. If a lot is in more than one land use zone, the area and width thereof
shall be not less than the area and width requirements, respectively, in
that zone in which any part of the lot is located which has the largest
area requirement and in that zone in which any part of the lot is located
which has the greatest width requirement.
c. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any lot which the
subdivider offers to deed or dedicate to the public or for public utility
purposes.
§ 28-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-5.6
AO:917
§ 28-5.6. Lot Frontage. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9304.6]
All lots shall have frontage on a street or highway except as provided
in subsection 28-5.5 of this Chapter. Alleys shall not be considered as
providing frontage for any lot in a division of land.
§ 28-5.7. Lot Design; Sloping Terrain. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9304.7]
In lieu of compliance with the provisions of paragraph a of subsection
28-5.1, the plan of a division of land may comply with the requirements of
this section if the Planning Commission determines:
§ 28-5.8. Divisions of Land for Lease Only. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9304.8]
The Planning Commission may recommend approval and the Council may
approve a tentative map of a division of land which does not comply in
all respects with the requirements of Sections 28-4 and 28-5 if lots in
the division of land are for lease only, and, because of the situation and
development or proposed development of the division of land and
surrounding property, approval of the tentative map would not be
detrimental to the public welfare or property of other persons in the vicinity
thereof.
There shall appear on the tentative map and on the final map or parcel map
letters not less than 1/2 inch in height stating "Division of Land for Purpose
of Lease Only" if the Planning Commission and Council so approve.
A person shall not sell, mortgage, or place a deed of trust or other lien upon
any lot or other parcel in such division of land, or offer or contract to do so,
unless such transaction would be in full compliance with all the provisions
of this Chapter and the Subdivision Map Act had such final map or such
parcel map not been filed.
The filing of such final map or of such parcel map shall authorize the leasing
of any lot shown upon such map.
a. That due to sloping terrain the topographic features within the division
of land will be better utilized if a portion of the lots in such division are
less in area and width than that required by the applicable land use
zone designation;
b. That a final map or parcel map of the division of land or any part thereof
will not be filed unless the average area of all lots on such map is not
less than the applicable land use zone designation;
c. That the lots having a reduced area will be compatible in design to
adjacent facing and siding lots of abutting development; and
d. That all lots which are not reduced in area comply with the provisions of
paragraph a of subsection 28-5.1.
§ 28-5.6 COMPTON § 28-5.8
AO:918
Except that the lots in a division of land for lease only need not comply with
the provisions of subsections 28-5.1 through 28-5.7, the provisions of this
section shall not modify in any way any requirements of Chapter 30, Zoning,
or any other ordinance or law as to area or width requirements.
§ 28-5.9. Flood Plain Management Regulations. [Ord. #2000, § 2]
Notwithstanding any provisions of this Chapter to the contrary, any land
subject to the terms and provisions of the Compton Flood Plain
Management Ordinance (Section 14-10 et seq.) shall be subject to the
following standards for subdivisions:
§ 28-6. IMPROVEMENTS.
§ 28-6.1. Requirements. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9305.1]
Improvements to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider, as
a condition precedent to the filing of a final map or parcel map, shall comply
with all the requirements of this section and the following subsections.
Such improvements shall be provided and developed in accordance with
the conditions imposed as a condition of approval of the tentative map,
in accordance with any agreement or bond made or entered into by the
subdivider for that purpose, and in accordance with the standards and
specifications set by administrative regulations and the laws of the City
applicable at the time of the approval of the tentative map.
§ 28-6.2. Improvement and Site Development Plans. [Added by Ord.
#1330, § 9305.2]
Plans, profiles, and specifications for the improvements, other than street
and highway improvements, to be installed, or agreed to be installed, as a
condition precedent to the approval of a final map or parcel map, shall be
submitted to the City Engineer not later than the time a final map or parcel
a. All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard
area and the elevation of the base flood.
b. All subdivision plans shall provide the elevation of proposed
structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood
elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a
registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Flood
Plain Administrator.
c. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
d. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
e. All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
§ 28-5.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-6.2
AO:919
map is submitted for checking and certification. Such plans shall show all
details of the proposed improvements needed for approval of the plans by
the City Engineer which may include requirements of other governmental
bodies whose jurisdiction some portion of the plan may encompass.
Plans for sanitary sewers and other methods of sewage disposal, storm
drains, and building pads shall comply with all applicable laws of the City
and any additional requirements of the City Engineer and Building Official.
Plans for water mains shall comply with all applicable laws of the City
and shall include plans for storage booster and transmission facilities,
together with necessary pertinent data, such as elevation, size, capacity,
and demand, in order to verify the adequacy of such facilities to deliver
the required flow of water. All such plans shall be approved by the Water
Superintendent.
Final plans shall be approved before the final map or parcel map is
transmitted to the Council for approval.
Preliminary plans may be approved by the City Engineer when sufficient
engineering data is furnished by the subdivider to demonstrate that the
preliminary design meets the City's standards and specifications, is
practicable from a maintenance standpoint, is consistent with sound
engineering practices, and that the final plans will conform to the
preliminary plans with only minor changes.
§ 28-6.3. Street and Highway Improvement Plans. [Added by Ord.
#1330, § 9305.3]
Plans, profiles, and specifications for all street and highway improvements
to be installed, or agreed to be installed, as a condition precedent to the
filing of the final map or parcel map shall be subject to the approval of the
City Engineer. Such plans shall be furnished to the City Engineer not later
than the time of submitting the final map or parcel map for checking and
shall be subject to his approval before any such map shall be certified by
him. Such plans, profiles, and specifications shall show full details of the
proposed improvements and shall be in accordance with the standards and
specifications of the City. Such plans shall also include the design grade
for an existing highway or for a future street provided the City Engineer
determines that such grade is necessary to properly locate applicable slope
and drainage easements.
§ 28-6.4. Highway Improvements. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9305.4]
Each highway shall be improved by full width grading, cement concrete
sidewalks, curbs and gutters, full width roadway paving, installation of
drainage facilities incidental thereto, street signs, street lights, and such
other improvements for traffic and drainage needs as are required for the
appropriate development of the division of land.
§ 28-6.2 COMPTON § 28-6.5
AO:920
§ 28-6.5. Street Improvements. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9305.5]
Each street, including private streets, shall be improved by full width
grading, cement concrete sidewalks, curbs and gutters, full width roadway
paving, the installation of drainage facilities incidental thereto, street signs,
street lights, and such other improvements for local traffic and drainage
needs as are required for the appropriate development of the division of
land.
§ 28-6.6. Improvements to Existing Streets or Highways Adjacent to
the Division of Land. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9305.6]
If a portion of an existing street or highway constitutes any portion of the
boundary of the division of land and such street or highway is unimproved,
or if the Planning Commission determines that the improvements are
insufficient for the general use of the lot owners in the division of land and
for local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs, the Planning Commission
may require the subdivider to improve or agree to improve such street or
highway as specified in subsections 28-6.4, 28-6.5 and 28-6.6.
§ 28-6.7. Improvements to Existing Streets or Highways Within the
Division of Land. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9305.7]
The Planning Commission may require the remodeling of an existing street
or highway. Such remodeling shall be in accordance with the improvement
requirements specified in subsections 28-6.4, 28-6.5 and 28-6.15.
§ 28-6.8. Improvement of Future Streets. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9305.8]
Except for full width grading, the subdivider shall not be required to
improve streets or highways shown on a final map or a parcel map as future
streets. The requirement for full width grading may be waived by the City
Engineer.
§ 28-6.9. Temporary Improvements. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9305.9]
Temporary improvements may be required prior to, or concurrent with,
permanent improvements. In such instances, the temporary improvements
shall be installed in a manner approved by the City Engineer.
§ 28-6.10. Protective Improvements. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9305.10]
The Planning Commission may require such structures to be installed as are
necessary for the proper functioning and maintenance of the improvements
required to remove a flood or geological hazard and as are necessary for the
protection of property adjacent to the division of land.
§ 28-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-6.11
AO:921
§ 28-6.11. Drainage Improvements. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9305.11; Ord. #1867, § 1]
The subdivider shall, as part of the improvement of a division of land,
provide such drainage facilities, other than those incidental to street or
highway improvement, as are considered necessary by the Planning
Commission for the drainage requirements of the division of land for local
neighborhoods. All drainage facilities shall be of such design as to carry
surface waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain, or natural
watercourse approved by the Director of Public Works. Drainage waters
shall not flow over a public sidewalk or parkway, but shall be deposited in
a concrete receptor, located outside the driveway and parking area where
possible, and approved for the purpose, and then carried under the sidewalk
or parkway, through the curb into the gutter in a manner approved by the
City Engineer.
Exception: R-A, R-L, R-M, and R-H Occupancies, other than townhouses,
may flow over a public sidewalk or parkway. Surface waters entrapped on
adjacent properties by reason of any fill shall be drained, by the installation
of pipes, conduits, culverts, or flumes in keeping with good engineering
practices and design, to the nearest street, storm drain, or natural
watercourse, as approved by the Director of Public Works, and shall be
the responsibility of the owner of the property on which the fill is placed.
No slope of any kind shall drain surface waters onto adjoining property.
Retaining walls shall be constructed to retain fill at property limits and
where fill exceeds 12 inches in depth. See Chapter 70 of the Uniform
Building Code for excavating and grading requirements.
§ 28-6.12. Fences and Walls Adjacent to Highways. [Added by Ord.
#1330, § 9305.12]
If the division of land lots front a major or secondary highway and the
Planning Commission requires the subdivider to dedicate vehicular access
rights to such highway, a chain link fence, or equivalent, or a concrete
block or masonry wall not more than 3 1/2 feet high may be required along
the frontage of the lots contiguous to such highway unless the Planning
Commission determines that such fencing or wall is impractical.
§ 28-6.13. Fencing of Watercourses or Drainage Facilities. [Added
by Ord. #1330, § 9305.13]
The subdivider shall provide a chain link fence or equivalent, not less than
six feet high, along each side of any portion of a dedicated right-of-way for
any watercourse or drainage facility within a proposed division of land if the
Planning Commission finds that the location, shape, slope, width, velocity
of water therein, or other characteristics of the watercourse or drainage
facility make the fencing of the right-of-way necessary for the protection of
the general public. Such fencing shall have an adequate number of gates to
facilitate cleaning and maintenance and shall not contain apertures below
the fence in excess of four inches vertical.
§ 28-6.11 COMPTON § 28-6.14
AO:922
§ 28-6.14. Sanitary Sewers. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9305.14]
The Planning Commission may require the subdivider to install sanitary
sewers to serve each lot in a division of land. Such sewers shall be designed
in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer, and the outlet to
be used for the sewers shall be designated by the City Engineer.
§ 28-6.15. Sidewalks. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9305.15]
The subdivider shall install concrete sidewalks not less than four feet wide,
when adjacent to the property line, or not less than five feet wide, when
adjacent to the curb unless the Planning Commission determines that
sidewalks are impractical or unnecessary.
§ 28-6.16. Street Lighting System. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9305.16]
The subdivider shall provide a street lighting system in each division of
land. Plans for the installation of the system shall be submitted to the City
Engineer for approval.
The requirement for a street lighting system may be waived provided the
Planning Commission determines that street lights will not be in keeping
with the neighborhood pattern, or lights are not necessary to serve the
lots in a division of land so as to maintain the continuity of an established
neighborhood street lighting pattern.
§ 28-6.17. Street Trees and Plants. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9305.17]
The subdivider shall plant and install trees in the parkway panels of streets
and highways within a division of land. The type or species and location
of such trees shall be subject to the approval of the Parks and Recreation
Director of the City.
§ 28-6.18. Water Mains and Fire Hydrants. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9305.18]
The subdivider shall install, or agree to install, water mains and fire
hydrants in the division of land for the general use of the lot owners and
for fire protection. The installation of such water mains and fire hydrants
shall comply in all respects with all statutes, laws, rules, and regulations
applicable to water mains and fire hydrants and shall be approved by the
Manager of the Water Department and the Fire Chief.
In the absence of such statutes, laws, rules, and regulations, required
domestic water flows shall be determined by the Manager of the Water
Department, and required fire flows, duration of required fire flows, and the
type and location of fire hydrants shall be determined by the Fire Chief.
Water mains and fire hydrants may be required on existing streets or
highways adjacent to or within the division of land provided the existing
§ 28-6.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-6.18
AO:923
improvements are insufficient for the general use and/or fire protection of
the lot owners.
§ 28-6.19. Improvement Agreements. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9305.19]
If any improvements are not completed to the satisfaction of the Council
before the final map or parcel map is filed, the subdivider shall, prior to
approval of such map by the Council, enter as contractor into an agreement
with the City to complete such improvements within the time specified in
the agreement.
§ 28-6.20. Costs of Improvements. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9305.20]
Improvements required by the provisions of this subsection shall be
installed and constructed by the subdivider at his expense and shall not be
paid for by any special assessment, lien, tax, bonded indebtedness, or other
charge against the land or real property within the division of land except:
§ 28-6.21. Underground Utilities in Commercial and Residential
Subdivisions. [Added by Ord. #1379, § 9305.21]
a. The cost of installing pipes and other facilities for the transmission of
water may be paid for in whole or in part from revenues collected from
the customers served at regular established water rates for the water
company pursuant to regulations of the Public Utilities Commission of
the State, where applicable, or by a Public Agency (as defined in
Section 4401 of the Government Code of the State) from the net
operating income only, as payment for the sale of water thereto;
b. As provided in Sections 11543, 11543.5, 11543.6, 11544, and 11545
(Sewer and Drainage Reimbursement Contracts) of the Subdivision
Map Act or other reimbursement enabling acts; and
c. On streets in the City's Select Street System the City may pay a portion
of the cost.
All outstanding or remaining assessments on the division of land established
for improvements constructed pursuant to special assessment district
proceedings shall be paid for by the subdivider.
a. Utility lines, including, but not limited to, electric, communication,
street lighting, and cable television, within each commercial and
residential subdivision shall be placed underground.
This requirement shall include not only all lines and wires located in
streets, alleys, rights-of-way, and exterior property boundaries but also
services to individual properties.
The subdivider shall be responsible for complying with the
requirements of this section and shall make the necessary
§ 28-6.18 COMPTON § 28-6.21
AO:924
§ 28-6.22. Location of Utility Lines in Industrial Subdivisions.
[Added by Ord. #1379, § 9305.22]
Utility lines shall be located on the rear or interior side property lines
of all lots within industrial subdivisions. Where practical difficulties arise
for the location due to the acquisition of easements or other unusual
circumstances, the Planning Commission may recommend and the Council
may approve alternate locations.
§ 28-6.23. Improvement Plans; Fees. [Added by Ord. #1700,
§ 9305.23]
Where the City Engineer checks an improvement plan, the subdivider shall
pay a nonrefundable fee to the City Engineer in addition to all other fees and
charges required by law. Such fee shall be in accordance with a schedule
thereof from time to time in effect as established by resolution of the
Council.
§ 28-6.23A. Improvement Plan Checking Fees. [Ord. #1792, § 3;
Ord. #1809, § 4]
Initial plan review (per sheet) $300
Fourth and subsequent resubmittal (per
sheet)
$100
§ 28-7. FINAL MAPS; PARCEL MAPS.
§ 28-7.1. Final Maps; Time Limits. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9306.1]
Within 18 months after the approval, or conditional approval, of the
tentative map, the subdivider shall cause the proposed division of land to
be accurately surveyed and a final map prepared and filed in the office of
the County Recorder. The time limit for such filing may be extended by the
Planning Commission for a period not to exceed one year.
arrangements for the installation of such facilities. This requirement
shall not apply to utility lines which do not provide services within the
area being subdivided.
b. For the purpose of this section, appurtenances and associated
equipment, such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers,
pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed
ducts in an underground system, may be placed above ground.
c. Upon the request of the subdivider, the Planning Commission may
recommend that the Council waive or conditionally waive the provisions
of subsection (a) of this section when it finds that the requirement of an
underground installation of utility lines would be unreasonable or
impractical because of topographical or soil conditions.
d. The provisions of this section shall not apply to minor land divisions.
§ 28-6.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-7.2
AO:925
§ 28-7.2. Parcel Maps; Time Limits. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9306.2]
Within one year after the approval, or conditional approval, of the tentative
map, the subdivider may be required to cause the proposed division of land
to be accurately surveyed, if necessary, and a parcel map prepared and filed
in the office of the County Recorder. The time limit for such filing may be
extended by the Planning Commission for a period not to exceed one year.
§ 28-7.3. Conformity to Tentative Maps. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9306.3]
The final map or parcel map shall conform to the approved tentative map
and to the requirements and conditions contained on the report approving
the tentative map. No final map or parcel map shall be accepted by the
City Engineer unless a tentative map has been approved by the Planning
Commission.
§ 28-7.4. Preparation. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9306.4]
Final maps and parcel maps shall be prepared by or under the direction of
a registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor.
§ 28-7.5. Submission. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9306.5]
Final maps and parcel maps shall be submitted to the City Engineer. The
subdivider shall submit 10 copies of the final map or parcel map to permit
the City Engineer to furnish copies to City officers and departments and to
other public agencies which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, may have
an interest in the proposed division of land.
§ 28-7.6. Reports. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9306.6]
Each officer or department, within 15 days after the receipt of a print of
a final map or parcel map, shall report in writing to the City Engineer
as to the compliance or noncompliance of such map with the approved,
or conditionally approved, tentative map, together with a statement of the
changes necessary thereon to cause such map to comply.
§ 28-7.7. Separated Parcels. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9306.7]
No land shall be divided on any single map sheet where such land is
separated or divided into two or more parcels or portions by any parcel
of land other than a street, alley, railroad right-of-way, public utility rightof-
way, or flood control right-of-way, and, where such land is so separated,
each parcel or portion thereof, if divided, shall be divided as a separate
parcel and shown on a separate map.
§ 28-7.2 COMPTON § 28-7.8
AO:926
§ 28-7.8. Dedications. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9306.8]
Parcels of land intended for public use in a division of land shall be
dedicated or offered for dedication to the City on the final map or parcel
map. Dedications or offers required for parcel maps shall be in accordance
with the provisions of subsection 28-8.21. Where applicable, the Planning
Commission may require the following dedications:
a. Natural Watercourses. In the event a division of land or any part thereof
is traversed by any major watercourse, channel, stream, swale, or
creek, the subdivider shall dedicate an adequate right-of-way for storm
drainage purposes if, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, such
dedication is necessary.
b. Drainage Facilities. If an artificial drainage facility is necessary for the
general use of lot owners in the division of land and for adequate
drainage needs, the subdivider shall dedicate an adequate right-of-way
for such drainage channel.
c. Sewers and Storm Drains. If, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, either sewers or storm drains or both are necessary for
the general use of lot owners in the division of land, and such sewers or
storm drains or both are not to be installed in the streets of such
division of land, the subdivider shall show upon the maps and dedicate
necessary easements for such sewers, storm drains, or both.
d. Private Streets. With the approval of the Council, any street or highway
which is intended to be kept physically closed to public travel or posted
as a private street at all times may be shown as a private street, but in
any such case the final map shall contain a conditional offer of
dedication, or, in the case of a parcel map, shall be accompanied by a
conditional offer of dedication by separate instrument which may be
accepted by the Council at such time as the street shall have ceased to
remain so physically closed or posted and shall have been opened to
public travel for a period of three months or more. Any such private
street shall be shown on such map by heavy dashed lines. Sufficient
data shall be shown on each private street to define its boundaries, as is
required for a public street, and sufficient mathematical data to show
clearly the portion of each lot within such street shall be shown.
e. Future Streets. Wherever the Planning Commission shall have
determined that a street is necessary for the future division of property
as shown on the tentative map or for adjoining property, but that the
present dedication and construction of such street is not warranted, the
Planning Commission may require that the location, width, and extent
of such street shall be shown on the final map or parcel map as a future
street.
f. Fire Fighting Access Easements. In areas where, in the opinion of the
Fire Department, there will be a fire hazard to the watershed or any
other properties, unobstructed fire protection equipment access
§ 28-7.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-7.8
AO:927
§ 28-7.9. Rights-of-Way Under Condemnation. [Added by Ord.
#1330, § 9306.9]
In the event an easement for any right-of-way required under the provisions
of this Chapter, in connection with any proposed division of land, is in the
process of condemnation by the City at the time of the submission of any
final map or parcel map, the subdivider, in lieu of offering such right-of-way
and prior to the approval of such final map or certification of such parcel
map, shall submit to the City Engineer a deed granting such easement to the
City on the condition that such condemnation proceedings are abandoned,
together with a contract and bond as provided by subsections 28-6.19 and
28-11.6.
In the event that such condemnation proceedings shall be completed such
deed, contract, and bond shall be returned to the subdivider. In the event
that such condemnation proceedings are abandoned such deed, contract,
and bond shall be delivered by the City Engineer to the Council for
acceptance.
§ 28-8. FINAL MAP AND PARCEL MAP REQUIREMENTS. [Added by
Ord. #1330, § 9307]
Any division of land map prepared for filing shall meet the requirements of
the Subdivision Map Act and this Chapter.
§ 28-8.1. Boundary Lines (Blue Border). [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9307.1]
The boundary lines of a division of land shall be indicated by a border of
light blue ink approximately 1/8 of an inch in width applied on the reverse
side of the tracing and inside such boundary lines. Such ink shall be of such
density as to be transferred to a blue line print of such map and not to
obliterate any line, figure, or other data appearing on such map.
§ 28-8.2. Title Sheets. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9307.2]
The title sheet of each map shall contain a title consisting of the words,
"Tract No. ________" and the number of the subdivision, on a final map and
easements not less than 15 feet wide shall be dedicated from the public
street or highway to the boundary of the division of land.
g. Access Rights. Access rights to all major or secondary highways and to
one street for all double frontage lots, except corner lots, shall be
dedicated to the City unless an alternate design is approved by the City.
h. Restricted Use Areas. If any portion of a lot or lots is subject to
restricted uses, as set forth in subsection 27-8.12, the subdivider shall
dedicate to the City the right to restrict the erection of buildings or
other structures within those portions of the lots subject to the
restricted use.
§ 28-7.8 COMPTON § 28-8.2
AO:928
the words "Parcel Map No. ________" and the number of the parcel map, on
a parcel map. It shall also contain the words "In the City of Compton" or
"Partly in the City of Compton and partly in (insert the name of the political
division or divisions involved)."
The title sheet shall also contain a subtitle consisting of a description of
all the property being divided, by reference to such maps of the property
shown thereon, as shall have been previously filed or recorded in the
office of the County Recorder, or previously filed with the County Clerk,
pursuant to a final judgment in any action in partition, or which shall have
been previously filed in the office of the County Recorder pursuant to the
authority of Chapter 3, Part 2, of Division 4 of the Business and Professions
Code of the State, or by reference to the plot of any United States survey.
When necessary for greater clarity or definiteness, supplemental reference
may be made to any other map on file in the office of the County Recorder.
Upon the title sheet of each map filed for the purpose of reverting
subdivided land to acreage, the subtitle shall consist of the words "A
Reversion to Acreage of " (inserting a legal description of the land being
reverted).
Each reference in such subtitles for any division of land shall be spelled
out and worded identically with the original record thereof and shall show
a complete reference to the book and page of records in the office of the
County Recorder.
The title sheet of each division of land shall contain the certificate of
the surveyor or engineer referred to in Sections 11579 or 11592 of the
Subdivision Map Act. The title sheet, or at least one map sheet, shall contain
a basis of bearing, making reference to some recorded subdivision map,
County Surveyor's map, or other record acceptable to the City Engineer.
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 11567 and 11577 of the Subdivision
Map Act, required certificates, affidavits, and acknowledgments may be
legally stamped or printed on the title sheet of a final or parcel map with
opaque ink. Any stamped or written matter, including signatures, shall be
so made with opaque ink that legible copies, produced through any normal
method of reproduction, may be obtained.
§ 28-8.3. Orientation. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9307.3]
The map on each sheet and the lettering thereon shall be so oriented that,
with the North point directed away from the reader, the map may be read
most conveniently from the bottom or lower right corner of such sheet. The
binding edge shall be at the left and lengthwise of the sheet, keeping in
mind that the sheets are always on the right page of the map book, the left
page being always blank.
§ 28-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-8.4
AO:929
§ 28-8.4. Lot Numbers. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9307.4]
All lots shall be numbered beginning with the numeral "1" and continuing
consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the entire division
of land. No prefix, suffix, or combinations of letters and numbers shall be
used. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet.
§ 28-8.5. Title, Scale, North Point, Numbers, and Cross References.
[Added by Ord. #1330, § 9307.5]
Each sheet of a final map or parcel map, excepting the title sheet or sheets
thereof, shall bear the main title of the map, the scale of the map North
point, and sheet number, together with a description of the relation, if any
between each sheet and each other sheet thereof.
§ 28-8.6. Bearings and Lengths of Lines. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9307.6]
The bearing and length of each lot line, block line, and boundary line shall
be shown on the final map or parcel map; provided, however, when bearings
or lengths of lot lines in any series of lots are the same, such bearings or
lengths may be omitted from each interior parallel lot line of such series.
Each required bearing and length shall be shown in full, and no ditto mark
or other designation of repetition shall be used.
§ 28-8.7. Area Designations. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9307.7]
Upon each lot containing an area of one acre or more shall be designated
the acreage of such lot shown not less accurately than to the nearest 0.01
of an acre.
§ 28-8.8. Curve Data. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9307.8]
The length, radius, and total central angle or bearing of terminal radii of
each curve and the bearing of each radial line to each lot corner on each
curve, or the central angle of each segment within each lot shall be shown
thereon.
§ 28-8.9. Widths and Center Lines of Public Ways, Easements, and
Railroad Rights-of-Way. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9307.9]
There shall be shown upon each final map or parcel map the center line
of each highway, street, or way, the total width thereof, the width of that
portion, if any, to be dedicated, and in the case of any existing highways,
streets, or ways, the width thereof, and the width of each highway, street,
or way on each side of the center thereof. On each such center line shall
be shown the bearing and length of each tangent and radius, central angle,
and length of each curve.
The final map or parcel map shall show the width of each railroad rightof-
way, flood control or drainage easement, and each other easement
§ 28-8.4 COMPTON § 28-8.9
AO:930
appearing on such map, whether previously of record or offered for
dedication on such map.
§ 28-8.10. Street and Highway Names. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9307.10]
§ 28-8.11. City Boundary Lines. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9307.11]
Upon the final map or parcel map shall be shown each City boundary line
crossing or adjoining the division of land, and such line shall be clearly
designated and tied in.
§ 28-8.12. Land Subject to Flood Hazard, Inundation, or Geological
Hazard. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9307.12]
If any portion of a lot or parcel of land of a division of land is subject to
flood hazard, inundation, or geological hazard, such fact and portion shall
be clearly shown on the final map or parcel map by a prominent note on
each sheet of such map whereon any such portion is shown. The dedication
of the right to restrict building, as set forth in paragraph h of subsection
28-7.8, may be required as a condition precedent to filing the final map or
parcel map.
a. Street and highway names within the boundaries of a division of land
shown on a final map or parcel map shall be submitted to the City
Engineer for approval, and, if duplicated elsewhere in the City or so
nearly the same in spelling or pronunciation as to cause confusion, the
City Engineer may require some other name. Unless a name is so
duplicated or confusing, it shall be the same as the name of any street
or highway of which it is on a line of extension, or the name to which
such street or highway may be in the process of being changed.
b. Streets or highways extending approximately northerly and southerly
shall be designated "avenue," and those extending approximately
easterly and westerly shall be designated "street" except where a
highway is on a line of extension of a major or secondary highway of
unusual prominence in the City highway system and which bears an
established name may be approved by the City Engineer.
c. Streets or highways which materially change direction shall bear the
name and suffix designated by the City Engineer as most closely
conforming to a suitable street naming system.
d. The words "avenue," "boulevard," "place," "street," or other designation
of any such street or highway shall be spelled out in full.
e. The name of each newly dedicated portion of any street or highway
shall be shown in or narrowed to such newly-dedicated portion.
§ 28-8.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-8.13
AO:931
§ 28-8.13. Natural Watercourse Designation. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9307.13]
In the event a dedication of right-of-way for storm drainage purposes is not
required, the Planning Commission may require that the location of any
watercourse, channel, stream, swale, or creek be shown on the final map or
parcel map.
§ 28-8.14. Maps Showing Structures Required. [Added by Ord.
#1330, § 9307.14]
When a final map of a division of land is submitted to the City for acceptance
of easements for streets, highways, or public ways and filing with the
County Recorder, or when a parcel map requiring a separate instrument of
such easement dedication is submitted to the City Engineer for checking
and filing with the County Recorder, the final map or parcel map shall be
accompanied by an additional copy of such map for submission to the City
Engineer, and on such map shall be delineated all structures existing within
the easements except publicly-owned storm drains, water lines, sewers,
and other sanitary facilities, whether such structures are on recorded
easements or not.
§ 28-8.15. Waivers of Signatures. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9307.15]
If the owner of an easement or right-of-way of any kind or nature in any
right-of-way offered for dedication, who has no other interest whatever in
any part of the lands included within the division of land, refuses to make
his easement subject to any right-of-way offered to the public, but the final
map in all other respects complies with the provisions of this Chapter, with
the Subdivision Map Act, and with every other applicable statute and law,
and the Council finds that the subdivider has in good faith attempted to
obtain the necessary signature from such owner and has been unable to do
so, and that a refusal to accept the final map for filing would work an undue
hardship on the subdivider, then, by a majority vote of all its members, the
Council may accept such map.
§ 28-8.16. Final Maps; Evidence of Title. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9307.16]
The evidence of title required by the provisions of Section 11625 of the
Subdivision Map Act shall be a certificate of title or a policy of title
insurance issued by a title company authorized by the laws of the State
to write the same, showing the names of all persons having any record
title interest in the land to be subdivided, together with the nature of their
respective interests therein. In the event any dedication is to be made for
public use of any property shown on any final map of land in the City, the
certificate of title or policy of title insurance shall be issued for the benefit
and protection of the City. Such certificate or policy shall be dated and
delivered upon request of the City Engineer when such final map is ready
for filing.
§ 28-8.13 COMPTON § 28-8.17
AO:932
§ 28-8.17. Final Maps and Parcel Maps; Easements. [Added by Ord.
#1330, § 9307.17]
§ 28-8.18. Final Maps; Easement Certificates. [Added by Ord.
#1330, § 9307.18]
Any final map of a subdivision presented to the City for acceptance of
easements and filing shall have written thereon, in addition to or as a part
of any other certificate required, a certificate signed by the owner, the
subdivider, and by all persons claiming any interest other than a right-ofway,
easement, or other interest, none of which can ripen into a fee, in the
lands included within the subdivision shown on the map, in substantially the
following form: "We hereby certify that except as shown on a copy of this
map on file in the office of the City Manager, we know of no easement or
structure existing within the easements hereby offered for dedication to the
public, other than publicly-owned water lines, sewers, or storm drains; that
we will grant no right or interest within the boundaries of said easements
offered to the public, except where such right or interest is expressly made
subject to the said easements."
§ 28-8.19. Parcel Maps: Data. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9307.19]
If the parcel map is compiled from record data, the source of information
used shall be contained in a note on one sheet of the parcel map.
a. Upon a final map or parcel map shall be shown the center line or side
lines of each easement to which the lots in the division of land are
subject. In the event such easement is not definitely located of record, a
statement showing the existence of such easement shall be placed on
the map.
b. Each easement shown for any storm drain or sewer or fire access shall
be designated on the final map or parcel map by fine-dashed lines.
c. Distances and bearings on the lines of lots which are cut by easements
shall be arrowed or so shown as to indicate clearly the actual length of
each lot line.
d. The width of easements or the lengths and bearings of the lines thereof
and sufficient ties thereto to definitely locate such easements with
respect to a division of land shall be shown on the final map or parcel
map.
e. Each easement shall be clearly labeled and identified and, if of record,
the record reference shall be shown thereon.
f. If an easement is being dedicated by a final map, it shall be properly set
out in the owner's certificate of dedication on the map.
g. All notes or figures pertaining to each easement shall be subordinated
in form and appearance to those relating to the division of land itself.
§ 28-8.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-8.20
AO:933
§ 28-8.20. Parcel Maps; Easements. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9307.20]
An easement required as a condition of approval of the tentative map
shall be shown and identified on the parcel map as required in subsection
28-8.17.
§ 28-8.21. Parcel Maps; Dedications. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9307.21]
Any right-of-way for street opening or widening or grant of easement
required as a condition precedent to filing a parcel map shall be offered by
separate instrument, accepted and recorded prior to, or concurrently with,
the filing of the parcel map. The separate instrument may be prepared by
a title company or by the City Engineer's office and shall be accompanied
by a title report, prepared in favor of the City, indicating who is required to
sign this document to pass clear title to the City. Such title report shall be
kept up-to-date and the City shall be notified of any change until such time
as the separate documents are recorded.
§ 28-8.22. Survey Procedures and Practices. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9307.22]
The procedure and practice of all survey work done on any division of land,
whether for preparation of a final map or parcel map, shall conform to the
standards and details set forth in Chapter 15, Division 3, of the Business and
Professions Code of the State, the Land Surveyor's Act. The allowable error
of closure on any portion of a final map or parcel map shall be 1/10,000.
In the event the County Engineer, the County Road Commissioner, the State
Highway Engineer, or the City Engineer shall have established the center
line of any street or alley in or adjoining a division of land, the final map or
parcel map shall show such center line, together with a reference to a field
book or map showing such center line and the monuments which determine
its position. If determined by ties, that fact shall be stated upon the final
map or parcel map.
§ 28-8.23. Evidence Determining Boundaries. [Added by Ord.
#1330, § 9307.23]
On each final map shall be fully and clearly shown and identified such
stakes, monuments, or other evidence determining the boundaries of the
division of land as were found on the ground, together with sufficient
corners of adjoining divisions of land, by lot and block number, subdivision
name or number, and place of filing, or by section, township, and range
or other property designation as may be necessary to locate precisely the
limits of the division of land.
The City Engineer may require that a field survey be performed in order to
establish the boundary of any parcel map and shall examine such survey for
compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and the Land Surveyor's Act.
§ 28-8.20 COMPTON § 28-8.24
AO:934
§ 28-8.24. Monuments. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9307.24]
a. Boundaries. Each final map or parcel map shall show durable
monuments found or set at or near each boundary corner and at
intermediate points, approximately 1,000 feet apart, or at such lesser
distances as may be made necessary by topography or culture to insure
accuracy in the reestablishment of any point or line without
unreasonable difficulty. The precise position and the character of each
such monument shall be shown on such map. Such durable monument
shall be not less substantial than an iron pipe of a two inch outside
diameter, not less than three feet in length, with plug and tack, and set
at least two feet into the ground, or of such other character and stability
as may be approved by the City Engineer. For the purposes of this
Chapter, a lead and tack set in permanent concrete or masonry shall be
considered as a durable monument. The approximate elevation of the
top of each such monument with respect to the surface of the ground
shall be shown on such map.
b. Street Center Lines. Whenever necessary in the opinion of the City
Engineer, center line monuments shall be set to mark the intersections
of streets, intersections of streets with the tract boundary, or to mark
either the beginning and end of curves or the points of intersection of
tangents thereof or other intermediate points.
Each such monument shall be not less durable and substantial than:
1. In asphaltic concrete or cement concrete pavements, a lead and
tack;
2. In unsurfaced graveled or oiled surfaces, a two inch iron pipe set
not less than 12 inches below the surface or at such depth as may
be approved by the City Engineer; or
3. In bituminous macadam, a spike not less than six inches long.
c. Notes to Be Furnished. For each center line intersection monument set
the engineer or surveyor under whose supervision the survey has been
made shall furnish to the City Engineer a set of notes showing clearly
the ties between such monument and a sufficient number (normally
four) of durable distinctive reference points or monuments. Such
reference points or monuments may be leads and tacks in sidewalks, or
stakes set back of the curb line and below the surface of the ground or
such substitute therefor as appears to be not more likely to be
disturbed. Such sets of notes shall be of such quality, form, and
completeness and shall be on paper of such quality and size as may be
necessary to conform to the standardized office records of the City
Engineer. All such notes shall be indexed and filed by the City Engineer
as a part of the permanent public records of his office.
d. Identification Marks. All monuments set as required in this section shall
be permanently and visibly marked or tagged with the registration or
§ 28-8.24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-8.24
AO:935
§ 28-9. TENTATIVE MAPS OF MINOR LAND DIVISIONS AND
CERTIFICATES OF EXCEPTION.
§ 28-9.1. Certificates of Exception; Procedure. [Added by Ord.
#1330, § 9308.1]
A subdivider requesting a Certificate of Exception pursuant to the
provisions of subsections 28-1.6 and 28-1.7 shall submit a statement of
ownership as specified in subsection 28-9.8 and a plot plan map of the
proposed division, based on record data and information on file in the office
of the City Engineer, showing sufficient detail to justify an exception to the
Planning Director. Off-site access, if required, shall be indicated on the plot
plan map.
The Planning Director shall identify, date, and review the plot plan map and
within five working days issue a Certificate of Exception or deny approval
of the plot plan map. If at any time during the determination period the
Planning Director finds that the plot plan map or supporting documents
are improperly prepared or are insufficient to make a determination, and
the subdivider is so notified, the determination period may be extended by
mutual agreement for a period of time not to exceed 40 days from the date
of submission.
Where a subdivider does not possess an easement for off-site access, as
required by subsection 28-4.15, the Planning Director may waive the
requirement for such easement and approve the plot plan map for design
license number of the engineer or surveyor under whose supervision
the survey was made.
e. Deferment. All boundary monuments shall be set prior to filing the final
map unless extensive grading operations or improvement work makes it
impractical to set monuments. In the event any or all of the boundary
monuments required are to be set subsequent to filing of the final map,
the engineer or surveyor making the survey shall furnish evidence
acceptable to the engineer prior to submitting his final map to
substantiate his reasons for deferring the setting of permanent
monuments until after filing of the final map. If the setting of boundary
monuments is deferred, field notes showing the boundary survey shall
be presented to the City Engineer at the time the final map is submitted
for checking. Interior street center line monuments may be set
subsequent to filing of the final map. The final map shall show which
monuments are in place and which are to be set. Prior to approval of the
final map by the City Engineer, the subdivider shall submit a written
agreement in which he agrees that the monuments so deferred will be
set within a specified time and that the notes required by subsection c
of this section will be furnished within the specified time.
f. Inspections and Approval. All monuments shall be subject to inspection
and approval of the City Engineer in conjunction with his checking of
the map.
§ 28-8.24 COMPTON § 28-9.1
AO:936
only, provided the Planning Director finds that the subdivider has exhausted
every reasonable means to obtain the required easement and that it is
probable that the future division of adjacent properties will provide a means
of access to the parcels which lack approved access. The Planning Director
shall indicate on the approved plot plan map that the division of land does
not have approved access.
If a Certificate of Exception is issued, the Planning Director shall forward
copies of the approved plot plans to the applicant and to the City Engineer.
If a Certificate of Exception is disapproved, the Planning Director shall
forward written notice of the disapproval, together with a complete
statement of the reasons for the action to the subdivider.
A subdivider need not submit a plot plan map to receive a Certificate of
Exception for a minor land division described by paragraph c of subsection
28-1.7 when the subdivider has submitted and received approval for a
site plan pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 30, Zoning, setting forth
the zoning regulations provided the subdivider requests issuance of the
Certificate of Exception at the time the site plan is submitted for approval.
§ 28-9.2. Certificates of Exception: Revised Plot Plans. [Added by
Ord. #1330, § 9308.2]
If at any time subsequent to the receipt of a Certificate of Exception for
a minor land division the subdivider finds that minor adjustments to the
configuration figuration of one or more of the parcels within the division are
necessary, and the Planning Director determines that such changes do not
constitute a new division of land, the subdivider may file a revised plot plan
map. The Planning Director shall process such maps in accordance with the
provisions of subsection 28-9.2 except that the determination period shall
not be more than five working days.
§ 28-9.3. Certificates of Exception: Appeals to the Planning
Commission. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9308.3]
A subdivider dissatisfied with any action taken by the Planning Director
pursuant to the provisions of subsection 28-9.1 and 28-9.2 may file a written
appeal with the Planning Commission within 15 days after such action.
The Planning Commission shall hear the appeal within 21 days or at its
next succeeding regular meeting, unless the subdivider consents to a
continuance. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Commission
shall, within seven days, declare its finding based upon the testimony and
documents produced before it. It may sustain, modify, reject, or overrule,
any action of the Planning Director provided such action is not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Chapter or any other applicable law or statute.
§ 28-9.4. Certificates of Exception: Appeals to the Council. [Added
by Ord. #1330, § 9308.4]
The subdivider may appeal any action taken by the Planning Commission
pursuant to the provisions of subsection 28-9.3 to the Council by written
§ 28-9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-9.4
AO:937
notice to the City Clerk in the manner prescribed for subdivisions by
subsection (b) of Section 11552 of the Subdivision Map Act.
§ 28-9.5. Tentative Minor Land Divisions; Submission of Maps.
[Added by Ord. #1330, § 9308.5]
A tentative minor land division map shall be submitted to the Planning
Director for transmittal to the Planning Commission for review and
approval. The tentative map shall be prepared in accordance with the
provisions of subsection 28-3.2.
§ 28-9.6. Tentative Minor Land Divisions; Map Numbers. [Added by
Ord. #1330, § 9308.6]
The subdivider shall apply for a map number prior to submission of a
tentative map. Map numbers shall be assigned by the County Engineer.
§ 28-9.7. Tentative Minor Land Divisions; Map Contents. [Added by
Ord. #1330, § 9308.7]
The tentative minor land division map shall be a reproducible print, legibly
drawn to a scale of sufficient size to show full detail, including the following
information:
a. The North point, date, and scale;
b. The assigned map number;
c. The dimensions and record boundaries of the total ownership;
d. Sufficient dimensions and record boundaries so as to define the
boundaries of the proposed minor land division;
e. The approximate boundaries, dimensions, and area of each proposed
parcel;
f. General information as to the locations, names, widths, and
improvements of all adjoining highways, streets, or ways;
g. A number for each parcel;
h. The widths and approximate alignments of all easements, whether
public or private, for access, drainage, sewage disposal, and public
utilities which are existing or are proposed by the subdivider;
i. The actual street names or an identifying letter for proposed streets;
j. Approximate contours showing existing topography;
k. The approximate location of existing structures or improvements,
shown to scale, within or immediately adjacent to the division of land,
showing the house numbers and labeling each structure with the
proposed disposition;
§ 28-9.4 COMPTON § 28-9.7
AO:938
§ 28-9.8. Tentative Minor Land Divisions; Maps; Written
Statements. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9308.8]
The subdivider shall submit with the tentative minor land division map a
written statement containing the following information:
§ 28-9.9. Tentative Minor Land Divisions: Maps: Processing. [Added
by Ord. #1330, § 9308.9]
Tentative minor land division maps shall be processed and acted upon in
accordance with the provisions of section 28-3.
§ 28-10. MAP FILING FEES.
§ 28-10.1. Tentative Map Fees. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9309.1; Ord.
#1798, § 1; Ord. #1815, § 2]
At the time of submission, the person submitting a tentative map shall pay
a filing fee. The amount of such fee shall be set by an ordinance of the City
Council and shall be adjusted periodically to reflect changes in processing
costs, borne by the City.
§ 28-10.2. Final Maps; Parcel Maps; Filing Fee Deposits; Refunds.
[Added by Ord. #1330, § 9309.2; Ord. #1356]
Upon the submission of a final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall
deposit with the County Engineer a sum of money equal to $200 per map,
plus $5 per lot. An additional checking fee of $5 shall be charged for each
lot that is revised after it has been checked. The money shall be deposited
in a trust fund for the filing of such map, and, upon the filing of such map in
l. The approximate location and direction of flow of all defined
watercourses; and
m. A vicinity map, if necessary, to show the location of the division in
relation to the nearest existing cross streets.
a. A legal description of all ownerships comprising a part of the proposed
minor land division;
b. A statement that the subdivider is the record owner of all real property
comprising the proposed minor land division or that the record owners
consent to the submission of the map;
c. The method of sewage disposal for each parcel;
d. The source of domestic potable water supply for each parcel; and
e. A clear statement of the proposed use of the property.
Any of the information required pursuant to this section may be shown on the
face of the tentative minor land division map.
§ 28-9.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-10.2
AO:939
the office of the County Recorder, such money shall be used by the County
Engineer in payment of the fee for the filing of such map. Where a lot is
required by the provisions of subsection 28-5.5, such lot shall be omitted in
calculating the map-checking fee.
In the event the subdivider abandons his intention to cause such map to be
filed and so notifies the County Engineer of such fact in writing, such money
shall be returned to the subdivider who deposited the same. All moneys paid
out of such trust fund shall be paid by warrant of the County Auditor which
shall be drawn upon the requisition of the County Engineer.
§ 28-10.3. Final Maps: Parcel Maps; Checking Fees. [Added by Ord.
#1330, § 9309.3; Ord. #1356; Ord. #1700, § 4,c]
Where the City Engineer checks a final map or parcel map under the
provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, the subdivider shall pay a nonrefundable
map-checking fee to the City Engineer. Such fee shall be in
accordance with a schedule thereof from time to time in effect as
established by resolution of the Council.
§ 28-10.3A. Street Excavation Permit Fees. [Ord. #1792, § 4; Ord.
#1809, § 5]
Basic fee $200
Over 4 lots $40 per lot
The subdivider shall make additional fee payments for the fourth and
subsequent submittals of said maps at a rate equivalent to 1/3 of that for
the original final or map checks, as reflected in the above schedule.
§ 28-10.4. Tentative Minor Land Division Maps; Fees. [Added by
Ord. #1330, § 9309.4]
Processing fees for tentative minor land division maps shall be collected
from the subdivider in accordance with the provisions of subsection 28-10.1.
§ 28-10.5. Certificates of Exception; Fees. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9309.5]
Processing fees for each plot plan map submitted by an applicant requesting
a Certificate of Exception shall be $30. A fee of $15 shall be charged for
processing revised plot plan maps for an applicant requesting a Certificate
of Exception.
§ 28-11. DEPOSITS; BONDS.
§ 28-11.1. Bonds for Sewer Improvement. [Added by Ord. #1100,
§ 9310]
Before commencing any improvement in a division of land, the subdivider
shall file with the City both a performance bond and a labor and material
§ 28-10.2 COMPTON § 28-11.1
AO:940
bond, issued by one or more authorized corporate sureties, in such amounts
as shall be determined by the City Engineer for all sewers and other
improvements under his jurisdiction to be installed or constructed. Each
bond amount shall not be less than 50% of the involved construction costs.
§ 28-11.2. Inspection Deposits; Special. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9310.1]
Before commencing any improvement in a division of land, the subdivider
shall deposit with the City the sum required by the City Engineer for all
sewers and other improvements under his jurisdiction to be installed or
constructed. The subdivider shall also deposit an additional sum estimated
by the City Engineer to be the actual costs of the inspections of all
improvements under his jurisdiction.
§ 28-11.3. Inspection Deposits; General. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9310.2]
In lieu of making the special deposit required for the costs of inspections of
improvements by the City Engineer, the subdivider may make and maintain
with the City a general deposit in an amount not less than $1,000,
determined by the officer with whom the deposit is made to be sufficient to
protect the City's interests. The general deposit shall be held and used for
the same purposes as the special deposit for the costs of the inspections of
improvements by the City Engineer.
§ 28-11.4. Insufficient Inspection Deposits. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9310.3]
If any deposit made pursuant to the provisions of either subsections 28-11.1
or 28-11.2 is less than sufficient to pay all of the costs of inspection, the
subdivider, upon demand of the City, shall pay to the City an amount equal
to the deficiency. If the subdivider fails or refuses to pay such deficiency
upon demand, the City may recover the same by action in any court of
competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full, the
improvement shall be considered not completed.
§ 28-11.5. Refunds. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9310.4]
The City shall refund unused deposits as determined by the City Engineer.
If the actual cost of inspections is less than the amount deposited, the City
shall refund to the subdivider any amount still remaining in the manner
provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys.
§ 28-11.6. Surety Companies. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9310.5]
All faithful performance bonds referred to in this Chapter shall be furnished
by a surety company authorized to write the same in the State and shall be
subject to the approval and acceptance of the Council.
§ 28-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-11.7
AO:941
§ 28-11.7. Faithful Performance Bonds. [Added by Ord. #1330,
§ 9310.6]
The agreement referred to in subsection 28-6.19 shall be accompanied by
a faithful performance bond guaranteeing the faithful performance of all
work, the inspection of which is the duty of the City Engineer, in a penal
sum which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, equals the cost thereof.
§ 28-11.8. Faithful Performance Deposits: Monuments. [Added by
Ord. #1330, § 9310.7]
The agreement referred to in paragraph e of subsection 28-8.24 shall be
accompanied by a deposit in cash in a penal sum which, in the opinion of the
City Engineer, equals the cost of setting such monuments, guaranteeing the
faithful performance of all such work of setting monuments and furnishing
notes and in every respect complying with such agreement.
§ 28-11.9. Faithful Performance Bonds: Water Mains. [Added by
Ord. #1330, § 9310.8]
If the subdivider shows to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that he has
entered into a contract with a water utility to construct water mains as
required by this Chapter, which contract makes the City a part thereto and
provides that such contract may not be modified or rescinded without the
consent of the City except as required by the Public Utilities Commission of
the State, and has deposited with such water utility security for the payment
of such water utility, which security the City Engineer finds adequate, the
subdivider need not accompany his agreement to install water mains with a
faithful performance bond.
§ 28-11.10. Reductions in Bonds and Deposits of Portions
Completed. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9310.9]
When any portion of an improvement has actually been fully completed, the
officer whose duty it is to inspect such improvement may in his discretion
authorize from time to time a reduction in the bonds, or a partial withdrawal
of funds, or a partial reassignment and withdrawal of savings and loan
certificates or shares, which bonds, funds, certificates, certificates of credit,
or shares were deposited in lieu of the faithful performance bonds required
by this Chapter, equal to the estimated cost of such completed portion.
The provisions of this subsection do not authorize a reduction or withdrawal
for partial completion of any or all of such improvements.
§ 28-11.11. Failure to Complete Improvements: Forfeitures. [Added
by Ord. #1330, § 9310.10]
Upon failure of a subdivider to complete any improvement within the time
specified in an agreement, the Council may, upon notice in writing of not
less than 10 days served upon the person, firm, or corporation signing
such contract, or upon notice in writing of not less than 20 days served by
§ 28-11.7 COMPTON § 28-11.11
AO:942
registered mail addressed to the last known address of the person, firm, or
corporation signing such contract, determine that such improvement work,
or any part thereof, is not completed and may cause to be forfeited to the
City such portion of such sum of money or bonds given for the faithful
performance of such work or may cash any savings and loan certificates as
shares deposited and assigned to assure the faithful performance of such
work in such amount as may be necessary to complete such improvement
work.
§ 28-11.12. Unpaid Taxes, Liens, and Assessments. [Added by Ord.
#1330, § 9310.11]
Prior to filing of the final map, the subdivider shall file with the County Clerk
a certification from the official computing redemptions in the County and
in the City showing that, according to the records of his office, there are
no liens against the division of land or any part thereof for unpaid State,
County, municipal, or local taxes or special assessments collected as taxes,
except taxes or special assessments not yet payable.
As to taxes or special assessments collected as taxes not yet payable, the
subdivider shall file with the County Clerk a certificate by each proper
officer, giving his estimate of the amount of taxes and assessments which
are a lien but which are not yet payable. Whenever any part of the division
of land is subject to a lien for taxes or special assessments collected as
taxes which are not yet payable, the final map shall not be recorded until
the owner or subdivider executes and files with the Board of Supervisors
of the County a good and sufficient bond to be approved by the Board of
Supervisors and by its terms made to inure to the benefit of the County upon
the payment of all State, County, municipal, and local taxes and all special
assessments collected as taxes, which, at the time the final map is recorded,
are a lien against the property but which are not yet payable. In lieu of a
bond, a deposit may be made of money or negotiable bonds in the amount,
and of the kind approved, for securing deposits of public money, with the
approval of the Board of Supervisors of the County.
§ 28-11.13. Money, Negotiable Bonds, Certificates of Credit, and
Savings and Loan Shares. [Added by Ord. #1330, § 9310.12]
In lieu of any faithful performance bond required by the provisions of this
Chapter, the subdivider may deposit with the Council a sum of money, or
negotiable bonds, or certificates of credit, or savings and loan certificates or
shares equal to the required amount of such bond as security for the faithful
performance thereof. If the subdivider deposits certificates of credit or
savings and loan certificates or shares, he shall also assign such certificates
and shares to the City.
§ 28-12. FEES FOR INSPECTION.
§ 28-11.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-12.1
AO:943
§ 28-12.1. Inspection Fees. [Added by Ord. #1700, § 9311.1]
In addition to other requirements mentioned in this section, the subdivider
shall pay to the City a fee equivalent to not less than 1% of the involved
construction costs. Said fee shall not be refundable.
§ 28-12.2. Insufficient Inspection Fees. [Added by Ord. #1700,
§ 9311.2]
If any fee made pursuant to the provisions of subsection 28-12.1 is less than
sufficient to pay all the costs of inspection, the subdivider, upon demand
of the City, shall pay to the City, an amount equal to the deficiency upon
demand. If the subdivider fails or refuses to pay such deficiency upon
demand, the City may recover same, and any litigation costs as well, by
any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such judgment, or in its absence
such deficiency, is paid in full, the improvement shall be considered not
completed.
Chapter 29
SETBACK LINES
§ 29-1. ESTABLISHMENT. [Ord. #856, § 9200]
In order to provide for the safety, comfort, convenience, and welfare of
residents and property owners of the City, setback lines may be established
by the Council along any portion of any street or any other public
thoroughfare. The setback lines shall be initiated according to the
provisions of this Chapter. The Council may, on its own initiative, establish
a setback line on any street or any other public thoroughfare, the setback
lines to be established by ordinance.
§ 29-2. DEFINITION. [Added by Ord. #1256, § 9200.1]
As used in this Chapter:
SETBACK LINE — Shall mean a line established by the Council in
accordance with sections hereafter contained, between which and the
established street line no structure may be built. The location of such a
setback line may be determined by a distance from the front line of the
lot, the distance from an established street line, or a distance from the City
Engineer's official center line.
§ 29-3. PETITION. [Amended by Ord. #1256, § 9201]
Proceedings for the establishing of setback lines along any portion of any
street, or any other public thoroughfare, may be initiated by petition in the
following manner:
A petition may be filed with the Council asking that the setback lines be
established; such petition to submit plans, or sketches, with descriptions
§ 28-12.1 COMPTON § 29-3
AO:944
designating the streets, or portions of streets, or any other public
thoroughfares, along which such setback lines are sought to be established,
and the distance of the setback line from the established property line,
street line, or official center line of street as established by the City
Engineer. The Council shall thereupon instigate an investigation of such
petition through the City Manager, and, in case there is a City Planning
Commission, it shall be referred to the City Planning Commission for
investigation and report. Such report shall be had not less than two weeks
from the time the petition has been filed. Upon consideration of such
petition, which shall take due account of the public peace, health, safety,
convenience, and welfare of the community, the Council may in its
discretion establish such a setback line beyond which no building shall be
erected or constructed.
§ 29-4. RESOLUTION OF INTENTION. [Ord. #859, § 9202]
Before ordering the establishment of any setback line authorized by this
Chapter, the Council shall pass a resolution of intention so to do,
designating the setback line proposed to be established, which resolution
shall be published once in a daily newspaper published and circulated in
the City and designated by the City Council for the purpose, and one copy
of the resolution shall be posted conspicuously upon the street in front of
each block or part of block of any street, public way or place where such
setback line is proposed to be established. Such resolution shall contain also
a notice of the day, hour and place when and where any and all persons
having any objection to the establishment of the proposed setback line may
appear before the Council and present any objection which they may have to
the proposed setback line as set forth in the resolution of intention. The time
of hearing shall not be less than 15 nor more than 40 days from the date of
the adoption of the resolution of intention; and publication and posting of
the resolution shall be made at least 10 days before the time of the hearing.
§ 29-5. BUILDING PROHIBITED. [Ord. #859, § 9203]
After the adoption of the resolution of intention, and prior to the time
the ordinance establishing a setback line in such proceedings becomes
effective, no building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building
or structure between any proposed setback line and the street lines, and
any permit so issued shall be void.
§ 29-6. PROTESTS. [Ord. #859, § 9204]
At any time not later than the hour set for hearing objections and protests
to the establishment of the proposed setback line any person having any
interest in any land upon which the setback line is proposed to be
established, may file with the City Clerk a written protest or objection
against the establishment of said setback line designated in the resolution
of intention. Such protest must be in writing and be delivered to the Clerk
not later than the hour set for hearing, and no other protests or objections
shall be considered. All protestants may appear before the Council at the
§ 29-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-6
AO:945
hearing, either in person or by counsel, and be heard in support of their
protests or objections. At the time set for hearing, or at any time to which
the hearing may be continued, the Council shall proceed to hear and pass
upon all protests or objections so made and its decision shall be final and
conclusive. The Council shall have power and jurisdiction to sustain any
protest or objection and abandon the proceeding, or to deny any and all
protests or objections, and order by ordinance the establishment of the
setback line described in the resolution of intention, or to order the same
established with such changes or modifications as the Council may deem
proper.
§ 29-7. PERMITS RESTRICTED. [Amended by Ord. #976; Ord.
#1170, § 9205]
From and after the taking effect of such ordinance establishing any setback
line and as to all setback lines established by this Code, no person shall
construct any building, wall, fence, or other structure within the space
between the front property line and the setback line, so established, and
the Building Department shall refuse to issue any permit for any building or
structure to be erected within such space.
§ 29-8. BUILDING SETBACK LINES ON CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord.
#856, §§ 9206.7, 9206.17; Ord. #905, § 9206.11; Ord. #928,
§§ 9206.12 — 9206.15; Ord. #1049; Ord. #1052, § 9206.16; Ord.
#1089; Ord. #1091; Ord. #1150, § 9206.18; Ord. #1179, § 9206.19;
Ord. #1215; Ord. #1222, § 9206.20; Ord. #1258; Ord. #1262; Ord.
#1298, § 9206.21; Ord. #1357; Ord. #1358, § 9206.22; Ord. #1360,
§ 9206.23]
The public peace, health, safety, comfort and convenience, interest and
welfare requires the establishment of the following setback lines.
a. Along Tamarind Street in the City between the north line of Compton
Boulevard and the south line of Rosecrans Avenue, a line to be known
and designated as a setback line is hereby established on each side of
Tamarind Street between Compton Boulevard and Rosecrans Avenue as
follows, to wit:
On the east and west sides of Tamarind Street at a minimum distance
of 36.5 feet from the following described center lines: Commencing at
the intersection of the center line of Compton Boulevard with a line
drawn 26.5 feet at right angles from and parallel with the westerly line
of Tamarind Street as shown on map of Wright's Addition to the Town
of Compton, recorded in Book 7, Page 55 of Miscellaneous Records of
Los Angeles County; thence northerly along said parallel line and its
northerly prolongation to an intersection with the center line of Poplar
Street as shown on map of Tract No. 3765, recorded in Book 41, Page
88 and 89 of Maps, Records of Los Angeles County; thence northerly
in a direct line to the intersection of the center line of Elm Street
with a line drawn 23 feet at right angles from and parallel with the
§ 29-6 COMPTON § 29-8
AO:946
westerly line of Tamarind Street, all as shown on said map of Tract
No. 3765; thence northerly along said last mentioned parallel line to its
intersection with the center line of Rosecrans Avenue as shown on map
of said Tract No. 3765.
b. On both sides of East Compton Boulevard from east city limits to
Alameda Street, a distance of 12 feet. On both sides of Palm Street from
Alameda Street to Willowbrook Avenue, a distance of five feet. On both
sides of Magnolia Street from Alameda Street to Willowbrook Avenue, a
distance of five feet. On the north side of Rosecrans Avenue from the
east City limits to the west City limits, a distance of 40 feet from the
center line of Rosecrans Avenue. On the south side of Rosecrans Avenue
from the east City limits to the west City limits, a distance of 40 feet
from the center line of Rosecrans Avenue.
c. Along Compton Boulevard in the City, between Alameda Street and
Willowbrook Avenue, a line to be known and designated as a setback
line is hereby established on each side of Compton Boulevard between
Alameda Street and Willowbrook Avenue as follows, to wit:
On the north side of Compton Boulevard, at a minimum distance of 35
feet, and on the south side of Compton Boulevard, a minimum distance
of 43 feet from the official line of Compton Boulevard.
d. Along Compton Boulevard between the west City limits and the east
City limits, a setback line is hereby established on each side of Compton
Boulevard between the following points, to wit:
Between the west City limits and the west line of the west roadway of
Willowbrook Avenue, at a minimum distance of 40 feet from the official
center line of Compton Boulevard; between the east line of Alameda
Street to the west line of Long Beach Boulevard, at a minimum distance
of 50 feet from the official center line of Compton Boulevard; between
the east line of Long Beach Boulevard and the west line of Bowen
Avenue on the north, at a minimum distance of 40 feet from the official
center line; and between the east line of Bowen Avenue and east City
limits on the north and between the east line of Long Beach Boulevard
to the east City limits on the south, at a minimum distance of 50 feet
from the official center line of Compton Boulevard.
e. Along Long Beach Boulevard between the north City limits and the
south City limits, a setback line is hereby established on each side of
Long Beach Boulevard between the north City limits and the south City
limits as follows, to wit:
On the west side of Long Beach Boulevard, at a minimum distance of
50 feet, and on the east side of Long Beach Boulevard, at a minimum
distance of 50 feet from the official center line.
f. Along Rosecrans Avenue between the westerly boundary line and the
easterly boundary line of the City, a setback line is hereby established
§ 29-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-8
AO:947
on each side of Rosecrans Avenue between the above described
boundaries as follows, to wit:
On the north side of Rosecrans Avenue, at a minimum distance of 50
feet, and on the south side of Rosecrans Avenue, at a minimum distance
of 50 feet from the official center line of Rosecrans Avenue.
g. Along the easterly and westerly sides of Acacia Avenue from the
northerly line of Alondra Boulevard, 90 feet wide, and the southerly line
of Compton Boulevard, 80 feet wide, setback lines are established as
follows, to wit:
On the easterly side, a line that is parallel with and distant 20 feet
easterly, measured at right angles from the easterly line of Acacia
Avenue (formerly Acacia Street) 60 feet wide, as said avenue is shown
on the map of the Town of Compton Tract, recorded in Book 11, Page
68 of Miscellaneous Records of Los Angeles County.
On the westerly side, a line that is parallel with and distant 20 feet
westerly, measured at right angles from the westerly line of Acacia
Avenue (formerly Acacia Street) 60 feet wide, as said avenue is shown
on the map of the Town of Compton Tract, recorded in Book 11, Page
68 of Miscellaneous Records of Los Angeles County.
h. Along Palmer Avenue between the easterly line of the Southern Pacific
Railroad Company's right-of-way and the westerly line of Crane Street,
a building line is hereby established on each side of Palmer Avenue
between the above described boundaries as follows, to wit:
On the north side of Palmer Avenue from the easterly line of the
Southern Pacific Railroad Company's right-of-way to the westerly line
of Crane Street, at a minimum distance of 45 feet, and on the south
side of Palmer Avenue from the easterly line of the Southern Pacific
Railroad Company's right-of-way to the westerly line of Crane Street,
at a minimum distance of 45 feet from the official center line of Palmer
Avenue.
i. Along the east roadway of Alameda Street, a setback line is hereby
established along the east side of the east roadway of Alameda Street as
follows, to wit:
A line parallel to and distant easterly 61 feet, measured at right angles,
from the easterly line of the Southern Pacific Railroad Company's rightof-
way extending from the northerly boundary of the City to the
southerly boundary of the City.
j. Along El Segundo Boulevard, from Central Avenue to the west side of
Wilmington Avenue on the north half of said El Segundo Boulevard and
from the west side of Central Avenue to a point 198 feet east of the east
side of Wilmington Avenue on the south half of said El Segundo
Boulevard, setback lines are hereby established along the above
described portion of El Segundo Boulevard as follows, to wit:
§ 29-8 COMPTON § 29-8
AO:948
A line drawn parallel to and distant northerly measured at right angles
50 feet from the center line of said El Segundo Boulevard and extending
from the easterly line of Central Avenue to the westerly line of
Wilmington Avenue.
A line parallel to and distant southerly 50 feet measured at right angles
from the center line of said El Segundo Boulevard extending from the
east line of Central Avenue to the now existent easterly boundary of
the City located approximately 198 feet easterly of the east line of
Wilmington Avenue.
k. A setback line is hereby established as follows, to wit:
Beginning at a point in the northerly City limits of the City, as said
City limits exist, approximately 200 feet north of the north line of
Olive Street, said point being distant easterly 50 feet measured at right
angles from that certain line shown on County Surveyor's Map No.
B 1822 as being center line per C.S. 8572-2, CSB 686-3, CF 1683,
Tract No. 5810; thence southerly in a straight line parallel with the
last mentioned center line to a point of intersection with the easterly
line of Atlantic Avenue, said easterly line being a curve concave to the
northeast.
l. Along the westerly side of Bullis Road, a line to be known and
designated as a setback line is hereby established as follows, to wit:
Beginning at a point in the southerly line of Rosecrans Avenue, distant
westerly thereon 40.01 feet from the point of intersection of said
southerly line with the center line of Bullis Road; thence southerly
parallel to said center line to a point of intersection with the northerly
line of Compton Boulevard.
A line parallel with and 13 1/2 feet westerly, measured at right angles
from the west line of Bullis Road, 33 feet wide, said Bullis Road is
identified as Temple Street and shown on Map of Tract 2288, recorded
in Book 30, Page 13 of Maps, records in the office of the Recorder
of Los Angeles County, California; said parallel line shall be prolonged
northerly to a point of intersection with the southerly line of Compton
Boulevard, and southerly to a point of intersection with the northerly
line of Alondra Boulevard.
m. Along the easterly and westerly sides of Santa Fe Avenue, lines to be
known as setback lines are hereby established as follows, to wit:
Those certain lines lying 50 feet easterly and westerly of and measured
at right angles from that certain center line of Santa Fe Avenue shown
on County Surveyor's Map No. B-1864 and where said center line is
curved, then 50 feet on either side of said center line measured along a
radius of said curve or said radius prolonged.
n. Along Alondra Boulevard between the east and west City limits, a line to
be known as a setback line is hereby established as follows, to wit:
§ 29-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-8
AO:949
On the south side between Grandee Avenue and Dwight Avenue, a line
parallel with and distant 50 feet southerly, measured at right angles,
from the City Engineer's official center line.
On the north side a line parallel with and northerly 45 feet, measured
at right angles from the City Engineer's official center line, from
Wilmington Avenue to a point which is 216.20 feet, measured along said
line from its intersection with the center line of Central Avenue; thence
southwesterly along a tangent curve concave to the south having a
radius of 950 feet, to a point of intersection with the easterly line of
Central Avenue.
On the north side, from Wilmington Avenue to the east City limits, a
line which is parallel to and distant northerly 50 feet, measured at right
angles from the above mentioned center line.
On the south side, from Wilmington Avenue to the northerly
prolongation of the westerly line of Lot 23, Tract 12290, a line which is
parallel to and distant southerly 50 feet, measured at right angles from
said center line.
o. Along Wilmington Avenue between the north City limits and the south
City limits, a line to be known as a setback line is hereby established as
follows, to wit:
On the west side of the street from the south City limits to Greenleaf
Boulevard and from Alondra Boulevard to the north City limits a line
parallel with and distant westerly 50 feet, measured at right angles,
from the City Engineer's official center line.
On the east side a line parallel with and distant easterly 50 feet,
measured at right angles, from the above mentioned center line.
p. Along the north side of 156th Street between Central Avenue and
Compton Avenue, a line to be known as designated as a setback line is
hereby established, to wit:
Beginning at the intersection of the north line of 156th Street and the
east line of Central Avenue (90 feet wide) as shown on the map of Tract
21983; thence north 11°11'40" west along the northerly prolongation
of said easterly line 45.36 feet to the point of beginning; thence south
50°46'42" east 38.53 feet to a line parallel with and distant northerly 20
feet, measured at right angles from said northerly line of 156th Street;
thence north 89°38'15" east along said northerly line 1,359.32 feet to
the westerly line of Compton Avenue (30 feet wide) as shown on said
map.
q. Along the westerly side of Harbor Avenue, a line to be known and
designated as a setback line is hereby established as follows, to wit:
On the westerly side of Harbor Avenue between the northerly line of
Artesia Boulevard and the common boundary of the City of Compton
§ 29-8 COMPTON § 29-8
AO:950
and the City of Long Beach, a line parallel to and distant westerly 40
feet from the center line of Harbor Avenue.
r. Along the westerly side of Alhambra Avenue, a line to be known and
designated as a setback line is hereby established as follows, to wit:
A line parallel with and distant westerly 15 feet measured at right
angles from the easterly line of Lots 17 and 16, Block 11, and Lots 6,
7, and 9 of Block 10 of Belle Vernon Acres Tract, as shown on map
thereof recorded in Book 9, Page 196 of Maps Records in the office of
the County Recorder of the County of Los Angeles, California.
s. Along the north side of Stockwell Street from the westerly line of
Wilmington Avenue to the first alley west thereof, said setback line
being a line along the north side of Stockwell Street, beginning at a
point of intersection of the easterly prolongation of the southerly line of
Lot 10, Tract 22893, as shown on the map thereof recorded in Book
637, Page 73 of Maps in the office of the County Recorder of Los
Angeles County, California, with the easterly line of that certain twentyfoot
alley shown on said map; thence easterly parallel with and 35.22
feet northerly of the northerly line of Stockwell Street, as shown on map
of Tract 13902 recorded in Book 321, Page 26 of Maps in the office of
said County Recorder, to a point which is 15 feet westerly measured
along said parallel line, from its intersection with the setback line for
Wilmington Avenue as set forth in paragraph o of Section 29-8 of this
Code; thence northeasterly 21.19 feet, more or less, to a point of
intersection with the last referred to setback line, said point being
northerly along said setback line 15 feet from its point of intersection
with that line first herein described as being parallel with the northerly
line of said Tract 13902.
t. Along the southerly side of Poppy Street, a line to be known and
designated as a setback line is hereby established as follows, to wit:
A line parallel with and distant southerly 70 feet, measured at right
angles from the northerly line of Poppy Street and its easterly
prolongation to the easterly line of Short Street, as said streets are
shown on map of Tract 6108, recorded in Book 68, Page 3 of Maps,
records in the Office of the Recorder of Los Angeles County, California.
u. On both sides of the center line of Palmer Street between Alameda
Street (West Roadway) and Willowbrook Avenue (West Roadway)
setback lines are hereby established as lines lying parallel with and
distant 50 feet, measured at right angles, from the following described
center line of Palmer Street, to wit:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of Alameda Street,
45 feet wide, with the westerly prolongation of a line that is parallel
with and distant 40 feet southerly, measured at right angles, from the
northerly line of Palmer Street (formerly Terebinth Street) as shown
on Map of Tract No. 5085, recorded in Book 59, Page 80 of Maps,
records of Los Angeles County; thence south 89°48'30" west a distance
§ 29-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-8
AO:951
of 213.36 feet to the beginning of a tangent curve, concave to the
southeast and having a radius of 500 feet; thence along said curve,
through a central angle of 20°19'42" a distance of 177.40 feet to a
tangent line; thence south 69°28'48" west along said tangent line a
distance of 538.86 feet to the beginning of a tangent curve, concave
to the northwest and having a radius of 500 feet; thence along said
curve, through a central angle of 20°27'40", a distance of 178.56 feet
to a tangent line, said tangent line being the easterly prolongation
of the northerly line of School Street, 50 feet wide, as said street is
shown on map of Tract 2491 recorded in Book 27, Page 2 of Maps,
records of Los Angeles County; thence south 89°56'28" west along said
easterly prolongation a distance of 101.35 feet more or less, to the
intersection of said northerly line of School Street with the westerly line
of Willowbrook Avenue, formerly Wilmington Street, 35 feet wide, as
shown on above mentioned Tract 2491.
v. Along the northerly and southerly lines of Laurel Street from the
easterly line of Acacia Avenue, 60 feet wide, to the westerly line of
Alameda Street, 71 feet wide, setback lines are established as follows,
to wit:
On the northerly side, a line, that is parallel with and distant 20 feet
northerly, measured at right angles from the northerly line of Laurel
Street, 60 feet wide, as said street is shown on the map of the Town of
Compton Tract, recorded in Book 11, Page 68 of Miscellaneous Records
of Los Angeles County.
On the southerly side, a line that is parallel with and distant 20 feet
southerly, measured at right angles from the southerly line of Laurel
Street, 60 feet wide, as said street is shown on the map of the Town of
Compton Tract, recorded in Book 11, Page 68 of Miscellaneous Records
of Los Angeles County.
w. Along the northerly and southerly sides of Greenleaf Boulevard, lines to
be known and designated as setback lines are hereby established as
follows, to wit:
On the south side between the easterly line of Central Avenue and the
westerly line of Wilmington Avenue, a line parallel with and distant
40 feet southerly measured at right angles from the line shown as
"Adopted Line" on County Surveyor's Map No. 8940-2.
On the south side between the easterly line of Wilmington Avenue and
the westerly line of Oleander Avenue, a line parallel with and distant
50 feet southerly measured at right angles from the line shown as
"Adopted Line" on County Surveyor's Map No. 8940-2.
On the north side beginning at a point 26.58 feet northerly along the
westerly line of Lot 222, Tract 1473, from the southwest corner of
said Tract, said line also being the easterly line of Wilmington Avenue;
thence easterly on a straight line to a point on the easterly line of Lot
222, said point being 20 feet measured northerly along said easterly
§ 29-8 COMPTON § 29-8
AO:952
Chapter 30
line from the southeast corner of said lot; thence easterly on a line
parallel with and distant 20 feet northerly, measured at right angles
from the southerly line of Tract No. 1473, to the easterly line of Lot 231
of said Tract, said line also being the westerly line of Center Avenue.
On the north side between the easterly line of Center Avenue and the
westerly line of Oleander Avenue, a line parallel with and distant 20 feet
northerly measured at right angles from the southerly line of Tract No.
1473.
On the north side between a point 14.70 feet easterly of the easterly
line of Willowbrook Avenue (East Roadway) and the westerly line of
Bentley Avenue, a line parallel with and distant 30 feet northerly
measured at right angles from the line shown as "Adopted Line" on
County Surveyor's Map No. 8940-2.
On the north side between the easterly line of Bentley Avenue and
the westerly line of Tamarind Avenue, a line parallel with and distant
30 feet northerly measured at right angles from the line shown as
"Adopted Line" on County Surveyor's Map No. 8940-2.
On the north side between the easterly line of Tamarind Avenue and a
point 16.99 feet westerly of the westerly line of Alameda Street (West
Roadway), a line parallel with and distant 30 feet northerly measured
at right angles from the line shown as "Adopted Line" on County
Surveyor's Map No. 8940-2.
On the south side between the easterly line of Alameda Street (East
Roadway) and the westerly line of Santa Fe Avenue, a line parallel with
and distant 40 feet southerly measured at right angles from the line
shown as "Adopted Line" on County Surveyor's Map No. 8940.2
On the south side between the easterly line of Santa Fe Avenue and
the westerly line of Tartar Lane, a line parallel with and distant 40 feet
southerly, measured at right angles from the line shown as "Adopted
Line" on County Surveyor's Map No. 8940-2.
On the south side between the easterly line of Tartar Lane and the
easterly boundary of the City of Compton, said boundary being
approximately 220 feet westerly or the westerly line of Delta Avenue, a
line parallel with and distant 45 feet southerly measured at right angles
from the line shown as "Adopted Line" on County Surveyor's Map No.
8940-1 and 8940-2.
On the north side beginning at a point on the westerly side of Lot 208,
Tract No. 13960, said point being 5.01 feet, measured northerly along
said line from the southwest corner of Lot 208; thence easterly on a
straight line to the southwest end of the fifteen-foot radius curve at the
southeast corner of said lot.
§ 29-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-8
AO:953
ZONING
§ 30-1. PURPOSE. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9101]
This Chapter is hereby adopted and established in order to encourage the
most appropriate use of land; conserve and stabilize the value of property;
provide adequate open spaces for light and air and permit the adequate
control of fires; prevent undue concentration of population; lessen
congestion on streets; and facilitate adequate provision for community
facilities and utilities, including transportation, water supply, sewage
disposal, schools, parks and other public requirements which tend to
promote the health, safety and public welfare, all in accordance with a
comprehensive plan for the orderly development and redevelopment of the
City.
§ 30-2. TITLE. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9102]
This Chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Law of the City of Compton."
§ 30-3. DEFINITIONS. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9103; Ord. #1635,
§ 1; Ord. #1698, § 1; Ord. #1713, § 1; Ord. #1717, § 1; Ord. #1733,
§ 1; Ord. #1746, § 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #1918, § 1; Ord. #1921, § 1;
Ord. #2080, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 1; Ord. #2155, § 1; Ord. #2179, § 1;
Ord. #2282 § 2]
As used in this Chapter:
ACCESSORY — Shall mean a building, part of a building or structure, or
use which is subordinate to, and the use of which is incidental to, that of
the main building, structure or use on the same lot or parcel of land. An
accessory building shall have no kitchen facilities and shall not be rented or
otherwise be used as a separate dwelling. Where the wall of an accessory
building becomes a part of, or is joined to, the wall of the main building,
such accessory building shall be counted as part of the main building.
ADVERTISING STATUARY — Shall mean a sign or advertising structure
which is a three-dimensional representation of an animate or inanimate
object or any sign which incorporates any three-dimensional geometric
shape in its design.
AIRPORT — Shall mean any place which is used, or intended to be used, for
the landing or taking off of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are
used or intended to be used for airport buildings or other airport facilities
or rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities located
thereon.
ALLEY — Shall mean a public or private way permanently reserved as a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE SALES — Shall mean a place where mechanically
or electronically operated amusement machines are kept or exhibited for
sale or lease exclusively and where members of the public are not permitted
§ 29-8 COMPTON § 30-3
AO:954
or allowed to operate or play such amusement machines except as incident
to a demonstration for the purpose of sale or lease of such amusement
machines.
AMUSEMENT MACHINES — ACCESSORY USE — Shall mean a place
where two or less mechanically or electronically operated amusement
machines are available for use for compensation, the use of which is
incidental to that of the location as a whole.
APPLICANT — Shall mean a person who submits a completed application
to the Commission pursuant to Sections 30-26, 30-27 or 30-28, or the
successor in such action.
ARCADE — Shall mean a place where 20 or more mechanically or
electronically operated amusement machines are available for use for
compensation, the use of which is the primary use of the location as a whole.
AUTOMOBILE DISMANTLING YARD — Shall mean a place used for the
dismantling or wrecking of motor vehicles and trailers required to be
registered under the Vehicle Code of the State, including the buying,
selling, or dealing in such vehicles or integral parts of component materials
thereof, and the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled, partially
dismantled, or wrecked inoperative vehicles and trailers. "Automobile
dismantling yard" shall not include the incidental storage of inoperative or
disabled vehicles in connection with the legal operation of an automobile
repair garage or automobile body and fender repair shop.
AUTOMOBILE IMPOUNDING YARD — Shall mean a place used for the
storage of any motor vehicle which has been impounded under court order
or any State law.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE — Shall mean a building, other than a
private garage, used for the maintenance and repair of automobiles.
BACHELOR APARTMENT — Shall mean a dwelling unit which has only one
room in addition to the kitchen and bathroom.
BAR — Shall mean a place, except bona fide restaurants, used in whole
or in part for the retailing of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises.
BILLBOARD — Shall mean an advertising structure which advertises goods,
products, services or facilities not sold, produced, manufactured or
furnished on the premises on which the sign is located (also known as
outdoor advertising, off-premises sign or off-site sign).
BLOCK FRONTAGE — Shall mean all the properties abutting on one side
of a street and lying between the nearest two intersecting or intercepting
streets or nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad rights-ofway,
unsubdivided land, or watercourses.
BOARDING HOUSE — Shall mean a place where lodging and meals are
provided for compensation for more than four individuals, excluding
members of the family occupying the property.
§ 30-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-3
AO:955
BUILDING — Shall mean a permanently located structure enclosed on all
sides by walls and having a roof (tents, trailers, and all forms of vehicles
shall be excluded).
BUILDING HEIGHT — Shall mean the vertical distance measured from the
grade of the site to the highest point of the structure.
CHAPTER — Shall mean and refer to this Chapter and any subsequent
amendment to this Chapter.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — Shall mean a place providing day care for
minors.
CHILDREN'S HOME — Shall mean a place where twenty-four-hour care and
supervision for minors is provided. "Children's home" shall include orphans'
homes, foster homes, homes for abused children, and homes for children
under the age of eight years suffering from mental diseases and disorders.
CITY — Shall mean the City of Compton.
CIVIC CLUB — Shall mean an association of persons organized solely or
primarily for the purpose of providing a community service. "Civic Club"
shall not include those clubs which are organized to provide a service
customarily carried on as a commercial business or organized primarily
for social, political, religious, or special purposes other than community
service.
CLINIC — Shall mean a place for group medical, dental, or therapeutic
services to the public.
CLUB — See "civic club" and "private club" as defined in this section.
COCKTAIL LOUNGE — See "bar" as defined in this section.
CODE — Shall mean and refer to all of the regulatory and penal laws of the
City.
COMMERCIAL MARIJUANA ACTIVITY — Shall include the cultivation,
possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory
testing, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of marijuana and
marijuana products, whether or not for profit. "Commercial marijuana
activity" also includes the activities of any business licensed by the State
or other government entity under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 or Division 10
of the California Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended
from time to time.
COMMERCIAL MARIJUANA USES — Shall mean any use of any real
property in the City which consists of, in whole or in part, any commercial
marijuana activity.
COMMERCIAL STRIP CENTER — Shall mean a shopping complex typically
containing a row of various stores, businesses, and restaurants having no
internal walkways connecting the lease spaces; open to a common parking
lot and located along a major street.
COMMISSION — Shall mean the Planning Commission of the City.
§ 30-3 COMPTON § 30-3
AO:956
CONDOMINIUM — Shall mean an estate in real property consisting of
an undivided interest in common in a parcel of real property, together
with separate interest in space in a residential, commercial, or industrial
building.
CONTRACTOR'S EQUIPMENT STORAGE YARD — Shall mean a place used
for the conduct of a business involved primarily with the rendering of
contractor's services and the use or storage of trucks, trailers, semitrailers,
cranes, hoists, storage tanks, large timbers or beams, or similar equipment
or the storage of construction or maintenance materials or supplies, but
excluding any such equipment or materials when such use is incidental to
the primary use lawfully conducted on such premises and stored thereon in
accordance with all the applicable provisions of this Chapter.
CONVALESCENT HOME — See "rest home" as defined in this section.
CONVENIENCE STORE — Shall mean a place of business, containing less
than 10,000 square feet of retail sales floor area, used for the retailing of a
variety of consumer goods.
CORNER LOT — Shall mean a lot situated at the intersection of two or more
streets having an angle of intersection of not more than 135°.
COUNCIL — Shall mean the City Council of the City.
COUNTY — Shall mean the County of Los Angeles.
CULTIVATION — Shall mean any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana.
DAY CARE CENTER — See "child day care center" as defined in this section.
DUMP — Shall mean a place devoted to the disposal of refuse, including
the incineration, reduction, or dumping of ashes, garbage, combustible or
noncombustible refuse, offal, or dead animals. "Dump" shall not include the
dumping of solid fill materials.
DWELLING — Shall mean a building, or portion thereof, designed for, or
occupied exclusively for, residential purposes, including one-family, twofamily,
and multiple-family dwellings. "Dwelling" shall not include hotels
and boarding and lodging houses.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean two or more rooms in a dwelling or
apartment hotel designed for, or occupied by, one family for living or
sleeping purposes and having only one kitchen.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SUBSTATION — Shall mean an assembly of
equipment which could include fuel cells and microwave, cable, radio, and/
or other communication facilities as part of a system for the distribution
of electric power where electric energy is normally received at a
subtransmission voltage and transformed to a lower voltage and/or
produced at this lower voltage in case a fuel cell is installed for distribution
to the customer.
ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION SUBSTATION — Shall mean an assembly of
equipment which could include fuel cells and/or energy support facilities
§ 30-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-3
AO:957
and microwave, cable, radio, and/or other communication facilities as part
of a system for the transmission of electric power where electric energy is
received at very high voltage from its energy sources by means of a network
of high voltage lines and transformed to lower transmission voltage and/
or produced at this lower voltage, in case fuel cells and/or energy support
facilities are installed, for the purposes of supplying electric power to
large consumers, interchange connections with other power-producing and
nonproducing and non-power-producing agencies, or electric distribution
substations for the transformation to lower voltage for utilization by smaller
individual users.
FAMILY — Shall mean an individual, or two or more persons related by
blood or marriage, or a group of not more than six persons, excluding
servants, who are not related by blood or marriage, living together as a
single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT — Shall mean a place used for the sale,
dispensing, or serving of food, refreshments, or beverages wherein fullcourse
meals are not served at all times as provided in the definition
of "restaurant." "Fast food restaurant" shall include takeout restaurants,
hamburger stands, cafes, sandwich shops, and other similar uses. "Fast food
restaurant" shall not include the sale of alcoholic beverages.
FREIGHT TERMINAL — Shall mean a place designed for the transfer of
freight, merchandise or other goods from one vehicle to another. This
definition shall not include businesses the bona fide purpose of which is the
warehousing of merchandise within a building.
FRONT LOT LINE — Shall mean a line separating the lot from the street, in
the case of an interior lot, and, in the case of a corner lot, a line separating
the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street, except in those
cases where the latest tract deed restrictions applicable thereto specify
another line as the front lot line.
FRONT YARD — Shall mean a yard extending across the full width of the
lot or parcel of land, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance
between the front lot line or a building line as established by Chapter 28,
whichever is more restrictive, and a line parallel thereto on the lot or parcel
of land.
FULLY ENCLOSED AND SECURE STRUCTURE — Shall mean a building,
greenhouse or other structure which has a complete roof enclosure
supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, which
is secure against unauthorized entry, provides complete visual screening,
and which is accessible only through one or more lockable doors and
inaccessible to minors.
GARAGE — See "automobile repair garage" and "private garage" as defined
in this section.
GRADE — Shall mean the average of the finished ground level at the center
of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of
sidewalks, the aboveground level shall be measured by the sidewalk.
§ 30-3 COMPTON § 30-3
AO:958
GRANNY FLAT — See "secondary dwelling unit" as defined in this section.
GUEST HOUSE — Shall mean an accessory building located on the same
premises as the main building for use of temporary guests of occupants
of the premises, having no more than 360 square feet, two rooms and
a bathroom, no "wet bar," kitchen or laundry room and not rented or
otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
HALFWAY HOUSE — Shall mean a place where sheltered care is provided
to ease the transition from institutional care or confinement to private
residence, or a place which is established to provide an alternative to
institutional care or confinement when such alternative is deemed to be
more beneficial to the resident of such place, or for persons who have been
temporarily displaced and cannot otherwise obtain shelter. "Halfway house"
shall include places which provide sheltered care for former alcohol and
drug abusers who are undergoing rehabilitation, indigents, and persons
released from jails, prisons, detention homes, or similar places where
individuals are housed and detained under legal restraint.
HOME OCCUPATION — Shall mean an occupation, vocation, trade or
profession, permitted under subsection 30-12.2 of this Chapter, carried
out or conducted on the premises by the occupant of the dwelling as
a secondary use in connection with which there shall be no structural
alteration of existing buildings, no construction of new buildings, and no
encroachment into a required garage. A home occupation shall employ
no person other than a member of the family occupying the dwelling.
There shall be no advertising sign, parking of commercial vehicles, display,
warehousing, outside storage or commodity sold upon the premises. A home
occupation shall not include the repair or storage of motor vehicles. A home
occupation shall not include activities which are objectionable due to noise,
dust, smoke, odor, or other causes.
HOSPITAL — Shall mean a place where patients are kept and treated,
including, but not limited to, those suffering from contagious or
communicable diseases or from bodily ills requiring surgery. "Hospital"
shall include convalescent hospitals but shall not include mental
institutions.
HOTEL — Shall mean a building designed for, or occupied as, a temporary
abode for individuals who are lodged with or without meals, in which there
are six or more guest rooms, and in which no provision is made for cooking
in any room or suite. "Hotel" shall not include jails, hospitals, asylums,
sanitariums, orphanages, prisons, detention homes, or similar buildings
where individuals are housed and detained under legal restraint.
INDOORS — Shall mean within a fully enclosed and secure structure.
INTERIOR LOT — Shall mean a lot other than a corner lot.
JUNK AND SALVAGE — Shall mean and include old, secondhand, or scrap
ferrous and nonferrous metals, paper and paper products, including roofing
and tar paper, cloth and clothing, wood and wood products, manufactured
rubber products, rope, manufactured plastic products, paint, manufactured
§ 30-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-3
AO:959
clay and porcelain products, trash and similar materials, dismantled
machinery, equipment, and parts.
JUNK AND SALVAGE YARDS — Shall mean a place which is maintained,
operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, selling, dismantling, or
processing of junk and salvage. "Junk and salvage yard" shall not include
the recycling of paper.
KENNEL — Shall mean a place where four or more dogs and cats, aged
four months or more, are kept, whether by owners of the dogs or cats or by
persons providing facilities and care, with or without compensation.
KITCHEN — Shall mean a room used, or intended or designed to be used,
for cooking or the preparation of food.
LIQUOR STORE — Shall mean a place used in whole or in part for the
retailing of alcoholic beverages, other than beer and wine, for consumption
off the premises. "Liquor store" shall not include any building containing
more than 10,000 square feet of retail sales floor area when less than 10%
of such floor area is utilized for the display and sale of alcoholic beverages,
nor shall it include the sale of beer or wine for consumption off the premises
when such sale is accessory to a principal permitted use.
LIVE-WORK UNIT — Shall mean a dwelling unit located in a nonresidential
zone that is designated to operate in conjunction with a physical space
designed for occupancy by a low intensity commercial or light industrial use
exercised by the residential occupant.
LODGING HOUSE — See "boarding house" as defined in this section.
LOT — Shall mean a parcel of real property shown as a delineated parcel
of land, with a separate and distinct number or other designation, on a plat
recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
LOT AREA — Shall mean the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a
lot.
LOT DEPTH — Shall mean the horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines, measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
LOT WIDTH — Shall mean the horizontal distance between the side lot
lines, measured in the mean direction of the front and rear lot lines, at a
distance midway between the front and rear lot lines.
MAIN BUILDING — Shall mean any building or structure on a lot or parcel
of land which building or structure is not accessory.
MAJOR RETAIL FACILITY — Shall mean a place of business, containing
more than 10,000 square feet of retail sales floor area, used for the retailing
of a variety of consumer goods.
MANUFACTURING — Shall mean assembling, fabricating, compounding,
processing, treating, and remanufacturing.
MARIJUANA — Shall also include "cannabis" as defined in Business and
Professions Code section 19300.5(f), as the same may be amended from
time to time.
§ 30-3 COMPTON § 30-3
AO:960
MARIJUANA — Shall mean all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of
the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include:
1. Industrial hemp, as defined in Section 11018.5 of the Health and
Safety Code; or
2. The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to
prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product.
MARIJUANA PRODUCT — Shall mean marijuana that has undergone a
process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a
concentrate, including, but not, limited to concentrated cannabis, or an
edible or topical product containing marijuana or concentrated cannabis
and other ingredients.
MENTAL CONVALESCENT HOME — Shall mean a place which permits the
rending or nursing, dietary, and other personal and sheltered care services
to persons eight years of age and older who have been issued by a medical
authority a written release from either a governmental or private mental
institution certifying that such persons have been adjudged by such doctor
or authority to be no longer in need of the care and treatment provided in
such institution.
MENTAL INSTITUTION — Shall mean a place where persons eight years
of age or older suffering from mental disease and disorders are kept and
where medical treatment is rendered for the care and cure of such persons.
MOTEL — Shall mean a place containing guest rooms or dwelling units,
some or all of which have a separate entrance leading directly from the
outside of the building, with a garage attached or automobile storage space
conveniently located on the lot or parcel of land, and which is designed,
used, or intended to be used wholly or in part for the accommodation of
automobile transients. "Motel" shall include auto courts, motor lodges, and
tourist courts.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Shall mean a building, or portion thereof,
designed for, or occupied by, two or more families living independently of
each other.
NET AREA — Shall mean that area of a lot or parcel of land exclusive of.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — Shall mean a building, or portion thereof,
lawfully existing on May 4, 1978, which was designed, erected, or
structurally altered for a use which does not conform to the uses permitted
in the zone in which it is located or which does not comply with all the
height, yard, and area regulations of such zone.
Existing or proposed public or private facilities, such as streets, alleys,
highways, or other public sites, when included within a planned
development project; and
a.
Other public or private easements where the owner of the underlying
fee does not have the right to use the entire surface of the land.
b.
§ 30-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-3
AO:961
NONCONFORMING USE — Shall mean a use of a building, lot, or parcel of
land which, although lawful prior to May 4, 1978, does not conform with the
regulations of the zone in which it is situated.
NURSERY SCHOOL — See "child day-care center" as defined in this section.
OCCUPIED — Shall mean arranged, designed, built, altered, converted,
rented, leased, or intended to be occupied.
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — Shall mean a detached building designed for,
or occupied exclusively by, one family.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean an ordinance of the City unless otherwise
designated.
OUTDOORS — Shall mean any location that is not within a fully enclosed
and secure structure.
PARCEL OF LAND — Shall mean a contiguous quantity of land in the
possession of, owned by, or recorded as the property of the same claimant
or person.
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, company, corporation, trust,
estate, receiver, syndicate, political entity, or any other group or
combination acting as a unit.
PERSONAL STORAGE FACILITY — Shall mean a place which provides
for the rental of interior, separated areas within a building to private
individuals for the storage of nonhazardous personal goods.
PLACE — Shall mean a building or locality used for a special purpose.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean a real estate development which
has been developed pursuant to Section 30-18 of this Chapter.
PORTE COCHERE — Shall mean an accessory residential structure open on
three sides, and attached to a dwelling, and established for the convenient
loading and unloading of passengers from an automobile.
PRIVATE CLUB — Shall mean an association of persons organized for some
common purpose. "Private club" shall not include civic clubs and clubs
which are organized solely or primarily for the purpose of rendering a
service customarily carried on as a business.
PRIVATE GARAGE — Shall mean an accessory building, or any accessory
portion of a main building, enclosed on three sides by permanent walls,
designed and used primarily for the shelter or storage of vehicles owned or
operated by the occupants of the main building.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE — Shall mean a house, an apartment unit, a mobile
home, or other similar dwelling, and secured accessory structure whether
legal and conforming with the underlying zoning, or legal and nonconforming
with the underlying zoning, that is currently in use as a
residence.
§ 30-3 COMPTON § 30-3
AO:962
PUBLIC UTILITY YARD — Shall mean a place used by any public utility for
an office, warehouse, storage yard, or vehicle and equipment maintenance,
including microwave, radio, cable and/or other communication facilities.
PUBLIC WORKS YARD — Shall mean a facility used by a public agency for
the storage and maintenance of a variety of vehicles and equipment and
for the temporary storage of debris resulting from tree trimming, street
maintenance, excavations and other public works activities.
REAR LOT LINE — Shall mean a lot line which is opposite to, and most
distant from, the front line and, in the case of an irregular or triangularshaped
lot, a line within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance
from the front line, having a length of 10 feet.
REAR YARD — Shall mean a yard extending across the full width of the lot
or parcel of land, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance
between the rear lot line or a building line as established by Chapter 28,
whichever is more restrictive, and a line parallel thereto on the lot or parcel
of land.
RECORDED — Unless otherwise stated, shall mean on file or recorded with
the office of the County Recorder.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Shall mean reusable material, including, but
not limited to, metals, glass, plastic and paper, which is intended for reuse,
remanufacture or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form.
Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous material.
Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported
in accordance with Section 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4) of the California
Health and Safety Code and the Used Oil Recycling Enhancement Act.
RECYCLING FACILITY — Shall mean a center for the collection and/or
processing of recyclable material. A certified facility is a recycling facility
certified by the State Department of Conservation as meeting the
requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter
Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage
containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential
commercial or manufacturing site and used solely for the recycling of
material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer.
Recycling facilities may include the following:
COLLECTION FACILITY — Shall mean a center for the acceptance,
by donation, redemption or purchase, of recyclable material from the
public. Collection facilities may include the following:
Small collection facility occupies an area of not more than 500
square feet, and may include:
(a) Reverse vending machines;
(b) A mobile unit;
Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse
vending machines occupying more than 50 square feet;
(c)
1.
a.
§ 30-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-3
AO:963
RENTAL HALL — Shall mean a building which is primarily used for rental
to businesses and private individuals for dances, banquets, charitable
functions and other social events. This definition shall include banquet halls
and wedding chapels.
RESIDENCE — Shall mean a building designed as living quarters for
persons doing their own cooking in such building.
REST HOME — Shall mean a place which permits nursing, dietary, and
other personal services rendered to convalescents, invalids, and aged
persons, but excluding cases of contagious, communicable, or mental
diseases and excluding surgery or primary treatments, such as are
(d) Kiosk-type units which may include permanent structures;
Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable
materials.
(e)
Small used oil collection facility consists of one self-contained, leakproof
unit of less than 400 gallons for the storage of used oil, as
defined by the Used Oil Recycling Enhancement Act.
2.
Large collection facility occupies an area of more than 500 square
feet and may include permanent structures.
3.
PROCESSING FACILITY — Shall mean a building or enclosed space
used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials.
Processing means the preparation of material for efficient shipment,
or preparation of material to meet an end-user's specifications, by
such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding,
crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning and
remanufacturing.
b.
REVERSE VENDING MACHINES — Shall mean an automated
mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty
beverage containers, including, but not limited to, aluminum cans and
glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable
credit slip with a value not less than the container's redemption value
as determined by the State. A reverse vending machine may sort and
process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is
enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store
all three container types in a proportion commensurate with their
relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification
as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines
may be permitted. A bulk reverse vending machine is larger than 50
square feet, designed to accept more than one container at a time, and
pays by weight instead of by container.
c.
MOBILE RECYCLING UNIT — Consists of an automobile, truck, trailer
or van, licensed by the State Department of Motor Vehicles, which is
used for the collection of recyclable material. A mobile recycling unit
also means the bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans or
trailers and used for the collection of recyclable materials.
d.
§ 30-3 COMPTON § 30-3
AO:964
customarily provided in hospitals and mental institutions. "Rest home" shall
include guest homes and homes for the aged.
RESTAURANT — Shall mean a place which is regularly and in a bona
fide manner used and kept open for the serving of meals to guests for
compensation, such meals to be prepared and served on the premises and
eaten inside the building, and which has suitable kitchen facilities. "Meals"
shall mean the usual assortment of foods commonly ordered at various
hours of the day, and the service of such food as sandwiches or salads
shall not be deemed a compliance with this requirement. "Restaurant" shall
include the incidental serving of alcoholic beverages provided a conditional
use permit has been obtained pursuant to the provisions of Section 30-26 of
this Chapter.
ROOSTER — Shall mean the male of the chicken also known as a cock.
ROW HOUSE — Shall mean attached or semi-detached buildings each
containing a single dwelling unit and located, or capable of being located,
on a separate lot.
SCHOOL — Shall mean an institution which offers instruction in the several
branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools
by the Education Code of the State.
SECONDARY DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a dwelling unit constructed
as an accessory to a single-family dwelling in accordance with Section 30-11
of this Chapter.
SECTION — Shall mean a section of this Chapter, unless some other law or
statute is mentioned.
SERVICE STATION — Shall mean an area which provides for the servicing
of motor vehicles, including tube and tire repairs, battery charging, the
storage of merchandise and supplies, sales of gasoline and lubricants,
automobile washing (not including mechanical car wash), and grease racks.
"Service station" shall not include automobile repairs, body and fender
works, engine overhauling or other similar activities of a major nature.
SIDE LOT LINE — Shall mean a lot boundary line which is not a front lot
line or rear lot line.
SIDE YARD — Shall mean a yard extending between the front yard and the
rear yard, the width of which is the minimum horizontal distance between
the side lot line or a building line as established by Chapter 28, whichever
is more restrictive, and a line parallel thereto on the lot or parcel of land.
SLAUGHTERHOUSE — Shall mean a place in which or on which animals
and fowl are killed, dressed or prepared for commercial purposes.
SOLID FENCE, WALL OR HEDGE — Shall mean a fence, wall, hedge or any
vegetative material which obstructs a clear view of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or effectively blocks from the public view an activity or the storage of
merchandise, materials or equipment.
STATE — Shall mean the State of California.
§ 30-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-3
AO:965
STORAGE, PERMANENT — Shall mean the storage or parking of anything
whatsoever for a period of 48 or more hours.
STREET — Shall mean a public or private thoroughfare which affords the
principal means of access to abutting property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Shall mean a change in the supporting
members of a building, such as the bearing walls, columns, beams, girders
and floor joists, roof joists, girders, rafters, or changes in the roof exterior
lines.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean anything constructed or erected which requires
location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location
on the ground. "Structure" shall not include fences or walls used as fences
less than six feet in height.
SUBSECTION — Shall mean a portion of a section of this Chapter.
SWAP MEET — Shall mean a place where merchandise is sold to the
public by four or more separate vendors. This definition shall include "flea
markets," "indoor swap meets" and other types of businesses for which
multiple-vendor marketing is the primary use.
TENANT MIX LEASING PLAN — Shall mean include a market analysis,
demonstration of key tenant commitments, an executed agreement with a
sales or leasing agent, a use plan for leasing, selling, or otherwise using
remaining space in the project other than by the key tenant(s), a financial
feasibility study, and provisions for long-term maintenance and marketing.
THROUGH LOT — Shall mean a lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
TOWNHOUSE — Shall mean attached or semi-detached buildings, each
containing a single dwelling unit and located or capable of being located
on a separate lot and owned in conjunction with an undivided interest in
common in the surrounding parcel of real property.
TRAILER PARK — Shall mean a place intended, maintained or designed
for the purpose of supplying a location of accommodation for one or more
automobile trailers for human habitation, including trailer camps or trailer
parks, and including all buildings used, or intended for use, as a part of the
equipment of such trailer park, whether or not a charge is made for the use
of the trailer park and its facilities.
TRAILER, AUTOMOBILE — Shall mean a vehicle, with or without motive
power, designed or used for human habitation and constructed to travel on
the public thoroughfares in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle
Code of the State.
TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean a residential,
commercial or industrial project located less than 1/4 mile from a rail, bus
or other transit center and designed to encourage transit and pedestrian
usage.
TRANSPORTATION YARD — Shall mean a place used for the storage,
maintenance, servicing or housing of trucks and tractor trailers when such
§ 30-3 COMPTON § 30-3
AO:966
storage, maintenance, servicing or housing is the primary use of the
property. "Transportation yard" shall not include the incidental
maintenance of trucks associated with a principal or conditionally permitted
use.
TRUCK YARD — See "transportation yard" as defined in this section.
USE — Shall mean the purpose for which land or a building is arranged,
designed, intended, occupied, or maintained.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — Shall mean a place selling goods, wares,
merchandise, or services for resale.
YARD — Shall mean an open space on a lot or parcel of land, other than
a court, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward,
except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.
§ 30-4. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES. [Added by Ord. #1557,
§ 9110; Amended by Ord. #2179, § 1]
In order to provide for the orderly growth and development of the City and
for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Chapter, the City is
hereby divided into the following zones:
Zone Symbol Zone Designation
R-A Residential Agriculture
R-L Low-Density Residential
R-M Medium-Density Residential
R-H High-Density Residential
C-O Professional Office
C-L Limited Commercial
C-M Commercial Manufacturing
M-L Limited Manufacturing
M-H Heavy Manufacturing
B Buffer
P Automobile Parking
D Planned Development
B-O Billboard Overlay Zone
§ 30-5. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9111]
The locations and boundaries of the various zones are shown on the "Official
Zoning Map of the City of Compton," on file in the office of the Planning
Department, a copy of which is attached to and made a part of this Chapter.
The Official Zoning Map is the same as was adopted by Ordinance No. 1095
on March 25, 1958, and as amended by subsequent ordinances. The former
§ 30-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-5
AO:967
zone symbols shown on said Official Zoning Map are hereby amended and
shall be shown by the following zone symbols:
Former Zone Symbol Amended Zone Symbol
R-1 R-L
R-2 R-M
R-3 R-H
C-2 C-L
M-1 M-L
M-2 M-H
B-1 B
§ 30-6. ZONE BOUNDARIES. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9112; Ord.
#2179, § 1]
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone on the Official
Zoning Map, the following provisions shall apply:
§ 30-7. RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURE ZONE (R-A).
§ 30-7.1. Purpose (R-A). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9120.1]
The Residential Agriculture Zone (R-A) is established to provide for the
development of large one-family homesites in a limited agricultural
environment.
a. Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following a street,
alley, railroad right-of-way, watercourse channel, or other rights-of-way,
the center line of such right-of-way shall be considered the zone
boundary, but if the street, alley, railroad right-of-way, watercourse
channel, or other right-of-way abuts a freeway on the opposite side of
the zone boundary, then the zone boundary shall extend across the
entire right-of-way.
b. Where boundaries are indicated as following lot or parcel lines not
abutting a right-of-way, such lines shall be considered the zone
boundary.
c. Where a zone boundary divides a lot or parcel of land and is not
dimensioned, the boundary shall be determined by the scale on the
Official Zoning Map.
d. Where any right-of-way, or any portion thereof, is vacated or
abandoned, the zone and regulations of the vacated or abandoned
portion of such right-of-way shall be the same as that of the property to
which such right-of-way reverts.
§ 30-5 COMPTON § 30-7.2
AO:968
§ 30-7.2. Uses (R-A). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9120.2; Ord. #1580,
1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #1918, § 2, 3; Ord. #1935, § 1; Ord. #1942, § 1;
Ord. #2023, §§ 1 — 3; Ord. #2080, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 2; Ord. #2155,
§ 2; Ord. #2282 §§ 3, 4]
a. Principal Permitted Uses. The following uses and buildings shall be
permitted in the Residential Agriculture Zone (R-A):
1. One-family dwellings;
2. Small family homes, foster family homes, small group homes and
family child care homes as defined, regulated and licensed by the
California Health and Safety Code (the provisions of subsection
30-11.3 of this Chapter shall apply);
3. Private and commercial field crops, orchards, horticultural
nurseries, and similar agricultural uses;
4. Chinchilla ranches;
5. Aviary, poultry (not to exceed six roosters) and rabbits for private
use only;
6. One horse, bull or cow for each 2,500 square feet of parcel area,
not to exceed a total of five, for the use of the family occupying the
property;
7. Three adult dogs and three adult cats and their litters up to four
months of age and three other household pets;
8. Home occupations;
9. The rooming and boarding of not more than two persons in addition
to members of the family occupying the property;
10. The storage of petroleum products for use on the property only;
11. Swimming pools for private use only;
12. Non-habitable accessory buildings, including private garages,
private hobby shops, laundry rooms and buildings, including an
office necessary for the conduct of the permitted agricultural uses;
13. City parks, playgrounds, police and fire stations, and libraries;
14. Public elementary, junior high and high schools offering full
curricula as required by State laws;
15. Water company wells, pumping plants, and reservoirs and electric
distribution substations;
16. Sales of household items, including rummage sales and garage
sales; provided, however, such sales shall not be held on more than
12 days in any calendar year;
§ 30-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-7.2
AO:969
17. Uses and buildings customarily incidental to any use and building
set forth in this subsection.
18. Any use or building which the Commission finds, as evidenced by
resolution in writing, is similar to any of the uses and buildings set
forth in this subsection;
19. Five sheep and/or five goats (not more than five of each per family);
20. Worm farms (not more than 19 beds, four feet by eight feet in
dimension or on equivalent area per parcel of land).
21. Secondary dwelling units (the provisions of subsection 30-11.2 of
this Chapter shall apply).
22. Indoor marijuana cultivation is allowed consistent with State law
which permits no more than six live marijuana plants to be planted,
cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private
residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the
grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured as
long as the marijuana cultivation activities comply with the
regulations set forth in paragraph c of subsection 9-24.4.
b. Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permits. The following uses
and buildings may be permitted in the Residential Agriculture Zone (RA)
provided a conditional use permit has been obtained pursuant to the
provisions of Section 30-26:
1. Planned residential developments (the provisions of Section 30-18
shall apply); and
2. Large group homes regulated and licensed by the California Health
and Safety Code;
3. Private elementary, junior high and high schools offering full
curricula as required by State laws.
c. Prohibited Agricultural Uses. For the purposes of clarification, the
following agricultural uses and buildings shall be specifically prohibited
in the Residential Agriculture Zone (R-A):
1. The maintenance of horses, except for the primary use of the
members of a family residing on the premises;
2. Hogs;
3. Fox and monkey farms and horse and mink ranches;
4. Dairies;
5. Slaughterhouses;
6. Wild animals whose natural habitat is not in residence with man;
7. Roadside sales stands;
§ 30-7.2 COMPTON § 30-7.2
AO:970
§ 30-7.3. Animal Maintenance Standards (R-A). [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9120.3; Ord. #1580, § 1; Ord. #2155, § 2]
Animals, birds, fowl and poultry on a lot or parcel of land in the Residential
Agriculture Zone (R-A) shall be maintained not less than the following
distances from any dwelling or commercial building or from any property
line:
§ 30-7.4. Property Development Standards (R-A). [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9120.4; Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #2025, § 1; Ord.
#2101, § 2]
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the Residential Agriculture Zone (R-A).
8. Apiaries; and
9. Any use or building which the Commission finds, as evidenced by
resolution in writing, is similar to any of the uses and buildings set
forth in this subsection.
10. Commercial marijuana uses, except as permitted by subsection
9-24.4.
11. Marijuana cultivation outdoors upon the grounds of a private
residence.
12. Marijuana cultivation indoors that does not comply with subsection
30-7.2a.
d. A violation of this Code subsection is a misdemeanor. If animals in
excess of those permitted are found on the property, they will be
confiscated and disposed of. The costs for confiscation, housing and
feeding of the animals seized prior to disposal will be the responsibility
of the owner of the animals.
a. Horses, cows, goats and sheep: 50 feet from residential and commercial
buildings and 10 feet from property lines; and
b. Birds, fowl, poultry, chinchillas and rabbits: 35 feet from residential and
commercial buildings and 10 feet from property lines.
a. Lot Area, Width and Depth. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.2 of
this Chapter.) Each lot or parcel of land shall have a minimum of 10,000
square feet, a minimum street frontage width of 60 feet and a minimum
depth of 150 feet.
b. Dwelling Unit Density.
1. The minimum lot area for each dwelling unit shall be 10,000 square
feet.
§ 30-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-7.4
AO:971
§ 30-7.5. Compliance Required. [Ord. #1935, § 1; Ord. #1942, § 1]
2. More than one one-family dwelling may be constructed on a lot or
parcel of land; provided, however, that each dwelling shall be
placed in such a manner that the area on which it is located shall
meet the minimum standards for lot area, width and depth set forth
above, could be legally divided from the original subdivision and
conforms to the density, lot design and street orientation of the
original subdivision.
c. Dwelling Unit Area and Number of Bedrooms. Each dwelling unit shall
have a gross floor area of not less than 1,200 square feet or not more
than 3,500 square feet nor shall any dwelling unit have less than two
bedrooms or more than five bedrooms.
d. Building Height. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.4 of this
Chapter.) The maximum height for buildings or structures shall be 35
feet.
e. Accessory Structures. Accessory structures shall have a combined area
no greater than twice that required for off-street parking.
f. Yards. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.3 of this Chapter.)
1. Front Yards. There shall be a front yard of not less than 20 feet.
2. Side Yards.
(a) There shall be an interior side yard of not less than three feet.
There shall be a street side yard of not less than five feet. There
shall be a side yard of not less than five feet for buildings and
structures of two or more stories.
(b) A porte cochere not more than 15 feet in height or 20 feet in
length may be placed over a driveway in an interior side yard.
(c) Detached accessory buildings may be located in a required
interior side yard.
3. Rear Yards.
(a) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet.
(b) A lot or parcel of land having a depth of 90 feet or less may
have a rear yard of 20% of the depth but shall not be less than
10 feet.
(c) Detached accessory structures of not more than one story and
attached unenclosed patio covers may occupy not more than
50% of a required rear yard.
g. Fences and Walls. The provisions of Section 30-44 of this Chapter shall
apply.
§ 30-7.4 COMPTON § 30-7.5
AO:972
§ 30-8. LOW-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-L).
§ 30-8.1. Purpose (R-L). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9121.1]
The Low-Density Residential Zone (R-L) is established to provide for the
development of single-family housing with ample yard space.
§ 30-8.2. Uses (R-L). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9121.2; Ord. #1784;
Ord. #2101, § 3; Ord. #2155, § 2; Ord. #2282 §§ 5, 6]
a. When the Zoning Ordinance is amended to restrict or prohibit the
maintenance of an animal or bird which was previously permitted under
this Chapter, the owner of the affected animal or bird shall have 30 days
from the date such amendment is adopted to remove the animal or bird
and bring the property into compliance.
b. Within the thirty-day compliance period, an owner of an affected animal
or bird may apply to the Planning Commission for additional time in
which to comply. The request shall be made in compliance with the
provisions for a Conditional Use Permit contained in this Chapter
(Section 30-26) and the request shall include the number of affected
animals or birds maintained on the property on the day preceding the
adoption of the applicable limitation; the purpose for which the animals
or birds are maintained; the length of time the animals or birds have
been maintained on the property and the length of time needed to come
into compliance with the new ordinance and the private loss that may
result from coming into compliance. No fee shall be charged for
processing a request for an extension submitted during the thirty-day
compliance period.
a. Principal Permitted Uses. The following uses and buildings shall be
permitted in the Low-Density Residential Zone (R-L):
1. One-family dwellings;
2. Small family homes, foster family homes, small group homes and
family child care homes as defined, regulated and licensed by the
California Health and Safety Code (the provisions of subsection
30-11.3 of this Chapter shall apply);
3. Three adult dogs and three adult cats and their litters up to four
months of age and three other household pets;
4. Birds, excluding pigeons, doves, chickens, and ducks kept as
household pets;
5. Home occupations;
6. The rooming and boarding of not more than two persons in addition
to members of the family occupying the property;
7. Swimming pools for private use only;
§ 30-7.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-8.2
AO:973
8. Non-habitable accessory buildings, including private garages,
private hobby shops, laundry rooms and greenhouses;
9. City parks, playgrounds, police and fire stations, and libraries;
10. Public elementary, junior high and high schools offering full
curricula as required by State laws;
11. Water company wells, pumping plants, and reservoirs and electric
distribution substations;
12. Sales of household items, including rummage sales and garage
sales; provided, however, such sales shall not be held on more than
12 days in any calendar year;
13. Uses and buildings customarily incidental to any use or building set
forth in this subsection; and
14. Any use or building which the Commission finds, as evidenced by
resolution in writing, is similar to any of the uses or buildings set
forth in this subsection.
15. Secondary dwelling units (the provisions of subsection 30-11.2 of
this Chapter shall apply).
16. Indoor marijuana cultivation is allowed consistent with State law
which permits no more than six live marijuana plants to be planted,
cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private
residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the
grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured as
long as the marijuana cultivation activities comply with the
regulations set forth in paragraph c of subsection 9-24.4.
b. Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permits. The following uses
and buildings may be permitted in the Low-Density Residential Zone (RL)
provided a conditional use permit has been obtained pursuant to the
provisions of Section 30-26:
1. Planned residential developments (the provisions of Section 30-18
shall apply);
2. Rowhouses and condominiums, provided they are part of an
approved planned residential development; and
3. Large group homes regulated and licensed by the California Health
and Safety Code;
4. Private elementary, junior high and high schools offering full
curricula as required by State laws.
c. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the
Low-Density Residential Zone (R-L):
§ 30-8.2 COMPTON § 30-8.2
AO:974
§ 30-8.3. Property Development Standards (R-L). [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9121.3; Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #2025, § 1; Ord.
#2080, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 3]
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the Low-Density Residential Zone (R-L).
1. Commercial marijuana uses, except as permitted by subsection
9-24.4.
2. Marijuana cultivation outdoors upon the grounds of a private
residence.
3. Marijuana cultivation indoors that does not comply with subsection
30-8.2a.
a. Lot Area, Width and Depth. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.2 of
this Chapter.) Each lot or parcel of land shall have a minimum area of
5,000 square feet, a minimum street frontage width of 50 feet and a
minimum depth of 100 feet.
b. Dwelling Unit Density.
1. The minimum lot area for each dwelling unit shall be 5,000 square
feet.
2. More than one one-family dwelling may be constructed on a lot or
parcel of land; provided, however, that each dwelling shall be
placed in such a manner that the area on which it is located shall
meet the minimum standards for lot area, width and depth set forth
above, could be legally divided from the original subdivision and
conforms to the density, lot design and street orientation of the
original subdivision.
c. Dwelling Unit Area and Number of Bedrooms. Each dwelling unit shall
have a gross floor area of not less than 1,200 square feet or not more
than 3,000 square feet nor shall each dwelling unit have less than two
bedrooms or more than five bedrooms.
d. Building Height. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.4 of this
Chapter.) The maximum height for buildings or structures shall be 35
feet.
e. Accessory Structures. Accessory structures shall have a combined area
no greater than twice that required for off-street parking.
f. Yards. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.3 of this Chapter.)
1. Front Yards. There shall be a front yard of not less than 20 feet.
2. Side Yards.
(a) There shall be an interior side yard of not less than three feet.
There shall be a street side yard of not less than five feet. There
§ 30-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-8.3
AO:975
§ 30-9. MEDIUM-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-M).
§ 30-9.1. Purpose (R-M). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9122.1]
The Medium Density Residential Zone (R-M) is established to provide a
suitable environment for family life in areas where a mixture of dwelling
unit types is permitted at medium density.
§ 30-9.2. Uses (R-M). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9122.2; Ord. #1602,
§§ 1b, 1c; Ord. #1746, § 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #2080, § 1; Ord. #2282
§§ 7, 8]
shall be a side yard of not less than five feet for buildings and
structures of two or more stories.
(b) A porte cochere not more than 15 feet in height or 20 feet in
length may be placed over a driveway in an interior side yard.
(c) Detached accessory buildings may be located in a required
interior side yard.
3. Rear Yards.
(a) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet.
(b) A lot or parcel of land having a depth of 90 feet or less may
have a rear yard of 20% of the depth but shall not be less than
10 feet.
(c) Detached accessory structures of not more than one story and
attached unenclosed patio covers may occupy not more than
50% of a required rear yard.
g. Fences and Walls. The provisions of Section 30-44 of this Chapter shall
apply.
a. Principal Permitted Uses. The following uses and buildings shall be
permitted in the Medium-Density Residential Zone (R-M):
1. Any use permitted in the Low-Density Residential Zone (R-L),
except those uses which require a conditional use permit;
2. Multiple-family residences of four units or less.
3. Uses and buildings customarily incidental to any use or building set
forth in this subsection; and
4. Any use or building which the Commission finds, as evidenced by
resolution in writing, is similar to any of the uses and buildings set
forth in this subsection.
5. Indoor marijuana cultivation is allowed consistent with State law
which permits no more than six live marijuana plants to be planted,
§ 30-8.3 COMPTON § 30-9.2
AO:976
§ 30-9.3. Property Development Standards (R-M). [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9122.3; Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #2025, § 1; Ord.
#2101, § 4; Ord. #2155, § 2]
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the Medium-Density Residential Zone (R-M).
cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private
residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the
grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured
as long as the marijuana cultivation activities comply with the
regulations set forth in paragraph c of subsection 9-24.4.
b. Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permits. The following uses
and buildings may be permitted in the Medium-Density Residential
Zone (R-M) provided a conditional use permit has been obtained
pursuant to the provisions of Section 30-26.
1. Planned residential developments (the provisions of Section 30-18
of this Chapter shall apply);
2. Large group homes regulated and licensed by the California Health
and Safety Code;
3. Planned condominium development (the provisions of Section
30-18 shall apply).
4. Multiple-family residences of five or more units on the same parcel
of land.
5. Private elementary, junior high and high schools offering full
curricula as required by State laws.
c. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the
Medium-Density Residential Zone (R-M):
1. Commercial marijuana uses, except as permitted by subsection
9-24.4.
2. Marijuana cultivation outdoors upon the grounds of a private
residence.
3. Marijuana cultivation indoors that does not comply with subsection
30-9.2a.
a. Lot Area, Width and Depth. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.2 of
this Chapter.) Each lot or parcel of land shall have a minimum area of
5,000 square feet, a minimum street frontage width of 50 feet and a
minimum depth of 100 feet.
b. Dwelling Unit Density. The minimum lot area for each dwelling unit
shall be 2,500 square feet.
§ 30-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-9.3
AO:977
§ 30-10. HIGH-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-H).
§ 30-10.1. Purpose (R-H). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9123.1; Ord.
#1733, § 1]
The High-Density Residential Zone (R-H) is established to provide for a
suitable residential environment through the predominant development of
multiple-family dwellings.
c. Dwelling Unit Area and Number of Bedrooms. Each dwelling unit shall
have a gross floor area of not less than 450 square feet for bachelor
units, 600 square feet for one bedroom units, 800 square feet for two
bedroom units and 1,000 square feet for units with more than two
bedrooms. Dwelling units shall not exceed 2,500 square feet.
d. Building Height. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.4 of this
Chapter.) The maximum height for buildings or structures shall be 35
feet.
e. Accessory Structures. Accessory structures shall have a combined area
no greater than twice that required for off-street parking.
f. Yards. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.3 of this Chapter.)
1. Front Yards. There shall be a front yard of not less than 20 feet.
2. Side Yards.
(a) There shall be an interior side yard of not less than three feet.
There shall be a street side yard of not less than five feet. There
shall be a side yard of not less than five feet for buildings and
structures of two or more stories.
(b) A porte cochere not more than 15 feet in height or 20 feet in
length may be placed over a driveway in an interior side yard.
(c) Detached accessory buildings may be located in a required
interior side yard.
3. Rear Yards.
(a) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet.
(b) A lot or parcel of land having a depth of 90 feet or less may
have a rear yard of 20% of the depth but shall not be less than
10 feet.
(c) Detached accessory structures of not more than one story and
attached unenclosed patio covers may occupy not more than
60% of a required rear yard.
g. Fences and Walls. The provisions of Section 30-44 of this Chapter shall
apply.
§ 30-9.3 COMPTON § 30-10.2
AO:978
§ 30-10.2. Uses (R-H). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9123.2; Ord. #1602,
§ 1d; Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord. #1746, § 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #2080, § 1;
Ord. #2155, § 2; Ord. #2282 §§ 9, 10]
a. Principal Permitted Uses. The following uses and buildings shall be
permitted in the High-Density Residential Zone (R-H):
1. Any use permitted in the Medium-Density Residential Zone (R-M),
except those uses which require a conditional use permit;
2. Uses and buildings customarily incidental to any use or building set
forth in this subsection; and
3. Any use or building which the Commission finds, as evidenced by
resolution in writing, is similar to any of the uses or buildings set
forth in this subsection.
4. Indoor marijuana cultivation is allowed consistent with State law
which permits no more than six live marijuana plants to be planted,
cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private
residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the
grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured as
long as the marijuana cultivation activities comply with the
regulations set forth in paragraph c of subsection 9-24.4.
b. Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permits. The following uses
and buildings may be permitted in the High-Density Residential Zone
(R-H) provided a conditional use permit has been obtained pursuant to
the provisions of Section 30-26 of this Chapter.
1. Large group homes regulated and licensed by the California Health
and Safety Code;
2. Planned residential and condominium developments (the
provisions of Section 30-18 of this Chapter shall apply).
3. Multiple-family residences of five or more units on the same parcel
of land.
4. Private elementary, junior high and high schools offering full
curricula as required by State laws.
c. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the
High-Density Residential Zone (R-H):
1. Commercial marijuana uses, except as permitted by subsection
9-24.4.
2. Marijuana cultivation outdoors upon the grounds of a private
residence.
3. Marijuana cultivation indoors that does not comply with subsection
30-10.2a.
§ 30-10.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-10.3
AO:979
§ 30-10.3. Property Development Standards (R-H). [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9123.3; Ord. #1733, 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #1941, § 1; Ord.
#2025, § 1; Ord. #2080, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 5]
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the High-Density Residential Zone (R-H).
a. Lot Area, Width and Depth. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.2 of
this Chapter.) Each lot or parcel of land shall have a minimum area of
5,000 square feet, a minimum street frontage width of 50 feet and a
minimum depth of 100 feet.
b. Dwelling Unit Density. The minimum lot area for each dwelling unit
shall be 1,500 square feet, except that for senior housing units the
minimum lot area shall be 1,250 square feet.
c. Dwelling Unit Area: Each dwelling unit shall
have a gross floor area of not less than 450 square feet for bachelor
units, 600 square feet for one bedroom units, 800 square feet for two
bedroom units and 1,000 square feet for units with more than two
bedrooms. Dwelling units shall not exceed 2,000 square feet.
d. Building Height. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.4 of this
Chapter.) The maximum height for buildings or structures shall be 35
feet.
e. Accessory Structures. Accessory structures shall have a combined area
no greater than twice that required for off-street parking.
f. Yards. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.3 of this Chapter.)
1. Front Yards. There shall be a front yard of not less than 15 feet.
2. Side Yards.
(a) There shall be an interior side yard of not less than three feet.
There shall be a street side yard of not less than five feet. There
shall be a side yard of not less than five feet for buildings and
structures of two or more stories.
(b) A porte cochere not more than 15 feet in height or 20 feet in
length may be placed over a driveway in an interior side yard.
(c) Detached accessory buildings may be located in a required
interior side yard.
3. Rear Yards and Open Space.
(a) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 10 feet.
(b) 100% occupancy of a rear yard by garages, carports, laundry
rooms or storage rooms only may be permitted provided such
buildings are not more than one story and are located a
§ 30-10.3 COMPTON § 30-10.3
AO:980
§ 30-11. SPECIAL REGULATIONS: RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
§ 30-11.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. #2080, § 1]
This Section provides supplemental land use and development standards for
residential uses with unusual development characteristics or needs.
§ 30-11.2. Secondary Dwelling Units. [Ord. #2080, § 1]
This subsection establishes standards for the development of secondary
dwelling units in accordance with Sections 65851.1 and 65851.2 of the
California Government Code.
minimum distance of 25 feet from the principal building or
buildings on such lot or parcel of land.
(c) There shall be a minimum of 100 square feet per unit of usable
accessible open space, exclusive of the required front yard,
turning radii and driveways.
g. Fences and Walls. The provisions of Section 30-44 of this Chapter shall
apply.
a. Secondary dwelling units that are designed and constructed to be
compatible with existing residential structures can contribute to
meeting housing needs within the community.
b. Secondary dwelling units shall be approved by the Architectural Review
Board prior to construction.
c. The following standards and criteria shall apply to all secondary
dwelling units:
1. Location.
(a) Secondary dwelling units may be located within the Residential
Agriculture (R-A) or Low-Density Residential (R-L) Zones.
(b) Secondary dwelling units may only be located on a lot that
contains one, but no more than one, existing single-family
dwelling.
2. Lot Size. No secondary dwelling unit shall be placed on any lot
which contains less than 15,000 square feet in a Residential
Agriculture (R-A) Zone and 7,500 square feet in a Low-Density
Residential (R-L) Zone.
3. Unit Size. Secondary dwelling units shall be a minimum of 400
square feet and a maximum of 800 square feet and shall contain no
more than one bedroom or other room capable of being used as
sleeping quarters.
4. Development Standards.
§ 30-10.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-11.2
AO:981
§ 30-11.3. Family Child Care Homes. [Ord. #2080, § 1]
This subsection establishes standards for the development of family child
care facilities that provide care, protection and supervision of children, in
(a) Secondary dwelling units shall be compatible in materials,
colors and general architecture to the primary dwelling unit.
(b) Secondary dwelling units shall not be located within any
required front or street side yard.
(c) Secondary dwelling units shall not be located above the height
of the second floor of any structure.
(d) Secondary dwelling units shall be located so that available
open space is maximized.
(e) Detached secondary dwelling units may be located within a
required rear yard provided such buildings are not more than
one story and that the distance between the secondary
dwelling unit and the rear property line combined with the
distance between the secondary dwelling unit and the primary
dwelling unit is no less than 26 feet.
(f) The entrance to the secondary dwelling unit shall not be
located on the front facade of the primary dwelling unit. If the
entrance is on the side facade, it shall be set back a minimum
of 40 feet from the front lot line.
(g) Signs advertising the availability of the secondary dwelling
unit shall not be permitted.
5. Parking.
(a) A two car garage shall be required for use of the primary
dwelling unit.
(b) One additional, paved parking space shall be required for use
of the secondary dwelling unit.
(c) The additional parking space shall have direct ingress and
egress and shall not block access to a required garage or other
parking area.
(d) The additional parking space shall not be located within a
required front or street side yard area.
(e) All off-street parking shall be developed in accordance with
Section 30-21 of this Chapter.
6. Code Compliance. The primary dwelling unit shall be inspected for
compliance with Uniform Building and Housing Code standards
and all corrections shall be completed prior to issuance of a
building permit for a secondary dwelling unit.
§ 30-11.2 COMPTON § 30-11.3
AO:982
the care provider and licensee's own home, for periods of less than 24 hours
per day, in accordance with Section 1597 of the California Health and Safety
Code.
a. Small family child care homes provide family child care for up to eight
children, including children under the age of 10 who live in the care
provider and licensee's home. Small family child care homes are a
permitted accessory use in all residential zones, subject to compliance
with the following standards:
1. The care provider and licensee shall reside in the home.
2. There shall be no signage identifying the home.
3. No child care activities shall be conducted in the front yard.
b. Large family child care homes provide family child care for up to 14
children, including children under the age of 10 who live in the care
provider and licensee's home and the assistant care provider's children
under the age of 10. Large family child care homes are a permitted
accessory use in all residential zones, subject to compliance with the
following standards:
1. The care provider and licensee shall reside in the home.
2. There shall be no other child care home within 300 feet of the
exterior boundary of the lot containing the home.
3. There shall be no more than one home within any residential
complex or on any individual residential lot.
4. The home must have a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet.
5. The home shall maintain the provisions for enclosed off-street
parking that were provided when the structure was originally
constructed.
6. Previously converted garages shall be restored to their original
use.
7. Additional off-street parking for a minimum of two vehicles shall be
provided for parents and employees.
8. The rear yard of the home shall be enclosed by a solid fence or wall.
9. Outdoor activities may only be conducted within the rear yard of
the home between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and sunset. No child care
activities shall be conducted in the front yard.
10. There shall be no signage identifying the home.
11. The property shall not be altered or structurally changed in a way
which is adverse to the character or appearance of the residential
zone.
§ 30-11.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-11.3
AO:983
§ 30-11.4. Garage and Yard Sales. [Ord. #2101, § 6; Ord. #2155, § 2]
This subsection establishes standards for garage and yard sales conducted
as an accessory to a permitted dwelling in a residential zone.
12. The floor space of the home shall not be increased to accommodate
child care services or altered or arranged in a way that would
preclude its use as a dwelling.
13. The care provider and licensee shall be responsible for preventing
any disruption of the surrounding residential area due to noise or
traffic.
14. A site plan and floor plan of the home shall be approved by the
Architectural Review Board to verify compliance with the
standards contained in this subsection.
15. The home shall obtain a certificate of occupancy in accordance with
the provisions of Section 30-33.
a. Prior to holding a garage or yard sale, a garage sale permit shall be
obtained from the Planning Department.
b. Garage and yard sales shall be permitted for a maximum of 12 days per
calendar year on the first Saturday of each month. Garage and yard
sales held on any other day shall be in violation of the Compton
Municipal Code. Only one sale shall be permitted per lot, irrespective of
the number of residential units. All applications must be submitted by
the Monday prior to the Saturday sales date.
c. Garage and yard sales shall only be conducted between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and sunset.
d. Garage and yard sales shall only display and sell residential household
items and the display and sale of new or nonresidential merchandise
shall not be permitted.
e. Garage and yard sales shall be conducted entirely on private residential
property. No items may be displayed on public parkways or rights-ofway
or on residential perimeter fences.
f. The violation of this subsection is an infraction. The penalty for the
violation of this subsection is a fine of $50 for the first violation, $75 for
the second violation and $100 for each additional violation of this
subsection within one year. The City Attorney shall have the authority to
file the violation as a misdemeanor when a continuing violation is
shown to exist. A continuing violation is deemed to be two or more
violations for the same or different sections of the Municipal Code
whereupon the violator was previously cited for an infraction.
§ 30-11.3 COMPTON § 30-11.5
AO:984
§ 30-11.5. Home Occupations. [Ord. #2101, § 6]
This subsection established standards for the operation of a home
occupation as an accessory to a permitted dwelling unit in a residential
zone.
a. Home occupations shall be limited to low-intensity businesses and small
craft activities, such as offices, telemarketing, off-site consulting,
painting and rug weaving, that cannot affect neighboring residences.
b. A home occupation shall be subject to the following standards and
limitations:
1. There shall be no merchandise, signs, equipment or materials
visible from outside the dwelling. The appearance or construction
of the dwelling shall not be altered nor shall there be any activity
that indicates that the dwelling is used for a nonresidential
purpose.
2. The home occupation shall be conducted solely within the
residential structure and shall not operate out-of-doors or within a
garage.
3. The home occupation shall be limited to one room of the dwelling
or 25% of the gross floor area of the dwelling, whichever is less.
4. Only the residents of the dwelling shall be employed in the
business.
5. The home occupation shall not use, produce or maintain any
hazardous materials or chemicals. Tools and equipment used in the
conduct of the business shall not generate smoke, dust, noise or
vibrations beyond that typical to the residential use.
6. No wholesale or retail business, nor any business involving on-site
sales shall operate as a home occupation. Telephone or mail order
marketing businesses shall be permitted provided that no delivery
of goods occurs on site. Limited or incidental storage of goods may
be permitted on-site up to a maximum of 50 cubic feet.
7. No identifiably commercial vehicle or equipment used in
conjunction with the home occupation shall be parked on-site or on
an adjacent street.
8. Vehicular or pedestrian traffic to the business shall not exceed that
normally experienced by exclusively residential use.
9. Vehicle repair, equipment repair, merchandise sales, dating
services, beauty salons, on-site food preparation, upholstery and
similar uses are not permitted as a home occupation.
§ 30-11.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-11.5
AO:985
§ 30-11.6. Residential Additions. [Ord. #2101, § 6]
This subsection establishes standards for additions to existing residential
structures.
§ 30-12. LIMITED COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-L).
§ 30-12.1. Purpose (C-L). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9131.1; Ord.
#1733, § 1]
The Limited Commercial Zone (C-L) is established to provide for
neighborhood, community, and regional retail business areas with related
uses.
§ 30-12.2. Uses (C-L). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9131.2; Ord. #1602,
§ 1 g; Ord. #1711, § 1; Ord. #1712,fj § 1; Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord.
#1746, § 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #1921, § 1; Ord. #2031, § 3; Ord.
#2072, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 7; Ord. #2155, § 3; Ord. #2282 § 11; Ord.
#2300 § 2]
10. Custom alterations and dressmaking is permitted as a home
occupation provided the activity complies with the requirements of
the Bureau of Labor Standards.
a. All additions shall be compatible with the design, exterior materials and
general appearance of the existing structures.
b. Interior design shall be practical, integrated into the existing floor plan
and shall conform to commonly accepted living arrangements.
1. Bedrooms shall not be used to access any room except a private
bathroom.
2. Additions, other than bathrooms, shall only be accessed from a
habitable, general use room or a common hallway a minimum of
three feet in width.
a. Principal Permitted Uses. The following uses and buildings, of less than
50,000 square feet in size, shall be permitted in the Limited
Commercial Zone (C-L):
1. Administrative and professional offices;
2. Ambulance services (no more than four ambulances);
2A. Amusement machines-accessory use (subject to approval by the
Architectural Review Board);
3. Antique stores;
4. Art galleries;
5. Auto parking lots and structures;
§ 30-11.5 COMPTON § 30-12.2
AO:986
6. Auto supply stores (new and rebuilt, packaged auto supplies only);
7. Bakeries (employing not more than five persons, excluding full-time
sales personnel);
8. Banks and financial institutions;
9. Barber shops;
10. Beauty shops;
11. Bicycle sales and repair;
12. Blueprinting;
13. Book stores;
14. Bus stations (no storage or repair of buses);
15. Cafeterias;
16. Carpet sales;
17. Carnivals, circuses and Christmas tree lots; temporary (subject to
approval by the Council);
18. Child day-care centers;
19. City parks, playgrounds, Police and Fire Stations;
20. Civic clubs;
21. Civic center buildings and uses;
22. Cleaning and dyeing agencies (including retail cleaning and dyeing
using noninflammable, nonexplosive cleaning fluids);
23. Cleaners, self-service;
24. Clothing sales;
25. Colleges, beauty, barber, and business;
26. Confectionery stores;
26A. Convenience stores;
27. Curio shops;
28. Department stores;
29. Drapery sales;
30. Dressmakers (custom, retail dress-making subject to the provisions
of the Division of Labor Standards);
31. Drugstores;
§ 30-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-12.2
AO:987
32. Dry good sales;
33. Elementary junior high and high schools offering full curricula as
required by State laws;
34. Electrical and electronic appliance sales and service and repair;
35. Engravers, hand;
36. Fireworks stands (subject to approval by the Council);
37. Fix-it-shops;
38. Florist shops;
39. Food markets;
40. Frozen food lockers;
41. Furniture stores;
42. Garden equipment sales, service, rental, and repair;
43. Gift shops;
44. Glass shops;
45. Governmental offices;
46. Gymnasiums (commercial);
47. Hardware stores;
48. Health centers;
49. Hobby shops;
50. Ice cream parlors;
51. Ice sales and storage (no more than 10 ton capacity);
52. Knit and yarn shops;
53. Jewelry sales and repairs;
54. Laundries, hand;
55. Laundries, self-service;
56. Leather products sales;
57. Libraries;
58. Locksmiths;
58A. Major retail facilities (including the sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption off the premises where such sales utilize less than
10% of the sales floor area);
§ 30-12.2 COMPTON § 30-12.2
AO:988
59. Manicurists;
59A. Massage establishments (the provisions of Section 9-15 of the
Compton Municipal Code shall apply.);
60. Mattress sales;
61. Medical, dental and therapeutic clinics;
62. Medical, dental and X-ray laboratories;
63. Millinery shops;
64. Mimeographing;
65. Museums;
66. Newsstands;
67. Newspaper offices;
68. Notions stores;
69. Novelty stores;
70. Nurseries, horticultural;
71. Paint stores;
72. Pet shops;
73. Pharmacies;
74. Photo equipment and supplies;
75. Photoengraving;
76. Photographers studios;
77. Photostating;
78. Plumbing fixture sales;
79. Pottery fixture sales;
80. Print and lithography shops (employing not more than five
printers);
81. Public utility substations;
82. (Reserved)
83. Realtors;
84. Radio studios (fully soundproofed);
85. Reducing salons;
§ 30-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-12.2
AO:989
86. Restaurants;
87. Restaurants, fast food;
88. Schools (art, music, dancing, drama; driving, trade, vocational,
karate and other similar special-purpose schools);
89. Secondhand stores;
90. Sewing machine sales and service;
91. Shoe sales and repair;
92. Shoeshine stands;
93. Sightseeing and limousine agencies (no storage or repair of
vehicles);
94. Sporting goods stores (the provisions of subsection 30-26.3 of this
Chapter shall apply);
95. Stationery stores;
96. Swimming pools (commercial);
97. Tailors (custom, retail tailoring subject to the provisions of the
Division of Labor Standards);
98. Taxidermists;
99. Tearooms;
100. Telephone and telegraph offices and exchanges;
101. Tile sales;
102. Tobacconists;
103. Travel agencies;
104.Water company wells, pumping plants, reservoirs and electrical
distribution stations;
105. Uses and buildings customarily incidental to any use or building
set forth in this subsection; and
106. Any use or building which the Commission finds, as evidenced by
resolution in writing, is similar to any of the uses or buildings set
forth in this subsection.
107. Certified small recycling collection facilities maintained as an
accessory to major retail facilities (the provisions of subsection
30-12.4i of this Chapter shall apply).
108. Certified small used oil collection facilities maintained within a
building as an accessory to gas stations, auto repair garages and
§ 30-12.2 COMPTON § 30-12.2
AO:990
auto parts stores (the provisions of subsection 30-12.4i of this
Chapter shall apply).
109. Temporary and accessory uses for a maximum of 12 days per
calendar year (the provisions of Section 30-25 of this Chapter shall
apply);
110. Indoor marijuana cultivation is allowed consistent with State law
which permits no more than six live marijuana plants to be planted,
cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private
residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the
grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured as
long as the marijuana cultivation activities comply with the
regulations set forth in paragraph c of subsection 9-24.4.
b. Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permits. The following uses
and buildings may be permitted in the Limited Commercial Zone (C-L)
provided a conditional use permit has been obtained pursuant to the
provisions of Section 30-26 of this Chapter.
1. Advertising statuary;
2. Alcoholic beverage sales for consumption on the premises that are
accessory to a primary restaurant or entertainment use (the
provisions of Section 30-51 of this Chapter shall apply);
3. Amusement machine sales (the provisions of subsection 7-6.9 shall
apply);
4. Amusement parks, fairgrounds, private clubs and privately owned
recreation centers, game rooms and domino parlors;
5. Arcades (the provisions of subsection 7-6.9 shall apply);
6. Auctions (open air);
7. Automobile repair garages (excluding body and fender work and
painting);
8. Automobile service stations (no more than two tow trucks);
9. Automobile upholstery shops;
10. Bars, lounge and liquor stores (the provisions of Section 30-51 of
this Chapter shall apply);
11. Beer and wine sales for consumption off the premises that are
accessory to a convenience or small grocery store use where such
sales utilize less than 10% of the sales floor area (the provisions of
Section 30-51 of this Chapter shall apply).
12. Buildings in excess of 50,000 square feet in size;
13. Bowling alleys;
§ 30-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-12.2
AO:991
14. Car washes;
15. Charitable institutions and rescue missions;
16. Children's homes, foster homes, fraternity and sorority houses,
college and military housing, orphans' homes, rooming houses,
boarding houses and residential care facilities;
17. Furniture upholstery shops;
18. Dance halls;
19. Dog and cat hospitals, training schools and kennels;
20. Firearm sales;
21. Furniture upholstery shops;
22. Ice and roller skating rinks;
23. Jail farms;
24. Live work units;
25. Microwave stations and telecommunications antennas;
26. Motels and hotels;
27. Mortuaries;
28. Multiple and single-family residences;
29. New commercial strip centers;
30. New establishments with drive-thru facilities;
31. New take-out restaurants;
32. Planned commercial, residential and condominium developments
(the provisions of Section 30-18 of this Chapter shall apply);
33. Pool halls;
34. Race tracks;
35. Radio and television transmission towers;
36. Rifle and pistol ranges, shooting galleries, skeet and trap shooting
and archery ranges;
37. Small collection facilities (the provisions of subsection 30-12.4i of
this Chapter shall apply;
38. Swap meets, indoor swap meets, flea markets and similar multiplevendor
sales;
39. Trailer parks;
§ 30-12.2 COMPTON § 30-12.2
AO:992
§ 30-12.3. Prohibited Uses (C-L). [Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord. #2282 § 12]
The following uses and buildings shall be prohibited in the Limited
Commercial Zone (C-L):
§ 30-12.4. Property Development Standards (C-L). [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9131.3; Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #1921, § 1; Ord.
#1941, §§ 2, 3; Ord. #2025, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 7; Ord. #2155, § 3;
Ord. #2300 § 6]
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the Limited Commercial Zone (C-L):
40. Used automobile sales;
41. Wedding chapels, banquet halls and live entertainment;
42. Zoos and menageries; and
43. Uses and buildings customarily incidental to any use or building set
forth in this subsection.
a. Pawn Shops.
b. Commercial marijuana uses, except as permitted by subsection 9-24.4.
c. Marijuana cultivation outdoors upon the grounds of a private residence.
d. Marijuana cultivation indoors that does not comply with subsection
30-12.2a.
a. Lot Area and Width. (For exceptions see subsection 30-20.2 of this
Chapter). Each lot or parcel of land shall have a minimum area of
10,000 square feet and a minimum width of 70 feet.
b. Dwelling Unit Density. The minimum lot area for each dwelling unit
shall be 1,500 square feet, except that for senior citizen units the
minimum lot area shall be 1,250 square feet.
c. Dwelling Unit Area and Number of Bedrooms. Each dwelling unit shall
have a gross floor area of not less than 450 square feet for bachelor
units, 600 square feet for one bedroom units, 800 square feet for two
bedroom units and 1,000 square feet for units with more than two
bedrooms. Dwelling units shall not exceed 2,000 square feet.
d. Lot Coverage and Building Height. (For exceptions see subsection
30-20.4 of this Chapter).
1. Building lot coverage shall be limited to 40% of the lot or parcel of
land.
2. Building height shall be limited to 75 feet above grade (exclusive of
roof structures housing building operating equipment).
§ 30-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-12.4
AO:993
§ 30-13. COMMERCIAL MANUFACTURING ZONE (C-M).
e. Yards. (For exceptions see subsection 30-20.3 of this Chapter).
1. Front Yards. There shall be a front yard of not less than 10 feet,
except that buildings used as residences shall comply with the front
yard requirements of the High-Density Residential Zone (R-H).
2. Side Yards.
(a) No side yard shall be required, except where a side lot line
abuts a street and/or a residential zone there shall be a side
yard of not less than 10 feet.
(b) Buildings used as residences shall comply with the side yard
requirements of the High-Density Residential Zone (R-H).
3. Rear Yards.
(a) No rear yard shall be required, except where a rear lot line
abuts a residential zone there shall be a rear yard of not less
than 10 feet.
(b) Buildings used as residences shall comply with the rear yard
requirements of the High-Density Residential Zone (R-H).
f. Fences and Walls. The provisions of Section 30-44 of this Chapter shall
apply.
g. Special Development Standards: Outside Storage and Display. All uses,
storage, and display shall be located entirely within a building (for
exceptions see subsection 30-20.6 of this Chapter.)
h. (Reserved)
i. All applications for the establishment of recycling facilities shall be
subject to the standards and criteria set forth in the City's policy for the
evaluation and approval of recycling facility sites.
j. Special Development Standards: Tenant Mix Leasing Plan. A Tenant
Mix Leasing Plan shall be approved by the City prior to issuance of
building permits on existing structures reconfigured with three or more
commercial tenant spaces or the granting of any discretionary permit
approving any commercial or mixed-use project, including housing and
commercial or manufacturing uses, which contain three or more
commercial tenant spaces. The Tenant Mix Leasing Plan shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Director or his/her designee.
When submitted concurrently with an application for a discretionary
permit, Planning Commission shall approve the Plan.
§ 30-12.4 COMPTON § 30-13.1
AO:994
§ 30-13.1. Purpose (C-M). [Added by Ord. #1157, § 9132.1]
The Commercial Manufacturing Zone (C-M) is established to provide for
highway-related commercial enterprises, wholesaling, warehousing, and
certain limited manufacturing operations.
§ 30-13.2. Uses (C-M). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9132.2; Ord. #1713,
§ 1; Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord. #1746, § 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #1921, § 1;
Ord. #2101, § 8; Ord. #2155, § 3; Ord. #2282 § 13; Ord. #2300 § 3]
a. Principal Permitted Uses. The following uses and buildings, of less than
50,000 square feet in size, shall be permitted in the Commercial
Manufacturing Zone (C-M):
1. Any use permitted in the Limited Commercial Zone (C-L), except
those uses which require a conditional use permit;
2. Auction houses;
3. Automobile and bus sight-seeing agencies (no storage of vehicles);
4. Automobile engine cleaning;
5. Automobile detailing;
6. Automobile repair garages (excluding body and fender work and
painting);
7. Automobile service stations (no more than two tow-trucks);
8. Automobile upholstery shops;
9. Building materials sales;
10. Candy making;
11. Car washes;
12. Catering establishments;
13. Clothing and apparel manufacturing (excluding shoe
manufacturing);
14. Cold storage;
15. Dairy products manufacturing;
16. Egg candling;
17. Electrical appliance assembly;
18. Electronic instrument assembly;
19. Engraving, mechanical;
20. Film laboratories;
§ 30-13.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-13.2
AO:995
21. Furniture upholstery shops;
22. Monument and tombstone sales;
23. Motorcycle sales and services;
24. Paint mixing (no boiling);
25. Potato chip manufacturing;
26. Precision instrument assembly;
27. Research and testing laboratories;
28. Soft drink bottling;
29. Spaghetti and macaroni manufacturing;
30. Tamale and tortilla manufacturing;
31. Taxicab companies (no more than four taxicabs);
32. Warehouses;
33. Wholesale businesses;
34. Wrought iron sales and assembly; and
35. Uses and buildings customarily incidental to any use or building set
forth in this subsection;
36. Indoor marijuana cultivation is allowed consistent with State law
which permits no more than six live marijuana plants to be planted,
cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private
residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the
grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured as
long as the marijuana cultivation activities comply with the
regulations set forth in paragraph c of subsection 9-24.4.
b. Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permits. The following uses
and buildings may be permitted in the Commercial Manufacturing Zone
(C-M) provided a conditional use permit has been obtained pursuant to
the provisions of Section 30-26 of this Chapter.
1. Advertising statuary;
2. Alcoholic beverage sales for consumption on the premises that are
accessory to a primary restaurant or entertainment use (the
provisions of Section 30-51 of this Chapter shall apply);
3. Amusement machine sales (the provisions of subsection 7-6.9 shall
apply);
4. Amusement parks, fairgrounds, private clubs and privately owned
recreation centers, game rooms and domino parlors;
§ 30-13.2 COMPTON § 30-13.2
AO:996
5. Arcades (the provisions of subsection 7-6.9) shall apply);
6. Auctions (open air);
7. Automobile body and fender shops;
8. Automobile paint shops;
9. Automobile sales and rental;
10. Automobile tire sales and service;
11. Bars, lounge and liquor stores (the provisions of Section 30-51 of
this Chapter shall apply);
12. Beer and wine sales for consumption off the premises that are
accessory to a primary convenience or small grocery store use
where such sales utilize less than 10% of the sales floor area (the
provisions of Section 30-51 of this Chapter shall apply);
13. Buildings in excess of 50,000 square feet in size;
14. Bowling alleys;
15. Charitable institutions and rescue missions;
16. Dance halls;
17. Dog and cat hospitals, training schools and kennels;
18. Firearm sales;
19. Ice and roller skating rinks;
20. Jail farms;
21. Live work units;
22. Microwave stations and telecommunications antennas;
23. Motels and hotels;
24. Mortuaries;
25. New buildings, including additions and substantial modifications,
that are designed for occupancy by manufacturing uses on lots
located within 200 feet of a residentially zoned property within the
City of Compton;
26. New commercial strip centers;
27. New establishments with drive-thru facilities;
28. New take-out restaurants;
29. Planned commercial developments (the provisions of Section 30-18
of this Chapter shall apply);
§ 30-13.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-13.2
AO:997
§ 30-13.3. Prohibited Uses (C-M). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9132.3;
Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 8; Ord. #2282 § 14]
The following uses and buildings shall be prohibited in the Commercial
Manufacturing Zone (C-M):
§ 30-13.4. Property Development Standards (C-M). [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9132.4; Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord. #1941, §§ 4, 5; Ord. #2025,
§ 1; Ord. #2102, § 8; Ord. #2155, § 3]
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the Commercial Manufacturing Zone (C-M):
30. Pool halls;
31. Race tracks;
32. Radio and television transmission towers;
33. Rifle and pistol ranges, shooting galleries, skeet and trap shooting
and archery ranges;
34. Small collection facilities (the provisions of subsection 30-12.4i of
this Chapter shall apply);
35. Swap meets, indoor swap meets, flea markets and similar multiplevendor
sales;
36. Trailer parks;
37. Wedding chapels, banquet halls and live entertainment;
38. Zoos and menageries; and
39. Uses and buildings customarily incidental to any use or building set
forth in this subsection.
a. Residences, except that a watchman's or caretaker's residence no more
than 600 square feet in size may be permitted if it is an accessory use to
a principal permitted use or building and live-work units may be
permitted in accordance with Section 30-26 of this Chapter.
b. Pawn shops.
c. Commercial marijuana uses, except as permitted by subsection 9-24.4.
d. Marijuana cultivation outdoors upon the grounds of a private residence.
e. Marijuana cultivation indoors that does not comply with subsection
30-13.2a.
a. Lot Area and Width. (For exceptions see subsection 30-20.2). Each lot
or parcel of land shall have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet and a
minimum width of 70 feet.
§ 30-13.2 COMPTON § 30-13.4
AO:998
§ 30-14. LIMITED MANUFACTURING ZONE (M-L).
§ 30-14.1. Purpose (M-L). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9140.1]
The Limited Manufacturing Zone (M-L) is established to provide for light
industrial uses.
b. Lot Coverage and Building Height. (For exceptions see subsection
30-20.4 of this Chapter) as follows:
1. Building lot coverage shall be limited to 40% of the lot or parcel of
land.
2. Building height shall be limited to 75 feet above grade (exclusive of
roof structures housing building operating equipment).
c. Yards. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.3 of this Chapter).
1. Front Yards. There shall be a front yard of not less than 10 feet.
2. Side Yards. No side yard shall be required, except where a side lot
line abuts a street and/or residential zone there shall be a side yard
of not less than 10 feet.
3. Rear Yards. No rear yard shall be required, except where a rear lot
line abuts a street and/or residential zone there shall be a rear yard
of not less than 10 feet.
4. Within 200 feet of a residential zone all new buildings, including
additions, designed for occupancy by manufacturing uses shall
require a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of
Section 30-26 of this Chapter.
d. Fences and Walls. The provisions of Section 30-44 of this Chapter shall
apply.
e. Special Development Standards: Outside Storage and Display.
1. All uses, storage, and display shall be located entirely within a
building (for exceptions see subsection 30-26.6 of this Chapter).
f. Special Development Standards: Tenant Mix Leasing Plan. A Tenant
Mix Leasing Plan shall be approved by the City prior to issuance of
building permits on existing structures reconfigured with three or more
commercial tenant spaces or the granting of any discretionary permit
approving any commercial or mixed-use project, including housing and
commercial or manufacturing uses, which contain three or more
commercial tenant spaces. The Tenant Mix Leasing Plan shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Director or his/her designee.
When submitted concurrently with an application for a discretionary
permit, Planning Commission shall approve the Plan.
§ 30-13.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-14.2
AO:999
§ 30-14.2. Uses (M-L). [Added by Ord. #1557, Ord. #1698, § 1; Code
§ 9140.2; Ord. #1713, § 1; Ord. #1717, § 1; Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord.
#1746, § 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #1921, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 9; Ord.
#2155, § 3; Ord. #2282 § 15; Ord. #2300 § 4]
a. Principal Permitted Uses. The following uses and buildings of less than
50,000 square feet in size shall be permitted in the Limited
Manufacturing Zone (M-L); provided, however, nothing in this
subsection is intended to permit any use or process set forth in
paragraph b of subsection 30-15.2.
1. Any use permitted in the Limited Commercial Manufacturing Zone
(C-M), except those uses which require a conditional use permit;
2. Manufacturing of the following:
Aircraft parts;
Appliances;
Automobile and automobile trailer sales and services;
Automobile parts;
Automobile tire sales and service;
Awnings;
Batteries, including rebuilding;
Boat and other marine sales;
Boat repair;
Boats;
Bone and horn products;
Brushes;
Building, electrical, plumbing and roofing equipment sales and
rental agencies;
Burial vaults and coffins;
Cans;
Candles;
Carpets;
Ceramic products;
Cigarettes and cigars;
Clocks and watches;
§ 30-14.2 COMPTON § 30-14.2
AO:1000
Cork products;
Cosmetics, perfumes, and toiletries;
Dextrine;
Drugs and pharmaceuticals;
Electrical and electronic instruments and equipment;
Electrical motors and generators;
Feather products;
Feed stores;
Felt;
Fiber and fiber products;
Fiberglass products;
Flagstone sales;
Food products, excepting pickles, sausages, sauerkraut, and
vinegar;
Furniture;
Fur products;
Golf balls;
Grinding wheels;
Gypsum products;
Hair products;
Heating equipment;
Hemp and rope;
Ink;
Jewelry;
Leather products;
Machinery;
Margarine;
Metal products;
Metal stamps;
Musical instruments;
§ 30-14.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-14.2
AO:1001
Paint, lacquer, shellac, and varnish;
Paper products;
Phonograph records;
Plastic products;
Polish;
Putty;
Rubber products;
Sandpaper and emery cloth;
Shoes;
Signs;
Soap (cold mix);
Soft drinks;
Stencils;
Textiles;
Tools;
Tow trucks (no storage of inoperable vehicles);
Toys;
Trailers and campers;
Turpentine and linseed oil;
Vegetable oil;
Wallboard;
Window shades and Venetian blinds;
Wire;
Wood products;
Woolen goods; and
Yeast;
3. Storage of the following materials, subject to the provisions of
paragraph e of subsection 30-14.4:
Automobiles (in operating condition);
Barrels;
§ 30-14.2 COMPTON § 30-14.2
AO:1002
Building materials (excluding rock, gravel, and sand storage in
excess of 2,000 tons);
Equipment;
Feed;
Grain;
Lumber;
Metal;
Oxygen and other gases (in Interstate Commerce Commission
approved cylinders);
Pipe;
Wood;
4. Automobile body and fender shops;
5. Automobile paint shops;
6. Blacksmiths;
7. Book binderies;
8. Bottling plants;
9. Butane service stations;
10. Cabinet and carpentry shops;
11. Canneries (excluding meat and fish);
12. Carpet cleaning;
13. Cleaning and dyeing plants;
14. (Reserved)
15. Die casting;
16. Electric transmission substations;
17. Field crops, orchards, and similar agricultural uses;
18. Flour mills;
19. Foundries (nonferrous metals);
20. (Reserved)
21. Fruit and vegetable packing plants;
22. Fuel yards;
§ 30-14.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-14.2
AO:1003
23. Ice plants;
24. Knitting mills;
25. Laundries;
26. Lumber planing;
27. Machine shops;
28. (Reserved)
29. Metal spinning;
30. Military supply depots;
31. Motion picture lots;
32. Newspaper printing plants;
33. Paint spray booths;
34. Pest control operators;
35. Pipe fabrication;
36. Public utility service yards;
37. Saw works;
38. Sheet metal shops;
39. Starch bottling and mixing;
40. Stone grinding and cutting;
41. Tire retreading and recapping;
42. (Reserved)
43. (Reserved)
44. Welding shops;
45. Wineries;
46. Uses and buildings customarily incidental to any use or building set
forth in this subsection; and
47. Any use or building which the Commission finds, as evidenced by
resolution in writing, is similar to any of the uses or buildings set
forth in this subsection.
48. Indoor marijuana cultivation is allowed consistent with State law
which permits no more than six live marijuana plants to be planted,
cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private
residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the
§ 30-14.2 COMPTON § 30-14.2
AO:1004
grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured
as long as the marijuana cultivation activities comply with the
regulations set forth in paragraph c of subsection 9-24.4.
b. Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permits. The following uses
and buildings may be permitted in the Limited Manufacturing Zone (ML)
provided a conditional use permit has been obtained pursuant to the
provisions of Section 30-26 of this Chapter.
1. Advertising statuary;
2. Alcoholic beverage sales for consumption on the premises that are
accessory to a primary restaurant or entertainment use (the
provisions of Section 30-51 of this Chapter shall apply);
3. Amusement machine sales (the provisions of subsection 7-6.9 shall
apply);
4. Amusement parks, fairgrounds, private clubs and privately owned
recreation centers, game rooms and domino parlors;
5. Arcades (the provisions of subsection 7-6.9 shall apply);
6. Auctions (open air);
7. Bars, lounge and liquor stores (the provisions of Section 30-51 of
this Chapter shall apply);
8. Beer and wine sales for consumption off the premises that are
accessory to a primary convenience or small grocery store use
where such sales utilize less than 10% of the sales floor area (the
provisions of Section 30-51 of this Chapter shall apply);
9. Bowling alleys;
10. Buildings in excess of 50,000 square feet in size;
11. Charitable institutions and rescue missions;
12. Contractor's equipment storage yards;
13. Dance halls;
14. Dog and cat hospitals, training schools and kennels;
15. Firearm sales;
16. Freight terminals and transportation yards;
17. Ice and roller skating rinks;
18. Jail farms;
19. Live work units;
20. Metal plating;
§ 30-14.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-14.2
AO:1005
21. Microwave stations and telecommunications antennas;
22. Motels and hotels;
23. Mortuaries;
24. New buildings, including additions and substantial modifications,
that are designed for occupancy by manufacturing uses on lots
located within 200 feet of a residentially zoned property within the
City of Compton;
25. New commercial strip centers;
26. New establishments with drive-thru facilities;
27. New take-out restaurants;
28. Outside storage yards (for exceptions see subsection 30-20.6);
29. Paper recycling;
30. Planned commercial and industrial developments (the provisions of
Section 30-18 of this Chapter shall apply);
31. Pool halls;
32. Public works yards;
33. Race trucks;
34. Radio and television transmission towers;
35. Rifle and pistol ranges, shooting galleries, skeet and trap shooting
and archery ranges;
36. Small collection facilities (the provisions of subsection 30-12.4i of
this Chapter shall apply;
37. Swap meets, indoor swap meets, flea markets and similar multiplevendor
sales;
38. Recycling, collection and processing facilities (the provisions of
subsection 30-12.4i of this Chapter shall apply);
39. Truck, bus and recreational vehicle sales and service;
40. Trailer parks;
41. Wedding chapels, banquet halls and live entertainment;
42. Worm farms;
43. Zoos and menageries; and
44. Uses and buildings customarily incidental to any use or building set
forth in this subsection.
§ 30-14.2 COMPTON § 30-14.3
AO:1006
§ 30-14.3. Prohibited Uses (M-L). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9140.3;
Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #2101, § 9; Ord. #2282 § 16]
The following uses and buildings shall be prohibited in the Limited
Manufacturing Zone (M-L):
§ 30-14.4. Property Development Standards (M-L). [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9140.4; Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #1941, §§ 6, 7:
Ord. #2025, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 9; Ord. #2155, § 3]
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the Limited Manufacturing Zone (M-L):
a. Residences, except that a watchman's or caretaker's residence no more
than 600 square feet in size may be permitted if it is an accessory use to
a principal permitted use or building and live-work units may be
permitted in accordance with Section 30-26 of this Chapter.
b. (Reserved)
c. Any use prohibited under subsection 30-15.3 of this Chapter.
d. Pawn shops.
e. Commercial marijuana uses, except as permitted by subsection 9-24.4.
f. Marijuana cultivation outdoors upon the grounds of a private residence.
g. Marijuana cultivation indoors that does not comply with subsection
30-14.2a.
a. Lot Area and Width. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.2). Each lot
or parcel of land shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square feet and a
minimum width of 100 feet.
b. Lot Coverage and Building Height. (For exceptions see subsection
30-20.4 of this Chapter).
1. Building lot coverage shall be limited to 50% of the lot or parcel of
land.
2. Building height shall be limited to 75 feet above grade (exclusive of
roof structures housing building operating equipment).
c. Yards. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.3 of this Chapter).
1. Front Yards. There shall be a front yard of not less than 20 feet.
2. Side Yards. No side yard shall be required, except where a side lot
line abuts a street and/or a residential zone there shall be a side
yard of not less than 20 feet.
3. Rear Yards. No rear yard shall be required, except where a rear lot
line abuts a street and/or residential zone there shall be a rear yard
of not less than 20 feet.
§ 30-14.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-14.4
AO:1007
§ 30-15. HEAVY MANUFACTURING ZONE (M-H).
§ 30-15.1. Purpose (M-H). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9141.1]
The Heavy Manufacturing Zone (M-H) is established to provide for general
industrial development while controlling those uses which might be
obnoxious, offensive, or dangerous.
§ 30-15.2. Uses (M-H). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9141.2; Ord. #1698,
§ 1; Ord. #1713, § 1; Ord. #1717, § 1; Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord. #1746,
§ 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #1828, § 1; Ord. #1921, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 10;
Ord. #2155, § 3; Ord. #2282 §§ 17; Ord. #2300 § 5]
4. Within 100 feet of a residential zone all uses must be conducted
entirely within a building, except for customer and employee
parking and loading and unloading facilities approved by the
Architectural Review Board.
5. Within 200 feet of a residential zone all new buildings, including
additions, designed for occupancy by manufacturing uses shall
require a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of
Section 30-26 of this Chapter.
d. Fences and Walls. The provisions of Section 30-44 of this Chapter shall
apply.
e. Special Development Standards: Outside Storage and Display. The
outside storage or display of merchandise, materials, or equipment in
conjunction with a principal permitted use shall be permitted subject to
the provisions of Section 30-26 of this Chapter.
f. Special Development Standards: Tenant Mix Leasing Plan. A Tenant
Mix Leasing Plan shall be approved by the City prior to issuance of
building permits on existing structures reconfigured with three or more
commercial tenant spaces or the granting of any discretionary permit
approving any commercial or mixed-use project, including housing and
commercial or manufacturing uses, which contain three or more
commercial tenant spaces. The Tenant Mix Leasing Plan shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Director or his/her designee.
When submitted concurrently with an application for a discretionary
permit, Planning Commission shall approve the Plan.
a. Principal Permitted Uses. The following uses and buildings of less than
50,000 square feet in size shall be permitted in the Heavy
Manufacturing Zone (M-H):
1. Any use permitted in the Limited Commercial (C-L), Commercial
Manufacturing (C-M) or Limited Manufacturing Zone (M-L), except
those uses which require a conditional use permit.
2. Indoor marijuana cultivation is allowed consistent with State law
which permits no more than six live marijuana plants to be planted,
§ 30-14.4 COMPTON § 30-15.2
AO:1008
cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private
residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the
grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured
as long as the marijuana cultivation activities comply with the
regulations set forth in paragraph c of subsection 9-24.4.
b. Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permits. The following uses
may be permitted in the Heavy Manufacturing Zone (M-H) provided a
conditional use permit has been obtained pursuant to the provisions of
Section 30-26 of this Chapter:
1. Any use permitted by conditional use permit in the Commercial
Manufacturing (C-M) or Limited Manufacturing (M-L) Zones.
1A. Manufacturing of the following:
Abrasives;
Bleaching powder;
By-products of animals, meat and fish;
Cellulose;
Celluloid;
Cement;
Charcoal;
Cleaning compound;
Concrete batching plants (processing and storage of concrete
components);
Gelatine;
Glue;
Lampblack;
Lard;
Lime;
Mucilage;
Plaster of paris;
Plastics;
Rubber, including reclaiming;
Size;
Tallow; and
§ 30-15.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-15.2
AO:1009
Tar and tar products;
2. Manufacturing and storage of the following:
Acid;
Agar;
Alcohol;
Ammonia;
Ammunition;
Caustic soda;
Creosote;
Explosives;
Fertilizer;
Fireworks;
Gases;
Insecticides;
Lye;
Matches;
Phenol;
Potash;
Soda;
Sodium compound; and
Sulphur;
3. Advertising statuary;
4. Animal dumping and reduction;
5. Asphalt plants;
6. Bars and liquor stores (the provisions of Section 30-51 of this
Chapter shall apply);
6A. Beer and wine sales for consumption off the premises that are
accessory to a primary convenience or small grocery store use
where such sales utilize less than 10% of the sales floor area (the
provisions of Section 30-51 of this Chapter shall apply);
7. (Reserved)
§ 30-15.2 COMPTON § 30-15.2
AO:1010
8. Bone distillation;
8A. Bus storage yards;
9. Canning and processing of meat and fish;
10. Chamois skin processing;
11. Clay processing;
12. Coke ovens;
13. Fat rendering;
14. Feed mills;
14A. Freight terminals;
15. House moving and wrecking yards;
16. (Reserved)
17. Meat packing;
18. Metal works of the following kinds:
Blast furnaces;
Boiler works;
Drop forges;
Drop hammers;
Forging works;
Foundries (ferrous metals);
Pneumatic presses;
Smelters; and
Steel mills;
19. New commercial strip centers;
20. New establishments with drive-thru facilities;
21. Take-out restaurants;
22. Ore reduction plants;
23. Petroleum and petroleum products refining, processing, and
reclaiming and storage;
24. Planned commercial and industrial developments (the provisions of
Section 30-18 shall apply);
§ 30-15.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-15.2
AO:1011
§ 30-15.3. Prohibited Uses (M-H). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9141.3;
Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #2101, § 10; Ord. #2282 § 18]
The following uses and buildings shall be prohibited in the Heavy
Manufacturing Zone (M-H):
25. Private clubs;
26. Recycling of paper (when a plan for its storage and maintenance
has been approved by the Fire Department);
27. Rock crushing plants;
28. Rock, gravel, and sand storage in excess of 2,000 tons;
29. Sandblasting plants;
30. Sanitary landfills;
31. Slaughterhouses;
32. Solid waste transfer stations;
33. Solvent extracting;
34. Stockyards;
35. Tanneries;
36. Transportation yards;
37. Truck and bus repair (including body and fender works and spray
painting);
38. Truck repair;
39. Waste disposal facilities;
40. Worm farms; and
41. Recycling of paper (when conducted entirely within a building).
42. Alcoholic beverage sales for consumption on the premises that are
accessory to a primary restaurant or entertainment use (the
provisions of Section 30-51 of this Chapter shall apply);
43. Public works yards.
44. Recycling, collection and processing facilities (the provisions of
subsection 30-12.4i of this Chapter shall apply).
45. Outside storage yards (for exceptions see subsection 30-20.6 of this
Chapter.)
a. Residences, except that a watchman's or caretaker's residence no more
than 600 square feet in size may be permitted if it is an accessory use to
§ 30-15.2 COMPTON § 30-15.3
AO:1012
§ 30-15.4. Property Development Standards (M-H). [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9141.4; Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord. #1784; Ord. #1941, §§ 8, 9;
Ord. #2025, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 10; Ord. #2155, § 3]
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the Heavy Manufacturing Zone (M-H):
a principal permitted use or building and live-work units may be
permitted in accordance with Section 30-26 of this Chapter.
b. Automobile dismantling yards, wrecking yards, junk and salvage yards,
impound yards and pallet yards; provided, however, any such uses
lawfully commenced and still in existence on May 4, 1978, may lawfully
continue and be expanded if the property upon which such use is
conducted is improved in accordance with the provisions of subsection
30-20.6 of this Chapter. The expansion of any existing automobile
dismantling yard, wrecking yard, junk and salvage yard, impound yard
or pallet yard shall require a conditional use permit in accordance with
Section 30-26 of this Chapter.
c. Pawn shops.
d. Commercial marijuana uses, except as permitted by subsection 9-24.4.
e. Marijuana cultivation outdoors upon the grounds of a private residence.
f. Marijuana cultivation indoors that does not comply with subsection
30-15.2a.
a. Lot Area and Width. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.2 of this
Chapter). Each lot or parcel of land shall have a minimum area of
20,000 square feet and a minimum width of 100 feet.
b. Lot Coverage and Building Height. (For exceptions see subsection
30-20.4 of this Chapter).
1. Building lot coverage shall be limited to 50% of the lot or parcel of
land.
2. Building height shall be limited to 75 feet above grade (exclusive of
roof structures housing building operating equipment).
c. Yards. (For exceptions, see subsection 30-20.3 of this Chapter).
1. Front Yards. There shall be a front yard of not less than 20 feet.
2. Side Yards. No side yard shall be required, except where a side lot
line abuts a street and/or residential zone there shall be a side yard
of not less than 20 feet.
3. Rear Yards. No rear yard shall be required, except where a rear lot
line abuts a street and/or residential zone there shall be a rear yard
of not less than 20 feet.
§ 30-15.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-15.4
AO:1013
§ 30-16. BUFFER ZONE (B).
§ 30-16.1. Purpose (B). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9150.1]
The Buffer Zone (B) is established to provide physical separation between
conflicting land uses.
§ 30-16.2. Uses (B). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9150.2; Ord. #2101,
§ 11; Ord. #2282 § 19]
4. Within 100 feet of a residential zone all uses must be conducted
entirely within a building, except for customer and employee
parking and loading and unloading facilities approved by the
Architectural Review Board.
5. Within 200 feet of a residential zone all new buildings, including
additions, designed for occupancy by manufacturing uses shall
require a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of
Section 30-26 of this Chapter.
d. Fences and Walls. The provisions of Section 30-44 of this Chapter shall
apply.
e. Special Development Standards: Outside Storage and Display. The
outside storage or display of merchandise, materials or equipment in
conjunction with a principal permitted use shall be permitted subject to
the provisions of subsection 30-20.6 of this Chapter.
f. Special Development Standards: Tenant Mix Leasing Plan. A Tenant
Mix Leasing Plan shall be approved by the City prior to issuance of
building permits on existing structures reconfigured with three or more
commercial tenant spaces or the granting of any discretionary permit
approving any commercial or mixed-use project, including housing and
commercial or manufacturing uses, which contain three or more
commercial tenant spaces. The Tenant Mix Leasing Plan shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Director or his/her designee.
When submitted concurrently with an application for a discretionary
permit, Planning Commission shall approve the Plan.
a. Principal Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the
Buffer Zone (B):
1. Employee recreation;
2. Fences, walls, or hedges not to exceed a height above the ground
level of six feet, unless approved by the Architectural Review
Board;
3. Landscaping;
4. Motor vehicle parking; and
5. Railroad tracks and railroad spur tracks.
§ 30-15.4 COMPTON § 30-16.2
AO:1014
§ 30-16.3. Prohibited Uses (B). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9150.3;
Ord. #2282 § 20]
The following uses and buildings shall be prohibited in the Buffer Zone (B):
§ 30-17. AUTOMOBILE PARKING ZONE (P).
§ 30-17.1. Purpose (P). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9151.1]
The Automobile Parking Zone (P) is established to provide for off-street
parking for residential, commercial, industrial, public, and other uses in the
City.
§ 30-17.2. Combination With Residential Zones (P). [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9151.2]
Land classified in the Automobile Parking Zones (P) may also be combined
with residential zones, and, if so classified, shall be shown as PR-A, R-L, PRM,
or PR-H on the Official Zoning Map.
§ 30-17.3. Uses (P). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9151.3]
6. Indoor marijuana cultivation is allowed consistent with State law
which permits no more than six live marijuana plants to be planted,
cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private
residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the
grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured as
long as the marijuana cultivation activities comply with the
regulations set forth in paragraph c of subsection 9-24.4.
a. Buildings, structures, and the storage of materials, equipment, and
vehicles shall be prohibited in the Buffer Zone (B).
b. Commercial marijuana uses, except as permitted by subsection 9-24.4.
c. Marijuana cultivation outdoors upon the grounds of a private residence.
d. Marijuana cultivation indoors that does not comply with Section
30-16.2a.
a. Principal Permitted Uses. The following uses and buildings shall be
permitted in the Automobile Parking Zone (P):
1. Any use permitted in the residential zone with which the
Automobile Parking Zone (P) may also be classified;
2. Open air, temporary parking of transient automobiles, light trucks,
and other motor vehicles for periods of time not to exceed 48 hours;
3. Uses and buildings customarily incidental to any use or building set
forth in this subsection; and
§ 30-16.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-17.3
AO:1015
§ 30-17.4. Property Development Standards (P). [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9151.4; Ord. #2025, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 12]
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the Automobile Parking Zone (P); provided, however, the uses
permitted in the residential zone with which the Automobile Parking Zone
(P) may be combined shall comply with all the provisions of that residential
zone:
§ 30-18. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE (D).
§ 30-18.1. Purpose (D). [Added by Ord. #1602, § 9152.1; Ord.
#2101, § 13]
This zone is established to provide greater land use control than is provided
by the base zone for certain areas and/or uses with unusual development
problems or opportunities where the public good could better be served by
individualized land use regulations.
§ 30-18.2. Combination With Other Zones (D). [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9152.2; Ord. #1602, § 2]
Land classified in the Planned Development Zone may be combined with
any zone in which planned developments are permitted by conditional use
permit and if so classified shall be shown by the addition of the letter "D"
after the letter designation of the base zone on the Official Zoning Map of
the City.
4. Any use or building which the Commission finds, as evidenced by
resolution in writing, similar to any of the uses or buildings set
forth in this subsection.
b. Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permits. The following uses
may be permitted in the Automobile Parking Zone (P) provided a
conditional use permit has been obtained pursuant to the provisions of
Section 30-26:
1. Parking structures, designed and used for the temporary parking of
transient automobiles, light trucks, and other motor vehicles for a
period of time not to exceed 48 hours.
a. Lot Area and Width. Each lot or parcel of land shall have a minimum
area of 5,000 square feet and a minimum width of 50 feet.
b. Building Height. The maximum height for buildings or structures shall
be 75 feet.
c. Yards. There shall be no yard requirements.
d. Fences and Walls. The provisions of Section 30-44 of this Chapter shall
apply.
§ 30-17.3 COMPTON § 30-18.3
AO:1016
§ 30-18.3. Uses (D). [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9152.3; Ord. #1602,
§ 2; Ord. #2101, § 13; Ord. #2282 §§ 21, 22, 23]
The following uses are permitted in the Planned Development Zone:
a. Planned Residential Development. This designation shall apply to
single-family residential developments with unusual design
characteristics (such as private streets or smaller than standard
homesites), development problems (such as individually owned
rowhouses), or common area, as determined by the Planning Director.
1. A planned residential development shall be permitted in any
residential zone and the Limited Commercial (C-L) zone provided
that a conditional use permit has been obtained pursuant to the
provisions of Section 30-26.
2. Any noncommercial use permitted in the zone in which the planned
residential development is located may be permitted in the planned
residential development as a condition of approval.
3. Community facilities which are for the primary use of the residents
of the planned residential development are permitted.
4. Indoor marijuana cultivation is allowed consistent with State law
which permits no more than six live marijuana plants to be planted,
cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private
residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the
grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured as
long as the marijuana cultivation activities comply with the
regulations set forth in paragraph c of subsection 9-24.4.
b. Planned Condominium Development. This designation shall apply to
residential condominiums, townhouses, cooperative apartments, stock
cooperatives and similar developments as determined by the Site Plan
Review Committee.
1. A planned condominium development shall be permitted in R-M
(Medium-Density Residential), R-H (High-Density Residential), C-O
(Commercial Office) and C-L (Limited Commercial) zones provided
that a conditional use permit has been obtained pursuant to the
provisions of Section 30-26.
2. Any noncommercial use permitted in the zone in which the planned
condominium development is located may be permitted in the
planned condominium development as a condition of approval.
3. Community facilities which are for the primary use of the residents
of the planned condominium development are permitted.
4. Commercial uses which are for the primary use and convenience of
residents of the planned condominium development may be
permitted by the Commission as part of the conditional use permit
for the planned condominium development.
§ 30-18.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18.3
AO:1017
§ 30-18.4. Development Regulations (D). [Added by Ord. #1602,
§ 9152.4; Ord. #2101, § 13; Ord. #2136, § 1; Ord. #2155, § 4]
Any planned development project developed pursuant to this section shall
comply with the following regulations, and any permit issued shall be
subject to such provisions as are established as conditions of approval:
5. Indoor marijuana cultivation is allowed consistent with State law
which permits no more than six live marijuana plants to be planted,
cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private
residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the
grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured as
long as the marijuana cultivation activities comply with the
regulations set forth in paragraph c of subsection 9-24.4.
c. Planned Commercial and Planned Industrial Developments.
1. A planned commercial development shall be permitted in any
commercial or manufacturing zone provided that a conditional use
permit has been obtained pursuant to the provisions of Section
30-26.
2. A planned industrial development shall be permitted in any
manufacturing zone provided that a conditional use permit has
been obtained pursuant to the provisions of Section 30-26.
3. Any use permitted in the zone in which the planned commercial or
planned industrial development is located may be permitted in the
planned commercial or planned industrial development as a
condition of approval.
4. Community facilities which are for the primary use of the
occupants of the planned commercial or planned industrial
development are permitted.
5. Indoor marijuana cultivation is allowed consistent with State law
which permits no more than six live marijuana plants to be planted,
cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private
residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the
grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured as
long as the marijuana cultivation activities comply with the
regulations set forth in paragraph c of subsection 9-24.4.
a. Area of Project. Planned development projects shall have a total area of
not less than the following:
1. Planned residential developments shall have a total area of not less
than one acre.
2. Planned condominium developments shall have a minimum of four
units.
§ 30-18.3 COMPTON § 30-18.4
AO:1018
3. Planned commercial and industrial developments shall have a
minimum area of not less than two acres.
b. Property Development Standards. The property development standards
of the base zone shall apply, except as provided in this paragraph b.
1. Lot Area, Width and Depth. The area, width and depth of
individually and commonly owned parcels of land within the
planned development shall be established as a condition of
approval.
2. Dwelling Unit Density. The dwelling unit density, if applicable, shall
not exceed 120% of the number of units determined by dividing the
total net area of the planned development project by the minimum
lot area per dwelling unit requirement of the base zone.
3. Yards. Front, side and rear yards shall be established as a condition
of approval.
4. Fences, Walls and Hedges.
(a) The height of fences, walls and hedges shall be established as a
condition of approval.
(b) The Commission may require appropriate walls, fencing and
landscaping around the perimeter of the planned development
project.
5. Parking.
(a) The number of required parking spaces for planned
residential, planned commercial and planned industrial
developments shall conform to the provisions of Section 30-21
unless otherwise specified by the Commission as a condition of
approval.
(b) The number of required parking spaces for planned
condominium developments shall be:
(1) Two parking spaces, enclosed in a garage, to be assigned
to each residential unit within the project.
(2) One parking space to be provided for the use of visitors to
the project for each four residential units within the
project.
(3) Recreational vehicle parking shall be prohibited within
planned condominium developments except when a
separate, fenced and paved recreational vehicle storage
area is provided with a direct access from an exterior
street, for exclusive use of the residents, if approved by the
Commission.
§ 30-18.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18.4
AO:1019
(c) The location, arrangement and size of parking spaces shall be
established as a condition of approval.
6. Site Amenities.
(a) All residential developments of 12 units or more shall provide a
meeting room in addition to required common open space and
private open space. Depending upon the number of units
proposed, additional site amenities shall be required, selected
from the list provided or as approved by the Planning
Commission:
(b) Thirteen to 32 units, add two additional amenities:
(1) Tot lot with multiple play equipment.
(2) Pool and Jacuzzi/spa.
(3) Barbeque facility equipped with grill, picnic benches, etc.
(c) Thirty-three to 50 units, add three additional amenities:
(1) Tot lot with multiple play equipment.
(2) Pool and Jacuzzi/spa.
(3) Barbeque facility equipped with grill, picnic benches, etc.
(4) Court facilities (e.g. tennis, volleyball, basketball, etc.).
(d) Fifty-five to 75 units, add four additional amenities:
(1) Tot lot with multiple play equipment.
(2) Pool and Jacuzzi/spa.
(3) Barbeque facility equipped with grill, picnic benches, etc.
(4) Court facilities (e.g. tennis, volleyball, basketball, etc.).
(5) Exercise room.
(6) Clubhouse equipped with kitchen, defined areas for
games, exercise, recreation, and entertainment.
(e) Developments of more than 75 units shall provide five
additional amenities as well include multiples dispersed
throughout the project:
(1) Tot lot with multiple play equipment.
(2) Pool and Jacuzzi/spa.
(3) Barbeque facility equipped with grill, picnic benches, etc.
(4) Court facilities (e.g. tennis, volleyball, basketball, etc.).
§ 30-18.4 COMPTON § 30-18.4
AO:1020
(5) Exercise equipment room.
(6) Clubhouse equipped with kitchen, defined areas for
games, exercise, recreation, and entertainment.
(7) Jogging/walking trails with exercise stations.
(8) Community garden.
(9) Media/computer room.
c. Commercial and Community Facilities. The Commission shall approve
all aspects of the development of commercial and community facilities,
including but not limited to individual uses, location, signs and parking.
Any subsequent change in the type of commercial uses in a planned
condominium development shall be approved by the Commission.
d. Open Space.
1. The Commission shall review and approve the location, purpose,
landscape treatment and method of maintaining each common
open space or recreational element proposed.
2. A minimum of 25%, exclusive of roadways and private open space,
of planned condominium developments of less than three stories
shall be devoted to open and recreational common area. Open
space requirements for planned condominium developments of
three or more stories shall be determined by the Commission.
3. Private Open Space. Each unit in a planned condominium
development shall have an appurtenant private patio, deck,
balcony, atrium or solarium with a minimum usable area of 120
square feet, except as follows:
(a) Developments which contain one bedroom and zero bedroom
units designed exclusively for senior citizens may request that
the private open space standard be modified or waived by the
Commission.
(b) Planned condominium developments of three or more stories
may propose alternative private open space if indicated by the
physical structure of the development. Alternative private open
space must be approved by the Site Plan Review Committee
and the Commission.
(c) The usability of proposed private open space shall be
determined by the Site Plan Review Committee.
4. Private Storage Space. Each unit within a planned condominium
development shall have at least 200 cubic feet of usable, enclosed,
weatherproofed and lockable storage space for the exclusive use of
the unit owner. Such space must be over and above normal interior
storage space such as guest, linen or clothes closets or food
§ 30-18.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18.4
AO:1021
pantries. The location, dimensions and usability of such space shall
be determined by the Site Plan Review Committee except that
private storage space shall not be divided between two or more
locations. If such space is located within a common area within the
project, the property owner's association shall be responsible for
the care and maintenance of the exterior surface of the space.
e. Utilities.
1. The Commission may require that some or all utilities be placed
underground. Such service shall be provided pursuant to the
utilities' applicable rules and regulations on file with the California
Public Utilities Commission.
2. Each unit within a Planned Condominium Development shall have
all utility services connected to the unit and individually metered so
that the metering will separately measure utility service usage. In
the case of water meters this requirement may be waived by the
Site Review Committee.
3. Each unit within a planned condominium development shall have
its own circuit breaker panel for all electrical circuits and outlets
which serve the unit. Such panel shall be readily accessible to the
unit.
4. A program for ongoing rubbish collection which includes provisions
for the location of rubbish receptacles shall be submitted to and
approved by the Site Plan Review Committee for planned
condominium developments. Provisions for rubbish collection and
for the payment of fees for same shall be included in the conditions,
covenants and restrictions affecting each planned condominium
development.
f. Isolation of Vibration and Sources of Structure-Borne Noise in Planned
Condominium Developments Where Units Have Common Wall and/or
Floor and Ceiling.
1. Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent
mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps and
compactors which, because of their rotation, reciprocation,
expansion and/or contraction, turbulence, oscillation, pulsation,
impaction or detonation, are determined by the Chief Building
Inspector to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne
noise shall be shock mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or
bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the Chief
Building Inspector. Domestic appliances which are cabinet
installed or built into the individual units, such as clothes washers
and dryers, or other appliances which are determined by the Chief
Building Inspector to be a source of structural vibration or
structural-borne noise, shall be isolated from cabinets and floor or
ceiling by resilient gaskets and vibration mounts approved by the
Chief Building Inspector. The cabinets in which they are installed
§ 30-18.4 COMPTON § 30-18.4
AO:1022
should be offset from the back wall with strip gasketing of felt,
cork or similar material approved by the Chief Building Inspector.
Where such appliances utilize water, flexible connectors shall be
installed on all waterlines. If provision is made within the units
for the installation of nonpermanent appliances such as clothes
washers and dryers, then permanent rubber mounting bases and
surface plates shall be installed in a manner approved by the Chief
Building Inspector.
2. Location of Plumbing Fixtures. No plumbing fixture shall be located
on a common wall between two separate units where it would back
up to a living room, family room, dining room, den or bedroom of an
adjoining unit.
3. Separation of Vents and Lines. No common water supply lines,
vents or drain lines shall be permitted for contiguous units unless
there is at least 8 1/2 feet of pipe between the closest plumbing
fixtures within the separate units. The Chief Building Inspector
may approve other methods of isolating sound transmission
through plumbing lines where their effectiveness can be
demonstrated.
4. Isolation and Insulation of Lines. All water supply lines within the
project shall be isolated from wood or metal framing with pipe
isolators specifically manufactured for that purpose and approved
by the Chief Building Inspector. In multistory condominium
projects, all vertical drainage pipe shall be surrounded by 3/4 inch
thick dense insulation board or full thick fiberglass or wool blanket
insulation for its entire length, including the sections that pass
through wood or metal framing.
g. Attenuation of Noise: Planned Condominium Developments.
1. General. Wall and floor/ceiling assemblies separating units from
each other or from public or quasi-public spaces such as interior
corridors, laundry rooms, recreation rooms and garages shall
provide airborne sound insulation for walls and both airborne and
impact sound insulation for floor/ceiling assemblies.
2. Air-borne Sound Insulation. All wall assemblies enumerated or
alluded to in paragraph 1 shall be a type of construction that has a
minimum rating of 50 STC (Sound Transmission Class). Wood floor
joists and subflooring shall not be continuous between separate
condominium units. Penetrations or openings in the construction
for piping, electrical outlets and devices, recess cabinets, bathtubs,
soffits and heating, ventilating and/or air conditioning intake and
exhaust ducts and the like shall be sealed, lined, insulated or
otherwise treated to maintain the required rating; and such
treatment shall be approved by the Chief Building Inspector.
Entrance doors to the unit shall be of solid construction and,
together with perimeter seals, shall have a minimum rating of 30
§ 30-18.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18.4
AO:1023
STC. Such perimeter seals shall be maintained in effective
operating condition.
3. Impact Sound Insulation. All separating floor/ceiling assemblies
enumerated or alluded to above shall be of a type of construction
that has a minimum rating of 69 IIC (Impact Insulation Class). Floor
coverings may be included in the assembly to obtain the required
ratings but must be retained as a permanent part of the assembly
and may only be replaced by another floor covering that provides
the same or greater impact insulation.
4. Verification of Sound Class. STC and IIC ratings shall be based on
the results of laboratory measurements and will not be subjected to
field testing. The STC rating shall be based on the American
Society for Testing and Materials system specified in ASTM
B90-66t or equivalent. The IIC rating shall be based on the system
in use at the National Bureau of Standards or equivalent. Ratings
obtained from other testing procedures will require adjustment to
the above rating systems.
h. Conversion to Ownership: Planned Condominium Developments.
Planned condominium developments in which existing structures are
converted to ownership units must obtain:
1. A structural pest report from a qualified private contractor
approved by the Chief Building Inspector.
2. A project building report conducted by the Department of Building
and Safety or a qualified private contractor approved by the Chief
Building Inspector. This report shall include an inspection of the
condition of roofs, foundations, mechanical, electrical and
plumbing systems as well as verifying compliance with subsection
30-18.4e through g.
3. The developer shall tender an unconditional offer to pay each
tenant requiring relocation $500 in relocation compensation.
i. Financial Responsibility: Planned Condominium Developments.
1. Any fees incurred for inspections or corrections required by this
subsection 30-18.4 are the responsibility of the applicant and/or
subsequent developer.
2. A surety bond shall be posted with the City by the applicant and/or
subsequent developer of a planned condominium development for
the purpose of assurance of maintenance of utilities, fire
equipment, roadways and other portions of the development which
impact on the public health, safety and welfare. The amount of the
surety bond shall be determined by the Commission, but shall not
be less than $5,000. In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may
deposit a cash bond in the amount determined as above. The bond
shall be maintained for the life of the planned condominium
§ 30-18.4 COMPTON § 30-18.4
AO:1024
§ 30-18.5. Procedure (D). [Added by Ord. #1602, § 9152.5]
The provisions of Section 30-26 shall apply. The following items shall also
be submitted with the application for a conditional use permit:
development. The cost of the bond shall be the responsibility of the
applicant and/or subsequent developer until 75% of all units have
been transferred to private ownership, at which point the property
owner's association shall become responsible for maintenance of
said bond. Should the Commission determine that a default has
occurred in the performance of adequate maintenance of the
planned condominium development, the Commission shall instruct
the Chief Building Inspector to notify (in writing) the property
owner's association and the surety on the bond of the maintenance
violations. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the
estimated cost thereof and the period of time allocated for
completion of such work. After receipt of such notice the property
owner's association and/or surety must, within the time therein
specified, either cause the required work to be performed or, failing
therein, pay to the Department of Building and Safety the
estimated cost of doing the work, plus an additional sum equal to
10%.
a. Plot Plan. Six copies of a plot plan and one reproducible copy of the plot
plan, which shall show the following:
1. Title of the plot plan.
2. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
3. Name, address and telephone number of the person or firm
preparing the plot plan.
4. North Point and Scale. The plot plan shall be drawn to a scale of not
less than one inch equals 100 feet.
5. Location, name and width of existing and proposed streets, alleys,
easements and interior pedestrian ways, including all abutting
streets and streets proposed to provide primary access to the
proposed planned development project from a major street or
freeway.
6. Location and dimensions of existing and proposed buildings and
structures.
7. Plan for proposed landscaping and permanent watering system.
8. Proposed off-street parking facilities, including the location,
number and dimensions of private and public parking spaces, aisles
and driveways.
9. Height, type and location of proposed walls and fences.
§ 30-18.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18.5
AO:1025
10. If residential uses are proposed, a tabulation of the various
dwelling types proposed, the net area of the development, and the
dwelling unit density.
b. Architectural Plans. Drawings shall be submitted which shall indicate
the size and height and the color and materials to be used on the
exterior of all proposed buildings and structures. Such drawings shall
also include the dimensions and advertising copy of all proposed signs.
c. Tentative Map. A tentative division of land or parcel map shall be
submitted if required by Chapter 28, Land Subdivision. All proceedings
with regard to a tentative map submitted with an application for a
planned development project shall be held concurrently with those for
the conditional use permit.
d. Development Schedule. If the planned development project is to be
constructed in increments, a development schedule shall be submitted.
e. Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions.
1. If conditions, covenants and restrictions are to be recorded for the
planned development project, a copy of the declaration of
conditions, covenants and restrictions shall be submitted.
2. If the planned development project is to be divided into two or
more parcels containing common areas, a plan for the preservation
and continued maintenance of the common areas and facilities
shall be submitted as conditions, covenants and restrictions on the
development.
3. The declaration of conditions, covenants and restrictions shall
accompany all proposals for planned condominium developments
and shall establish a property owner's association to regulate
repairs and maintenance to the planned condominium
development. In addition to such conditions, covenants and
restrictions that may be required by the Department of Real Estate
of the State of California or pursuant to Title 6 of Part IV of Division
II of the California Civil Code or other State laws or policies, such
declaration shall provide for the following, none of which, after
acceptance in final form by the City, shall be amended, modified or
changed without first obtaining the written consent of the
Commission:
(a) Assignment or Conveyance of Private Open Space. The surface
area and appurtenant airspace of private open space areas,
including but not limited to the private patio, deck, balcony,
solarium or atrium required by subsection 30-18.4 and any
integral portion of the space that may exceed the minimum
area requirements shall be described and irrevocably assigned
by the declaration of conditions, covenants and restrictions to
its respective unit; except that where the private open space is
§ 30-18.5 COMPTON § 30-18.5
AO:1026
totally within the boundary described by the interior surfaces
of the unit, it shall be conveyed as an integral part of the unit.
(b) Assignment or Conveyance of Private Storage Areas. The
surfaces and appurtenant airspace of private storage areas,
including but not limited to the private storage space required
by subsection 30-18.4, shall be described and irrevocably
assigned by the declaration of conditions, covenants and
restrictions to its respective unit; except that where the private
storage space is totally within the boundary described by the
interior surfaces of the unit, it shall be conveyed as an integral
part of the unit.
(c) Assignment or Conveyance and Use of Required Off-Street
Parking Spaces. Required off-street, enclosed parking spaces,
shall be permanently and irrevocably assigned to particular
units within the project on the basis of two spaces per unit;
except that where two parking spaces are totally within the
boundary described by the interior surfaces of the unit, they
shall be conveyed as an integral part of the unit. To the
maximum practical extent, the two spaces assigned to each
unit shall be contiguous. In no case shall the private storage
area of one unit overhang or take its access from the required
off-street parking space of another unit. All parking spaces
shall be used solely by owners, members of their families, their
guests or lessees of the owner's unit. All parking spaces shall
be used solely for the parking of motor vehicles as defined by
the California Vehicles Code.
(d) The declaration of conditions, covenants and restrictions shall
contain a provision establishing the obligation and duty of the
property owner's association to maintain the common area in
good condition. The declaration of conditions, covenants and
restrictions shall provide for workmen's compensation
insurance and general liability insurance in an amount to be
determined by the Commission.
(e) The declaration of conditions, covenants and restrictions shall
contain a provision ensuring the right of any owner to enforce
the terms of the declaration of conditions, covenants and
restrictions.
(f) Maintenance of Common Areas and Facilities.
(1) Obligation. No conditional use permit shall be granted for
a planned condominium development unless the obligation
for care, upkeep and management of the common element
is set forth in the declaration of conditions, covenants and
restrictions and is imposed on a nonprofit corporation (the
property owner's association).
§ 30-18.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18.5
AO:1027
(2) Assessments. In order to protect the public health, safety
and welfare, provision shall be made both for annual
assessments for maintenance and special assessment for
capital improvements. The amount of the regular annual
assessment and the procedure for its change shall be
specified. The remedies which the property owner's
association may bring for nonpayment of assessments
shall be specified and may include penalties for late
payment.
(3) Veto Right and Authority of the City. In consideration for
the City's approval of a planned condominium
development, the declaration of conditions, covenants and
restrictions shall provide that the Commission, at its
option, has the right and authority to veto any action of the
property owner's association which would tend to
decrease the amount of the regular annual assessment
upon a finding by the City that such a decrease could or
would adversely affect the long-run maintenance of the
condominium structures and/or common areas. To enable
the City to exercise the optional veto, the declaration of
conditions, covenants and restrictions shall provide the
property owner's association actions to decrease the
annual assessment do not become effective until 60 days
after written notice of such action is given to the
Commission.
(g) Maintenance of Impact Insulation Class. The IIC rating of all
separating floor/ceiling assemblies, as required by subsection
30-18.4g, shall be described in the declaration of conditions,
covenants and restrictions. Where the minimum IIC rating is
obtained through the use of floor covering(s), the declaration
of conditions, covenants and restrictions shall provide that said
covering(s) shall not be removed for any purpose except
cleaning or replacement, and shall further provide that any
replacement covering(s) shall furnish not less than the degree
of impact insulation afforded by covering(s) originally
installed.
(h) Television and Radio Antennas. Individual television and radio
antennas shall be prohibited outside of any owner's unit. The
declaration of conditions, covenants and restrictions may
provide for a central antenna with connections to each unit via
underground or internal wall wiring. The declaration of
conditions, covenants and restrictions shall also permit cable
antenna service provided by a company licensed to provide
such service within the City and attic installation of antenna,
where structurally feasible.
(i) Right of Public Entry to Common Area. The City, the County,
the State and the Government of the United States, and any
§ 30-18.5 COMPTON § 30-18.5
AO:1028
department, bureau or agency thereof, shall have the right
of immediate access to all portions of common areas of the
project not assigned for the exclusive use of the owner of a
particular unit at all times.
(j) Utility Easements Over Private Streets and Other Areas. If the
planned condominium development contains private streets,
provision shall be made for public utility easements in or
adjacent to such private streets, adjacent to public streets or
over other portions of the project to accommodate fire
hydrants, water and gas mains, electrical lines and similar
urban infrastructure. The Commission may also require access
routes necessary to assure that fire-fighting equipment can
reach and operate efficiently in all areas of the project.
(k) Amendment of the Declaration of Conditions, Covenants and
Restrictions. Any amendment to the declaration of conditions,
covenants and restrictions which would amend, modify, delete
or otherwise affect any provision required by this section shall
require the prior written approval of the Commission. To that
end, no such amendment of the declaration of conditions,
covenants and restrictions shall be effective unless:
(1) The text thereof shall have been submitted to the
Commission 30 days prior to its adoption by the owners.
(2) The Commission has approved the amendment or failed to
disapprove it within said 30 days.
(3) The recorded instrument effecting such amendment shall
recite that it was so submitted and approved or not
disapproved.
f. Site Plan and Design Review.
1. Site plan and design review shall be required on all applications for
planned condominium developments.
2. A Site Plan Review Committee composed of the Chief Building
Inspector and the Subdivision Committee shall be established and
shall be responsible for the review and approval of said plan. The
Committee may require that a conference be held with the project
designer.
3. An application for approval of a site plan shall be submitted to the
Site Plan Review Committee for determination in any case
involving any of the following:
(a) Construction of a new building.
(b) Expansion, additions, alterations or repairs to existing
structures, or other construction, if:
§ 30-18.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-18.5
AO:1029
(1) The estimated cost of the work is $5,000 or more; and
(2) The work involves changes in exterior architectural
design, landscaping design or parking facilities.
(c) Signs involving an estimated value of $1,000 or more.
The Planning Director shall have authority to approve development
plans for work not exceeding the above limitations.
4. Development plans shall be reviewed in relation to the following
criteria:
(a) Compatibility with the General Plan and any specific plans for
the area.
(b) Compatibility of architecture and design with existing and
anticipated development in the vicinity, including the aspects
of site planning, land coverage, landscaping, appearance, and
scale of structures and open spaces and other features relative
to a harmonious and attractive development of the area.
(c) Convenience and safety of circulation for pedestrians and
vehicles.
(d) Attractiveness, effectiveness and restraint in signing, graphics
and color.
(e) Development scheduling (if phased development) which will
satisfy the above criteria in each phase.
If the proposed development complies with all applicable requirements
and standards of this section and other laws and regulations, and the
approving authority finds that the above criteria are adequately met or
can be met if specified conditions are observed, the Site Plan Review
Committee shall forward the completed application to the Commission
with recommendation that the application for conditional use permit
for a planned condominium development be approved, subject to such
specified conditions. If the Site Plan Review Committee finds that the
proposal cannot be modified to meet the requirements of this section
and the above criteria, the Committee shall recommend the application
for conditional use permit be disapproved. In all cases, findings shall
be made concerning the grounds for approval or disapproval.
g. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Commission, within
15 days after the date of determination of the Commission may appeal
in writing to the City Clerk for a review of the decision by the Council.
The Council, after the filing of such appeal, shall review the matter and
may affirm or reverse the decision of the Commission. The
determination of the Council hereto shall be final and conclusive.
§ 30-18.5 COMPTON § 30-18.6
AO:1030
§ 30-18.6. Prohibited Uses (D). [Ord. #2282 § 24]
The following uses are specifically prohibited in the Planned Development
Zone (D):
§ 30-19. SD SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT ZONE.
§ 30-19.1. Purpose (SD). [Added by Ord. #1640, § 9153.1]
The Specific Development Zone is established to provide more flexibility in
permitted land uses than is allowed by the base zone in certain areas and
greater environmental and architectural control over specific developments
than otherwise be imposed.
§ 30-19.2. Combination With Other Zones (SD). [Added by Ord.
#1640, § 9153.2]
Land classified in the Specific Development Zone may be combined with
any commercial zone and if so classified shall be shown by the addition of
the letters "SD" after the letter designation of the base zone on the Official
Zoning Map of the City.
§ 30-19.3. Uses (SD). [Added by Ord. #1640, § 9153.3; Ord. #2282
§ 25]
The following uses and buildings shall be permitted in the Specific
Development Zone:
a. Commercial marijuana uses, except as permitted by subsection 9-24.4.
b. Marijuana cultivation outdoors upon the grounds of a private residence.
c. Marijuana cultivation indoors that does not comply with Section
30-18.2 paragraphs a, b and c.
a. Principal Permitted Uses.
1. Any use permitted in the C-L (Limited Commercial), C-M
(Commercial Manufacturing) or M-L (Limited Manufacturing)
Zone, except those uses specifically prohibited.
2. Indoor marijuana cultivation is allowed consistent with State law
which permits no more than six live marijuana plants to be planted,
cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private
residence or inside an accessory structure located upon the
grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured as
long as the marijuana cultivation activities comply with the
regulations set forth in paragraph c of subsection 9-24.4.
b. Uses Permitted Subject to a Conditional Use Permit. The following uses
and buildings may be permitted in the Specific Development Zone
provided a Conditional Use Permit has been obtained pursuant to the
provisions of Section 30-26:
§ 30-18.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-19.3
AO:1031
§ 30-19.4. Prohibited Uses (SD). [Added by Ord. #1640, § 9153.4;
Ord. #2282 § 25]
The following uses and building shall be prohibited in the Specific
Development Zone:
§ 30-19.5. Development Regulations (SD). [Added by Ord. #1640,
§ 9153.5]
Any use and building proposed pursuant to this subsection (other than
those uses permitted in the base zone) shall comply with the following
regulations, and any permit issued shall be subject to such provisions as are
established as conditions of approval:
1. Any use and building which requires a Conditional Use Permit in
the base zone or under Section 30-26.
2. Any use and building which requires outside storage or display.
a. Any use and building, the primary purpose of which is the care,
maintenance, repair, sale, rental, towing or storage of vehicles, or the
sale, rental, rebuilding or storage of used vehicle parts.
b. Bars and liquor stores.
c. Billboards.
d. Car washes.
e. Clothing and apparel manufacturing (including shoe manufacturing).
f. Pool halls.
g. Soft drink bottling.
h. Any use and building which, by its nature, produces noise, dust, traffic
involving large trucks, or outside storage that the Architectural Review
Board of the Community Redevelopment Agency of the City deems
incompatible with the surrounding area.
i. Commercial marijuana uses, except as permitted by subsection 9-24.4.
j. Marijuana cultivation outdoors upon the grounds of a private residence.
k. Marijuana cultivation indoors that does not comply with Section
30-19.3a.
a. Types of Development. Uses and buildings other than those permitted
in the base zone shall only be permitted for new developments or on
properties where substantial redevelopment is proposed. Substantial
redevelopment shall mean a project of rehabilitation of buildings and
sites, the cost of which equals or exceeds 40% of the estimated market
value of the land and improvements at the time the project is proposed
§ 30-19.3 COMPTON § 30-19.5
AO:1032
to the City. Estimated market value shall be agreed to by the
Community Redevelopment Agency.
b. Property Development Standards. All development and rehabilitation
plans shall require the explicit approval of the Architectural Review
Board in the manner set forth in subsection 30-19.7 and conform to the
following requirements, unless a variation has been obtained pursuant
to the provisions of subsection 30-19.6.
1. Setback lines. No building shall be constructed upon any parcel
within 25 feet of a front lot line or within 15 feet of a street side lot
line. The Architectural Review Board may impose additional
setback requirements of up to 40 feet from the front lot line and up
to 25 feet from the street side lot line if it finds that:
(a) Such additional restrictions are required to maintain an
aesthetic scale of development because of the proposed
building height or size of a lot; or
(b) Such additional setback is required for the adequate screening
from the general public of exterior noise, dust, or the unsightly
appearance of the structure or building.
In no event shall any improvement except landscaping and vehicle
ingress and egress be allowed within 10 feet of any front or street side
lot line for any parcel, except that a six-foot solid wall of approved
construction and material may be erected at the side street lot line
in place of the ten-foot landscaping easement. Each setback shall
be dedicated to the City as a landscaping easement in perpetuity,
but it shall be the owner's duty to maintain it. If, at the City's sole
option, the City finds that the owner is not maintaining the landscaping
easement properly, it may maintain such easement itself and bill the
owner. No building permit shall be issued unless such dedication, in
form satisfactory to the City, shall have been made by the owner and
accepted on behalf of the City.
2. Buildings. Buildings shall be of a tiltup concrete type or its
equivalent. There shall be no corrugated metal buildings allowed.
3. Architectural style of buildings and other improvements. All
buildings and other improvements constructed upon a parcel of
land shall be of a similar or compatible architectural style. All
buildings shall be limited to the highest architectural and
engineering standards and should exhibit a high degree of
imagination and utility. To the fullest extent possible, all buildings
and other improvements shall be so designed as to be compatible
with surrounding buildings and be in scale with the surrounding
area. All air conditioning or other equipment located on the roof of
a building shall be screened from public view in a manner approved
by the Architectural Review Board.
§ 30-19.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-19.5
AO:1033
4. Landscaping. Every parcel of land shall be landscaped so as to
positively enhance the attractiveness of the development, to aid in
circulation, and to accentuate the architectural composition of the
buildings and the identification of the site as a modern and unified
development. In particular, the following shall apply:
(a) A minimum of 10% of the total area of a parcel to be developed
shall be landscaped with adequate provisions for irrigation.
The required landscaping easement shall be included in this
computation.
(b) A total of one tree for every 50 linear feet of street frontage
and one tree for every 10,000 square feet or fraction thereof of
parcel area shall be planted.
(c) All landscaping materials shall be of a size and maturity as
determined by the Architectural Review Board so as to be in
general scale with the development proposal.
(d) All landscaping shall be irrigated by an automatically
controlled sprinkler system.
(e) All landscaping shall be maintained in a well-kept, thriving
condition; and any destroyed or diseased trees, shrubs or other
vegetation shall be replaced as necessary.
(f) Berms or other natural-type land forms created by shrubs or
low-branching trees shall be encouraged in lieu of fences
(where the same are not required for security or visual
screening) for the articulation of vertical borders, definition of
circulation routes, or closure of constructed vistas.
(g) All buildings shall be set in a park-like atmosphere and be
bordered by landscaping whenever possible.
(h) In general, unrelieved parking areas without any landscaping
to soften their appearance should be avoided.
5. Signs.
(a) Purpose. All signs shall be for the purpose of identification or
direction only and shall contain no advertising; except that a
company logo or slogan may, at the option of the Architectural
Review Board, be considered identification.
(b) Restrictions. There shall be no revolving, flashing or moving
signs permitted. No pennants, bunting or similar devices for
commercial display shall be permitted; except that for a period
not to exceed 30 days, bona fide real estate agent may erect
open house flags to advertise properties either for sale or
lease.
§ 30-19.5 COMPTON § 30-19.5
AO:1034
(c) Regulations governing permitted signs. All signs, including
wall-painted "supergraphics," shall be approved by the
Architectural Review Board. In making this determination, the
Architectural Review Board shall be guided by the following
considerations:
(1) In general, freestanding signs shall be discouraged;
however, one freestanding sign which identifies a specific
development may be allowed if it is in scale with the
development and is of good design.
(2) All signs in any given development shall be of compatible
proportions and size with each other and with the
development.
(3) Each applicant shall prepare, and the Architectural
Review Board shall approve, designs for typical individual
tenant identification signs at the time of submittal of these
plans to the Architectural Review Board. Such typical
design shall include, but not be limited to, criteria on sign
size, shape, location, construction and materials. All signs
shall be in conformance with one overall theme as chosen
by the applicant and as approved by the Architectural
Review Board.
(4) In general, it shall not be permissible to place signs in the
landscape easement, except that the Architectural Review
Board may approve such signs if they are:
a. Freestanding signs as allowed in paragraph c1 above.
b. Monument signs that are in scale with the
development and are an integral part of the
landscaping design approved by the Architectural
Review Board.
(5) No sign may project over the roof line of a building nor
shall any sign exceed 10% of the total facade area for any
tenant.
(6) Notwithstanding the above, the Architectural Review
Board may reject any proposed sign or combination of
signs if, in its estimate, the design, location, color or size is
incompatible with the development in the surrounding
area.
6. Loading and unloading spaces. In general, loading and unloading
docks shall be constructed at the rear of buildings. Any docks at the
sides or front of buildings shall be screened so as to be visually
unobtrusive.
§ 30-19.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-19.5
AO:1035
§ 30-19.6. Variations (SD). [Added by Ord. #1640, § 9153.6]
Under certain circumstances, a variation from the provisions of Section
30-19 may be permitted. In order to permit such a variation, the
Architectural Review Board must determine that:
7. Utilities. Every applicant shall make every effort to underground all
on-site utilities. The Community Redevelopment Agency will
facilitate this with off-site undergrounding of utilities to the extent
feasible as determined by that Agency.
8. Trash. All trash enclosures shall be shielded from public view by a
block wall, or fence and landscaping.
9. Conservation of energy. All construction shall incorporate an
awareness of and commitment to the conservation of total energy
used, specifically the consumption of fossil fuels. The use of
innovative design and construction techniques, such as increased
insulation, reduction of heat loss surfaces, solar energy devices,
sun shades, etc., will be encouraged.
10. Exterior lighting. All lighting in buildings, landscaping, parking
lots, and similar facilities shall be directed away from all adjoining
and nearby residential property. Such lighting shall be arranged
and controlled so as not to create a nuisance or hazard to traffic or
to the living environment. This provision is also applicable to arc
lights, searchlights and similar lighting devices.
11. Maintenance. Each owner shall be responsible for the maintenance
in good order, repair and condition of the exterior of all buildings,
structures and other improvements, all landscaping, and all
walkways and driveways. Each owner shall repair or replace such
improvements upon the parcel if the same should be damaged or
destroyed by any casualty.
a. Unless the variation is permitted, practical difficulties and unnecessary
hardships would occur inconsistent with the general purpose and intent
of these provisions and the Redevelopment Plan for the Walnut
Industrial Park;
b. There are exceptional circumstances or conditions applicable to the
property or the intended development which do not apply generally to
other properties having the same standards, restrictions, and controls;
c. Permitting the variation will not be materially detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the area; and
d. Permitting the variation will not be contrary to the objectives of these
provisions and the Redevelopment Plan for the Walnut Industrial Park.
§ 30-19.5 COMPTON § 30-19.6
AO:1036
§ 30-19.7. Procedures (SD). [Added by Ord. #1640, § 9153.7]
The following procedures shall apply to any development proposed under
Section 30-19:
§ 30-20. GENERAL REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
§ 30-20.1. Purpose. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9160.1]
The purposes of the general regulations and exceptions of this Chapter
are to allow certain exceptions under specified conditions to the usual
In permitting any such variation, the Architectural Review Board shall impose
such conditions as are necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare,
and to assure compliance with the purposes of these provisions and the
Redevelopment Plan for the Walnut Industrial Park.
a. Architectural Review and Approval. No building, structure or other
improvement shall be commenced, erected, placed or altered on any
parcel unless the plans and specifications showing the plot layout, all
exterior elevations, structural design, materials and colors, parking,
signs and landscaping shall have been submitted to and approved in
writing by the Architectural Review Board, which may condition its
approval upon the implementation of any recommendations, limitations
or determinations not in conflict with the provisions of this Section
30-19. No permit shall be issued for the new construction or substantial
rehabilitation of any building, structure or other improvement covered
by said provisions until approval has been granted by the Architectural
Review Board. If the Architectural Review Board fails to approve or
disapprove a proposed design, plan, location, or other item within 90
days after plans and specifications have been submitted, approval will
not be required, and the provisions of this subsection 30-19.7 will be
deemed to have been fully complied with. The requirement of approval
set forth herein is in addition to, and not substituted for, any and all
other restrictions herein contained.
b. Appeals. An applicant may appeal an adverse decision of the
Architectural Review Board to the Council. Within 10 days from the
mailing of the notice of decision of the Architectural Review Board, the
appellant shall file an appeal in duplicate with the City Clerk, who shall
immediately forward the duplicate to the Council. The appeal shall set
forth the grounds relied upon by the appellant. Within 10 days following
the filing of the appeal, the Council shall set the matter for hearing and
shall give notice of the time and place for said hearing to the appellant.
The Council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, the decision of the
Architectural Review Board or may modify any decision or
determination, or may impose such conditions as the facts warrant, and
its decision or determination shall be final. Any hearing may be
continued from time to time.
§ 30-19.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-20.1
AO:1037
requirements of this Chapter and to provide for general regulations
applicable to all zone classifications.
§ 30-20.2. Area. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9160.2; Ord. #2101, § 14]
§ 30-20.3. Yards. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9160.3; Ord. #1733, § 1;
Ord. #1758, § 1; Ord. #2222, § 1]
a. Lot Areas Less Than Required. Where a person either owns or has a
right of possession to any lot or parcel of land having less area than
required by this Chapter by virtue of a duly recorded deed or contract
of sale, the required area shall mean the area of such lot or parcel of
land provided the deed or contract of sale, by which such right of
possession was separated, was recorded prior to the following dates:
1. In all residential zones: September 20, 1946;
2. In the Automobile Parking Zone (P): February 20, 1951; and
3. In all other zones: April 13, 2004.
b. Substandard Lots. When several previously subdivided contiguous lots,
each having less than the required area and width, are acquired by one
owner, the required area shall mean the total area of the resulting
parcel and all future development shall conform to the provisions of this
Chapter.
c. Parcels Divided by City Boundaries. Where a parcel of land which would
otherwise have been shown as one lot is divided into two or more lots
because of a City boundary line, the required area shall mean the total
area of such parcel of land.
d. Lot Areas Affected by Street Widening.
1. Where a building or structure is located on property acquired for
public use, such building or structure may be relocated on the same
lot or parcel of land although the lot area regulations of this
Chapter cannot reasonably be complied with. Further, where any
part of such a building or structure is acquired for public use, the
remainder of such building or structure may be repaired,
reconstructed or remodeled with the same or similar kinds of
materials used in the existing building.
2. If a lot or parcel of land contains the required area, and less than
45% of such lot or parcel of land is acquired for public use, the
remainder shall be considered to comply with the lot area
requirements of this Chapter.
a. Permitted Projections into Required Yards.
1. Fire escapes may protrude into any rear yard not more than four
feet and into any side yard not more than three feet.
§ 30-20.1 COMPTON § 30-20.3
AO:1038
2. Fireplaces, water heater closets, cornices, canopies, eaves, belt
courses, sills and other similar architectural features may protrude
into a front or rear yard not more than four feet and into a side yard
not more than six inches for each one foot of required side yard
width.
3. Open, unenclosed stairways or balconies not covered by a roof or
canopy may protrude into a required front or rear yard not more
than four feet.
4. Uncovered porches, platforms, or landing places which do not
extend above the level of the first floor of the main building may
protrude into any front yard or rear yard not more than six feet.
Any open-work railing not more than 30 inches in height may be
installed or constructed on any such porch, platform, or landing
place.
b. Use of Required Yards. Required yard or other open spaces around an
existing building, or any building erected on or after May 4, 1978, shall
not be considered as providing a yard or other open space for any other
building on an adjoining lot or building site.
c. Through Lots. Through lots or parcels of land 180 feet or more in depth
in any residential zone may be improved as two separate lots or parcels
of land with the dividing line midway between the street frontages
provided each resulting half shall not be less than the required area and
subject to the controls applying to the street upon which each such half
faces. Through lots or parcels of land having a depth of less than 180
feet in any residential zone may be improved as two separate lots or
parcels of land subject to approval by the Commission of a plot plan
showing that each parcel shall not be less than the required area and to
the controls applying to the street upon which each such parcel faces.
d. Property Development Standards for Schools, Churches, Institutions,
Small and Large Family Group Homes and Other Residential Care
Facilities in Residential Zones.
1. Setbacks. In all residential zones no building shall hereafter be
erected, structurally altered, or used for a school, church,
institution, large family group home, or other similar use permitted
under the use regulations of this Chapter, unless such buildings are
removed at least 15 feet from every boundary line of a property
included in any residential zone and provided that no front yard as
required in the zones nor any side yard as required in this
subsection d1 shall be used for play or parking purposes.
2. Overconcentration. In all residential zones no building shall
hereafter be erected, structurally altered, or used for a school,
church, institution, small or large group home or other residential
care facility within 300 feet of any existing or proposed similar
facility.
§ 30-20.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-20.3
AO:1039
§ 30-20.4. Height. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9160.4]
e. Storage and Parking in Yards.
1. No portion of any residential yard area visible from a public rightof-
way shall be used for the storage of motor vehicles, tents,
trailers, airplanes, boats, or parts thereof, garbage or rubbish
receptacles or the temporary hanging of clothing or rugs.
2. No portion of any residential yard area shall be used for the storage
of rubbish, garbage, junk, dismantled or inoperative vehicles,
furniture equipment, appliances, or the storage of building
materials (except building materials for use on the premises stored
thereon during the time a valid permit is in effect for construction
on the premises).
3. "Storage" as used in this subsection shall mean the presence for a
period of 48 consecutive hours or more of such restricted items.
4. No portion of any unpaved front yard or street side yard shall be
used for the parking of motor vehicles, airplanes, boats or trailers.
5. Except for violation of paragraph 4 above, all other violations of
this subsection shall constitute an infraction.
f. Paving of Yards. Not more than 25% of any required front or street side
yard shall be paved; provided, however, this requirement shall not be
construed to reduce the paved area required for parking ingress and
egress.
a. Exceptions. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no building
shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed the
height limit established by this Chapter for the zone in which such
building is located. The following are exceptions:
1. In the thirty-five-foot height zones, public or semi-public buildings,
schools, hospitals, or institutions may be erected to a height not
exceeding 75 feet when the required front, side, and rear yards are
increased an additional one foot for each four feet in height that
such buildings exceed 35 feet.
2. Roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks,
ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and
maintain the buildings and fire or parapet walls, skylights,
flagpoles, chimneys, domestic radio and television masts, or similar
structures may be erected above the maximum height permitted in
each zone. No structure shall be allowed for the purposes of
providing additional floor space.
b. Height Limits Around Airports. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code respecting height limitations, no building or structure erected
or structurally altered on or after May 4, 1978, shall exceed a total
§ 30-20.3 COMPTON § 30-20.4
AO:1040
§ 30-20.5. Miscellaneous. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9160.5; Ord.
#1733,§ 1; Ord. #1921, § 1; Ord. #1941, §§ 10, 11; Ord. #2025, § 1;
Ord. #2026, § 1]
height of 35 feet on land located within 1,000 feet of an airport. This
provision shall apply regardless of the zone classification of the land.
a. Trash Storage. All trash, refuse, garbage, combustible and
noncombustible rubbish, garden refuse, and/or litter in any zone within
the City shall be placed in and kept in receptacles, and, where
applicable, such receptacles shall conform with the provisions of
Chapter 21. All such receptacles shall be kept and stored in such
manner as to be concealed from the public view, except for the purpose
of collection and removal as provided in Chapter 21 and where such
receptacles are for the primary use of customers on the premises.
b. Trailers.
1. No trailer shall be used for living or sleeping quarters in any zone,
except when such trailer is located in an approved trailer park.
2. A trailer may be used as a temporary structure for temporary
occupancy by operators of fireworks stands and Christmas tree lots
but not to exceed a period of 30 days within any calendar year.
3. The Planning Director may permit the temporary use of trailers for
offices and classrooms, except that the continuance of such use for
more than six months shall require a conditional use permit from
the Commission.
c. Corrugated Metal. Corrugated metal shall not be used as an exterior
wall, fence, or roof in any zone.
d. Fences and Walls. The provisions of Section 30-44 of this Chapter shall
apply.
e. Small Collection Facilities for Schools, Churches and Community
Facilities. Schools, churches and community facilities which are
licensed by the City of Compton may operate a small collection facility
on the premises a maximum of 10 days a year (the provisions of
subsection 30-12.4i of this Chapter shall apply).
f. Compliance with Trash Enclosure Requirements. All uses which do not
have a trash enclosure in conformance with the provisions of this
Chapter shall be required to comply on or before one year from the date
of adoption unless a variance is granted pursuant to the provisions of
the Chapter.
g. Trash Bins and/or Containers. It shall be unlawful to cause any trash bin
and/or container to be or remain outside of the trash enclosure, where
such enclosure is required by this Code, except during trash collection
operations. The terms of this section shall apply equally to owners,
§ 30-20.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-20.5
AO:1041
§ 30-20.6. Outside Storage and Display. [Ord. #2101, § 14]
This subsection is established to provide standards for the outside storage
and display of merchandise and equipment in the commercial and
manufacturing zones.
operators and lessees of the property at which the offense occurs, and
to persons engaged in the collection of trash from said premises.
h. Penalties. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, failure to keep
and store trash bins and/or containers within a trash enclosure, except
during trash collection operations, as required by this Chapter is
hereby deemed an infraction unless the City Attorney files the violations
as a misdemeanor whenever a continuing violation is shown to exist. A
continuing violation is deemed to be two or more violations for the same
or different sections of the Municipal Code whereupon the violator was
previously cited for an infraction.
i. Razor Wire, Concertina Wire, Cut Glass. Razor wire, concertina wire
and/or cut glass shall not be used on the exterior surface of any wall,
fence, building, structure, or roof in any zone within the City, unless an
exemption has been granted by the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, when such use is deemed necessary and there exists no
reasonable alternatives for security purposes. An exemption may be
granted only for property located in a Light Manufacturing Zone (M-L)
or Heavy Manufacturing Zone (M-H).
a. Limited Commercial (C-L) and Commercial Manufacturing (C-M) Zones.
All uses, storage and display shall be located entirely within a building
except for the following:
1. Automobile sale or rental display areas (subject to approval by the
Architectural Review Board);
2. Automobile service stations (a maximum of 30 square feet may be
used to display, but not store, auto related items);
3. Childcare centers (play areas);
4. Carnivals, temporary;
5. Christmas tree lots;
6. Employee and customer parking (24 hours or less);
7. Florist shops (a maximum of 30 square feet may be used to display
flowers and plants);
8. Monument and tombstone sales (a maximum of 30 square feet may
be used to display, but not store, monuments and tombstones);
9. Motorcycle sales display areas (subject to approval by the
Architectural Review Board);
§ 30-20.5 COMPTON § 30-20.6
AO:1042
10. Pottery and porcelain sales (a maximum of 30 square feet may be
used to display, but not store, pottery and porcelain);
11. Nurseries, horticultural;
12. Restaurants, outside seating areas (subject to approval by the
Architectural Review Board);
13. Special outside sales may be permitted as an accessory use to any
licensed use provided, however, such sales shall require a separate
license and shall not be held on more than 12 days in any calendar
year;
14. Shoeshine and newsstands (subject to approval by the
Architectural Review Board); and
15. Storage of commercial vehicles, limited to four operating vehicles
(cars, pickup trucks or vans only) maintained as an accessory to a
permitted use.
b. Limited Manufacturing (M-L) and Heavy Manufacturing (M-H) Zones.
The outside storage and display of merchandise, materials or
equipment in conjunction with a permitted use shall be permitted as
follows:
1. Any outside storage or display permitted in the Limited
Commercial (C-L) or Commercial Manufacturing (C-M) zones;
2. Accessory storage and display areas not to exceed 30% of the size
of the building (subject to screening and approval by the
Architectural Review Board);
3. Accessory parking of service vehicles, including trucks (24 hours or
less);
4. Boat sales (subject to approval by the Architectural Review Board);
5. Truck, trailer and recreational vehicles sales and rental display
areas (subject to approval of the Architectural Review Board);
c. Development Standards. Except for those uses listed in paragraphs a
and b, above, all outside operations, display and storage, including
equipment, shall comply with the following standards:
1. Fences, Walls and Gates.
(a) All outside storage and display shall be conducted within an
area enclosed by solid fences, walls and gates developed and
constructed in accordance with Section 30-44 of this Chapter;
(b) All fences, walls and gates visible from a public right-of-way
shall conform to the provisions of the Uniform Paint Ordinance
and the Corridor Improvement Plan and shall be landscaped or
treated with an anti-graffiti substance approved by the City;
§ 30-20.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-20.6
AO:1043
§ 30-21. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.78
§ 30-21.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2010, § 1]
This section establishes standards for off-street parking and loading in
order to:
§ 30-21.2. General Regulations. [Ord. #2010, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 15]
2. Paving. The entire yard shall be paved with a minimum thickness of
two inches of asphalt on a minimum of four inches of aggregate
base material or a minimum of four inches of Portland cement
concrete or other approved permanent impervious surfacing
material.
3. Parking. The provisions of Section 30-21 of this Chapter shall apply.
4. Landscaping. The provisions of Section 30-43 of this Chapter shall
apply.
5. General.
(a) No materials, equipment or wrecked or dismantled vehicles
shall be placed or allowed to remain outside the enclosed yard
area or stored at a height greater than that of the surrounding
fence, wall or gate.
(b) Required parking spaces shall not be used for the storage of
materials or parking of equipment or wrecked or dismantled
vehicles.
6. Violations. The violation of this subsection is an infraction. The
penalty for the violation of this subsection is a fine of $50 for the
first violation, $75 for the second violation and $100 for each
additional violation of this subsection within one year. The City
Attorney shall have the authority to file the violation as a
misdemeanor when a continuing violation is shown to exist. A
continuing violation is deemed to be two or more violations for the
same or different sections of the Municipal Code whereupon the
violator was previously cited for an infraction.
a. Provide adequate off-street parking and loading facilities.
b. Ensure that interior site circulation does not interfere with vehicular or
pedestrian movement.
c. Ensure that vehicle movement and loading activities associated with a
use do not interfere with circulation on public rights-of-way.
78.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1557, 1650,
1733 and 1784.
§ 30-20.6 COMPTON § 30-21.2
AO:1044
a. Applicability. These regulations apply to all land uses, buildings and
structures and shall be the minimum standards for all off-street parking
and loading facilities. These regulations shall apply to all parking in all
zones, whether required by this section or installed for the convenience
of property owners or users.
b. Provision of Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading shall
be provided and developed in accordance with this section for:
1. Any new building.
2. Any addition or enlargement of an existing building.
3. Any change in the occupancy of any building or the manner in
which any use is conducted that would result in additional parking
spaces being required.
c. Conformance. Parking facilities constructed or substantially
reconstructed subsequent to the adoption of this section shall conform
to the standards set forth in this section and any design guidelines
subsequently established by the City and/or Community Redevelopment
Agency.
d. Pre-existing Buildings and Uses.
1. Nonresidential buildings and uses that were legally established
prior to adoption of this section may continue without additional
off-street parking and loading provided that existing off-street
parking and loading is not reduced, the building is not expanded
and the use is not altered or intensified in such a way as to increase
required parking per the provisions of this section.
2. Residences that were legally constructed prior to adoption of this
section may continue without additional off-street parking provided
that existing off-street parking is not reduced, the number of
residential units is not increased and any expansion to the size of
the residence conforms to the following standards:
(a) Residences with legally converted garages may not be
expanded without restoration of the original garage or
construction of a replacement garage.
(b) Residences constructed without an enclosed garage may be
expanded by 10% of dwelling unit size or 100 square feet,
whichever is greater, without provision of enclosed parking.
(c) Residences constructed with a one-car garage may be
expanded by 20% of dwelling unit size or 200 square feet,
whichever is greater, without provision of additional enclosed
parking.
(d) Residences constructed with a two-car garage may expanded
to the maximum size permitted by the base zone.
§ 30-21.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-21.2
AO:1045
§ 30-21.3. Parking Space Requirements. [Ord. #2010, § 1; Ord.
#2101, § 15]
(e) Single-family dwellings in which the original construction
design effectively precludes construction of additional garages
may be expanded by 30% of dwelling unit size or 300 square
feet, whichever is greater, without provision of additional
enclosed parking.
(f) Additions to residences made in accordance with this
subsection may not occupy the only portion of the lot or parcel
of land which could be used for required garages or access
thereto.
(g) All residences will be presumed to have been constructed with
provisions for off-street parking that conformed to the
standards in existence at the time of construction, unless
substantial evidence to the contrary is presented.
(h) All residences that restore a previously converted garage shall
be credited with an additional 200 square feet when computing
the maximum size of an addition.
(i) The size of residential units within multiple-family dwellings
may be expanded as part of a residential rehabilitation plan
that does not increase the total number of bedrooms in the
project and has been approved by the Architectural Review
Board.
3. When a building or dwelling is destroyed to more than 49% of its
replacement value, its restoration must include provisions for offstreet
parking which conform to this section.
e. Restrictions.
1. Unless otherwise specified, on-street parking within public or
private streets, alleys, driveways or drives shall not be used to
satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this section.
2. Required parking spaces must be available for the use of residents,
customers or employees and may not be used for the storage of
vehicles, equipment or goods.
3. Required parking spaces may not be assigned in any way to a use
on another site.
a. Calculation of Spaces.
1. Whenever the computation of the number of off-street parking
spaces results in a fraction of a space, the fraction shall be rounded
to the next whole number.
§ 30-21.2 COMPTON § 30-21.3
AO:1046
2. When there are two or more separate uses on a site, the required
parking for the site shall be the sum of the required parking and
loading for the individual uses.
3. When a use has more than 20% of its floor area in a distinct
function (e.g., office, warehouse or retail), the required parking is
calculated separately for each function. Where separation of
functions is not possible, the most restrictive parking standard
shall be applied.
4. The minimum number of required off-street parking spaces is
determined by the type of use and is not changed by the zone in
which it is located.
b. Parking Space Dimensions.
1. Standard parking spaces shall not be less than nine feet in width
and 20 feet in length.
2. Parallel parking spaces shall not be less than nine feet in width and
22 feet in length.
3. Compact parking spaces shall not be less than eight feet in width
and 16 feet in length and shall be located adjacent to one another.
c. Number of Parking Spaces. The minimum number of parking spaces
required for each land use is shown in Table 30-21.A.79 The requirement
for a use not specifically mentioned shall be the same as for a use that
has similar traffic-generating characteristics. The Planning Director
shall determine what constitutes similar traffic-generating
characteristics and the number of spaces required for accessory or
incidental uses.
d. Type of Spaces.
1. Unless otherwise specified, all requirements for parking are
presumed to be non-enclosed.
2. Where "enclosed" parking is specified, it shall be interpreted as a
parking space which has a combination of solid walls and garage
door(s) on four sides and a roof.
3. Where "covered" parking is specified, it shall be interpreted as a
parking space which has a permanent roof (e.g., carport).
4. Where "driveway" parking is specified, it shall be interpreted as a
parking space located in an existing driveway which may block
access to a garage or another driveway space.
e. Compact Car Spaces. Parking for compact cars may be used to satisfy a
portion of the required parking. Compact spaces shall be marked
79.Editor's Note: The table referred to herein may be found at the end of this subsection.
§ 30-21.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-21.3
AO:1047
"COMPACT" on the foot of the stall. The maximum number of compact
spaces allowed is as follows:
1. Nonresidential developments with a minimum of 10 spaces shall be
allowed to have 30% of the total spaces as compact parking.
2. Residential developments may have 30% of the guest parking
spaces as compact.
f. Motorcycle Parking. Facilities with 25 or more parking spaces shall
provide at least one designated parking area for use by motorcycles.
Those areas designated for use by motorcycles shall consist of a
minimum usable area of 56 square feet and shall be clearly marked.
g. Bicycle Parking.
1. Facilities for bicycle parking shall be provided at the rate of one
bicycle space per every 20 vehicle spaces required for all
commercial, retail, office, food-related, industrial and warehousing
uses. Where the application of the above standard results in a
fraction of a space, the fraction shall be rounded to the next whole
number.
2. Bicycle parking facilities may consist of a stationary bicycle rack,
cement slab or vertical meter bar where the bicyclist supplies a
chain and/or lock to secure the bicycle or an enclosed box with a
locking door, typically called a bicycle locker, where a single
bicyclist has access to a bicycle storage compartment.
3. Requests for exemptions from bicycle parking requirements shall
be made in writing to the Planning Director. Exemptions shall be
submitted and processed concurrently with project plans and/or
applications. Exemptions may be granted depending upon the
location of the use in respect to the urban area, the nature of the
use and hours of operation and the accessibility of the site by
bicycle at present and in the future.
h. Location of Parking Spaces.
1. Required residential parking shall be located on the same lot or
parcel of land as the use that the parking facilities are intended to
serve.
2. Required nonresidential parking shall be located as follows:
(a) On the same lot or parcel of land as the use which the facilities
serve; or
(b) On a separate lot or parcel not more than 300 feet from the
perimeter of the lot or parcel of land the parking facilities are
intended to serve, provided, that:
§ 30-21.3 COMPTON § 30-21.3
AO:1048
(1) Such parking shall be located within the same block or
within an adjacent block separated only by an alley from
the lot or parcel of land the parking facilities are intended
to serve;
(2) Such parking location shall be approved by the Planning
Director; and
(3) There shall be recorded in the office of the County
Recorder a covenant by the owner or owners of such lot or
parcel of land, for the benefit of the City, to the effect that
the required parking shall be maintained as long as the
use or building exists.
Table 30-21.A
Parking Space Requirements
Land Use Number of Required Spaces
RESIDENTIAL USES
Accessory Dwelling Units 1 open space/unit
Boarding Houses, Dormitories, Fraternities,
Sororities, Monasteries and Convents
2 enclosed spaces plus 1 space for each 300
square feet of gross floor area
Community Care Facilities (including senior
and residential congregate care in structures
designed as dwellings)
6 or fewer guests 2 enclosed spaces
7 or more guests 2 enclosed spaces, plus 1 space/3 guests
Condominiums and Townhouses 2 enclosed spaces/unit, plus 1 guest space/4
units
Mobile Home Parks 1 enclosed space and 1 open space/mobile
home site, plus 1 guest space/4 mobile home
sites
Multiple-Family Dwellings
2 or fewer bedrooms in an attached unit 1.5 enclosed spaces/unit, plus 1 guest space/4
units
2 or fewer bedrooms in a detached unit 2 enclosed spaces/unit, plus 1 guest space/4
units
3 or more bedrooms 2 enclosed spaces/unit, plus 1 guest space/4
units
Senior Citizen Apartments (80% 1 bedroom -
62 years or older)
1 covered space/unit, plus 1 guest space/4
units
Single-Family Detached Dwellings 2 enclosed spaces/dwelling
Residential Day Care Facilities
§ 30-21.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-21.3
AO:1049
Table 30-21.A
Parking Space Requirements
Land Use Number of Required Spaces
8 or fewer children 2 enclosed spaces
9 to 14 children 2 enclosed spaces, plus 2 open spaces (may be
in driveway)
COMMERCIAL USES
Ambulance Service, Taxi Service and Similar
Uses
1 space/250 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1.5 spaces/service vehicle
Automobile-Related
Auto Accessory Installation (includes auto
glass, car stereos, phones and alarms)
2 spaces/service bay or 2 spaces/500 square
feet of gross floor area if no bays are defined
Auto Repair (includes engines, electrical,
body and fender and spray painting)
3 spaces/service bay or 3 spaces/500 square
feet of gross floor area if no bays are defined
Auto Sales and Rental 1 space/250 square feet office area, plus 1
space/400 square feet of indoor sales area,
plus 1 space/2,000 square feet of outdoor
sales area (may not be located in display area)
Car Washes
Automated 6 spaces/tunnel, plus 5 spaces for queuing
Hand 2 spaces/service bay or 1 space/500 square
feet of paved washing area
Self Service 1 space/washing station, plus 2 spaces/
washing station for queuing (excludes
vacuuming areas)
Service Stations 1 space/pump island, plus 2 spaces/service
bay or 2 spaces/500 square feet of repair area
if no bays are defined, plus 1 space/250
square feet of retail sales area
Banks, Savings and Loan and Financial
Institutions
1 space/250 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 lane for each drive-up window with 5
spaces for queuing per lane
Building Materials Sales and Service 1 space/500 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space/1,000 square feet of outdoor
display, sales and storage area
Food Services
Banquet Halls, Rental Halls 1 space/50 square feet of banquet hall area,
plus parking for accessory uses
§ 30-21.3 COMPTON § 30-21.3
AO:1050
Table 30-21.A
Parking Space Requirements
Land Use Number of Required Spaces
Restaurants, Cafes, Fast Food Restaurants,
Bars, Cocktail Lounges and Other Eating
Establishments
1 space/100 square feet of gross floor area,
including outdoor seating area
Take Out (16 or fewer seats) 1 space/250 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space per delivery vehicle
Drive-Through Window 5 spaces for queuing space per window
Garden Shops, Nurseries, Pottery Sales and
Similar Uses with Outside Display Areas
1 space/250 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space/1,000 square feet of outdoor
display, sales and storage area
General Retail, Service and Office (includes all
commercial uses not listed herein)
1 space/250 square feet of gross floor area
Hotels and Motels 1 space/guest room, plus 2 spaces/manager's
unit, plus parking for accessory uses
Swap Meets
Indoor 1 space/250 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space/vendor
Outdoor 1 space/200 square feet of site, plus 1 space/
vendor
INDUSTRIAL USES
General Industrial (includes manufacturing,
assembly, warehousing, packaging, research
and development and services uses)
1 square feet of parking area (including
spaces, circulation, landscaping and
walkways) for each 1 square feet of first floor
gross floor area and 3 square feet of
subsequent floor gross floor area, but no less
than 1 space/850 square feet of gross floor
area (office uses of more than 20% of gross
floor area computed at 1 space/250 square
feet of gross floor area)
Mini-Storage and Self-Storage 1 space/1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Recreational Vehicles and Boat Storage 1 space/2,500 square feet of storage area
(may not be located in storage area)
Recycling Centers 1 space/2,000 square feet of site (minimum 4
spaces, plus provisions for adequate queuing)
Transportation and Storage Yards (includes
areas used for parking fleet vehicles,
equipment and materials)
1 space/1,500 square feet of yard area, plus 1
space/1,000 square feet of gross floor area
(office use of more than 20% of gross floor
area is computed at 1 space/250 square feet of
gross floor area)
§ 30-21.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-21.3
AO:1051
Table 30-21.A
Parking Space Requirements
Land Use Number of Required Spaces
COMMUNITY AND RECREATIONAL USES
Arcades and Pool Halls (more than 2 machines
or tables)
1 space/150 square feet of gross floor area
Bowling Alleys 3 spaces/lane, plus parking for accessory uses
Churches and Other Religious Meeting Places,
Conference and Meeting Facilities,
Mortuaries, Theaters, Auditoriums and Other
Places of Public Assembly
1 space/3 fixed seats or 1 space/54 inches of
bench seating or 1 space/40 square feet of
assembly area where no seats are provided,
whichever is greater
Communications Facilities (unmanned) 1 space/facility
Convalescent Hospitals, Nursing Homes,
Sanitariums, Hospitals and Medical Centers
1 space/250 square feet of gross floor area,
plus parking for public assembly and
accessory uses
Dance Halls 1 space/25 square feet of dance floor area,
plus parking for assembly and accessory uses
Driving Ranges 1 space/tee, plus parking for accessory uses
Gaming and Bingo Facilities 1 space/3 seats, plus parking for accessory
uses
Golf Courses
Miniature 2 spaces/hole, plus parking for accessory uses
Pitch and Putt 5 spaces/hole, plus parking for accessory uses
Regulation 9 spaces/hole, plus parking for accessory uses
Gyms, Gymnasiums, Spas and Health Clubs 1 space/100 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space/1,000 square feet of outdoor play
or field area, plus parking for accessory uses
Libraries 1 space/250 square feet of gross floor area
Miscellaneous Recreational Facilities (includes
ball fields, other athletic fields, skating rinks,
riding clubs and stables)
1 space/100 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space/1,000 square feet of outdoor play
area, plus parking for accessory uses
Movie Theaters 1 space/3 seats
Museums and Art Galleries 1 space/250 square feet of gross floor area
Public Utility Facilities 1 space/250 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1.5 spaces/fleet vehicle
RV Parks 1 overnight space/recreational vehicle, plus 1
parking space/recreational vehicle
Schools
Nursery, Pre-School, Day Care 1 space/5 children
§ 30-21.3 COMPTON § 30-21.3
AO:1052
§ 30-21.4. Handicap Parking Requirements. [Ord. #2010, § 1]
Facilities for handicap parking shall be provided in accordance with the
standards and requirements of the State of California and the Americans
with Disabilities Act. Handicap spaces shall count toward fulfilling the offstreet
parking requirements established by this section.
§ 30-21.5. Parking Area Design. [Ord. #2010, § 1]
Table 30-21.A
Parking Space Requirements
Land Use Number of Required Spaces
Elementary and Junior High School 2 spaces/classroom
High Schools 7 spaces/classroom
Colleges and Universities 10 spaces/classroom
Trade and Business Schools 1 space/35 square feet of classroom area
Art, Dance and Martial Arts Schools 1 space/employee, plus 1 space/3 students at
maximum capacity
Spectator Bleachers 1 space/54 inches of seating
Swimming Pools 1 space/125 square feet of water surface
Tennis, Handball and Racquetball Courts 3 spaces/court, plus parking for accessory
uses
Union Halls, Lodges and Clubs 1 space/250 square feet of office, plus parking
for public assembly and accessory uses
a. General. All parking areas shall be designed and developed in order to
provide adequate space for vehicle maneuvering and circulation as well
as paving, lighting and landscaping.
b. Aisle Width. Aisle width shall conform to the standards contained in
Table 30-21.B.80
c. Turnaround Space. A vehicle turn-around space shall be provided at the
end of all dead-end parking aisles. Other turnaround arrangements
providing the same maneuverability are subject to approval by the
Planning Director.
d. Vertical Clearance. Vertical clearance for parking spaces shall conform
to the standards contained in Table 30-21.C81 When handicap parking is
provided, vertical clearance shall comply with the California Code of
Regulations (Title 24, Part 2, Chapter 2-71).
80.Editor's Note: The table referred to herein may be found at the end of this subsection.
81.Editor's Note: The table referred to herein may be found at the end of this subsection.
§ 30-21.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-21.5
AO:1053
e. Motorcycle and Bicycle Facilities. Motorcycle and bicycle parking
facilities shall be separated from automobile parking spaces by either a
wall, fence, curb or by at least five feet of open space where parking is
prohibited. Signage indicating the availability and location of
motorcycle or bicycle parking shall be installed at the main entrance of
a building or parking lot in a location visible and legible to users of the
subject property.
f. Residential Parking. Parking for residential uses shall comply with the
provisions of this subsection:
1. There shall be a minimum unobstructed inside dimension of nine
feet by 20 feet for a private one-car garage or carport and 18 feet
by 20 feet for a private two-car garage or carport. The minimum
width for a garage door shall be eight feet for a one-car garage and
16 feet for a two-car garage. Nonstructural improvements such as
wall-mounted shelves or cabinets may encroach into the front five
feet of the parking space, provided a minimum 4 1/2 foot vertical
clearance is maintained above the finished floor of the garage.
Appliances such as water heaters, washing machines and clothes
dryers may not encroach into the minimum inside dimension.
2. Parking spaces that are located within rows of six spaces or more
may be divided by posts or columns located within three feet of the
head and foot of each space. Where such spaces are located
adjacent to a wall, fence or other obstruction, space width shall be
increased by one foot.
3. A minimum of 100 cubic feet of enclosed storage space shall be
provided for any residential unit without a private enclosed garage.
4. A minimum paved backup of 25 feet shall be provided for any
garage, carport or open parking space including those entered
directly from a street, alley or driveway. The width of the backup
shall be equal to the width of the space(s) that it serves. In no case
shall more than 10 feet of any public right-of-way be used to
provide required backup.
5. All residential driveways, parking and maneuvering areas shall be
fully paved with a minimum thickness of four inches of Portland
cement concrete.
g. Nonresidential Parking. Parking for nonresidential uses shall comply
with the following provisions:
1. A parking space adjacent on the side to a wall, fence or other
obstruction shall be increased in width by one foot. Posts/columns
may be permitted along the side of each space only within three
feet of the head and foot of each stall.
2. All nonresidential driveways and parking areas shall be surfaced
and maintained with a minimum thickness of two inches of asphalt
§ 30-21.5 COMPTON § 30-21.5
AO:1054
on a minimum of four inches of aggregate base material or a
minimum of four inches of Portland cement concrete or other
approved permanent impervious surfacing material. The ground to
be paved shall be treated with a soil sterilizer prior to paving.
3. Off-street parking provided for nonresidential uses shall designate
at least 10% of the total parking area for use by car pools and shall
comply with the Compton Congestion Management Plan.
4. No portion of any public right-of-way may be used to provide
required turning radius or backup.
h. Curb and Wheel Stop Requirements. All parking spaces shall have
individual wheel stops or continuous concrete curbing a minimum of six
inches high and six inches wide. Wheel stops and curbs must be located
a minimum of three feet from any structure, fence, wall, building,
walkway or curb of a required landscape strip.
i. Drainage. All required off-street parking areas shall be designed so that
surface water will not drain over any sidewalk or adjacent property.
Parking facilities shall be prepared, graded and paved to ensure that all
surface water drains into a public street, alley, storm drain or other
drainage system approved by the Compton Public Works/Engineering
Department.
j. Parking Space Delineation. All required vehicle parking spaces shall be
striped. Compact, handicap, guest, car pool or van pool and motorcycle
spaces shall be clearly marked. Aisles, approaches, directional
movements and maneuvering areas shall be clearly marked with
arrows. Striping and marking shall be with paint or other easily
distinguishable material.
k. Lighting. Lighting of outdoor parking areas shall be designed and
maintained in a manner to prevent glare or direct illumination from
intruding into any adjacent residential zone. A minimum of one
footcandle of illumination shall be provided throughout the parking
area. Light standards shall conform to the design specifications of the
Architectural Review Board.
l. Noise. Areas used for primary circulation or subject to frequent idling
of engines or loading activities shall be located and designed to
minimize impacts on adjoining properties. Screening or sound baffling
shall be provided as necessary.
§ 30-21.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-21.5
AO:1055
§ 30-21.6. Parking Area Landscaping. [Ord. #2010, § 1]
Table 30-21.B
Parking Aisle Widths
Parking Stall
Orientation to Drive
Aisle One-way Two-way
Parallel (0°) 11 feet 22 feet
30° 11 feet 22 feet
45° 14 feet 25 feet
60° 18 feet 25 feet
90° 25 feet 25 feet
Table 30-21.C
Unobstructed Vertical Clearances
Parking
Facility
Automobile Semi-truck Motorcycle/
Bicycle
Open Air 7.5 feet 15.0 feet 6.0 feet
Garage/Carport 7.5 feet 15.0 feet 6.0 feet
Drive-Through 9.0 feet 15.0 feet N/A
Parking
Structure
8.0 feet N/A 6.0 feet
Loading Docks/
Zones
15.0 feet 15.0 feet N/A
a. All parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 30-43
of this Chapter.
b. All areas in a parking lot not used for driveways, maneuvering areas,
parking spaces or walks shall be permanently landscaped in
§ 30-21.5 COMPTON § 30-21.6
AO:1056
§ 30-21.7. Circulation. [Ord. #2010, § 1]
§ 30-21.8. Driveways. [Ord. #2010, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 15; Ord.
#2251]
accordance with a landscaping plan approved by the Architectural
Review Board.
c. Parking lot landscaping shall be designed as follows:
1. All landscaped areas shall be bordered by a concrete curb a
minimum of six inches high and six inches wide. All landscaped
areas shall be a minimum of six feet in width. Concrete mow strips
at least six inches deep and four inches wide shall be required to
separate turf areas from shrub areas.
2. A ten-foot landscaped planting strip shall be established between
the public right-of-way and parking area.
3. At least one twenty-four-inch box tree shall be provided for every
four parking spaces. Trees shall be evenly distributed throughout
the parking area.
4. A permanent and automatic irrigation system shall be installed and
permanently maintained in all landscaped areas.
5. A maximum of 2 1/2 feet of the parking stall depth may be
landscaped in lieu of asphalt while maintaining the required
parking stall dimensions. This overhang shall be in addition to the
required right-of-way setbacks.
6. Provisions shall be made to ensure that adequate pedestrian paths
are provided throughout the landscaped areas.
a. General. All off-street parking spaces shall have access to a public
street or alley and shall have internal circulation, safe entrances and
exits, drives and aisles in conformance with City standards.
b. Access to Space. Every required parking space shall have unobstructed
access from an aisle without moving another vehicle. Tandem parking
arrangements are not permitted. All parking spaces shall be entered by
vehicles traveling in a forward direction.
c. Maneuvering Room. All commercial and industrial parking areas and all
multiple-family residential parking areas for five or more units shall
provide suitable maneuvering room so that vehicles may enter an
abutting street or alley in a forward direction.
d. Traffic Between Aisles. Traffic circulation shall be designed so that no
vehicle need enter a public street in order to progress from one aisle to
another aisle within the same parking lot.
§ 30-21.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-21.8
AO:1057
a. Residential. Driveways providing access to parking facilities serving
residential uses shall have the following dimensions:
1. Driveways for residential uses with four units or less shall have a
minimum width of 10 feet.
2. Driveways for residential uses with five units or more shall have a
minimum width of 12 feet for one-way traffic and 20 feet for twoway
traffic. Where one-way drives exist, directional signs and
arrows shall be provided.
3. Driveway width for existing residential uses with four or less units
may be reduced to nine feet when the original construction design
effectively precludes a larger driveway.
b. Limit on Residential Driveways. For all residential uses, the driveway
must lead directly to a garage, carport, or other approved parking
facility, except as provided below. The number of permitted driveways
shall be one, eighteen-foot wide driveway per street frontage, not to
exceed a total of two driveways. Circular driveways require 100 feet of
street frontage.
1. Exception: Pre-existing, developed residential lots with less than 50
feet of street frontage width. Residential lots with less than 50 feet
of street frontage width that cannot otherwise construct a garage
and driveway on site may be permitted to construct one driveway
that does not directly lead to a garage or carport subject to the
following requirements:
(a) The driveway shall be 10 feet in width and shall have a
minimum depth of 20 feet, exclusive of any safety barrier or
other City-approved instrument constructed.
(b) The residential lot shall have been previously improved or
developed with a habitable dwelling unit.
(c) A City-approved safety barrier must be constructed between
the dwelling and the driveway. The safety barrier shall be
equivalent to a wheel stop or masonry landscaped planter.
(d) The pavement area of the driveway (i.e. parking area) shall be
constructed with concrete. The driveway aprons and any other
areas within the public right-of-way (i.e. sidewalk) shall be
paved in accordance with City standards.
(e) The property owner must obtain all required City permits prior
to construction of any driveway.
(f) No vehicle shall be permitted to park on the driveway in such a
manner as to extend any part of the vehicle into the public
street, public right-of-way (i.e. sidewalk), or other block
pedestrian or vehicle traffic.
§ 30-21.8 COMPTON § 30-21.8
AO:1058
§ 30-21.9. Residential Parking Limitations. [Ord. #2010, § 1; Ord.
#2101, § 15]
c. Nonresidential. Driveways providing access to parking facilities serving
nonresidential uses shall have a minimum width of 12 feet for one-way
traffic and 24 feet for two-way traffic. Where one-way drives exist,
directional signs and arrows shall be provided.
d. Drive-Through Facilities. Drive-through facilities shall conform to the
following standards:
1. Each drive-through lane shall be separated from the circulation
routes necessary for ingress or egress from the property or access
to any parking spaces.
2. Each drive-through lane shall be striped, marked or otherwise
distinctly delineated.
3. The vehicle stack capacity of the drive-through facility and the
design and location of the ordering and pick-up facilities shall be
approved by the Architectural Review Board and shall be based on:
(a) Nature of the product or service being offered;
(b) Method by which the order is processed;
(c) Time required to serve a typical customer;
(d) Arrival rate of customers;
(e) Peak demand hours; and
(f) Anticipated vehicular stacking required.
4. The applicant may be required by the Architectural Review Board
to submit a traffic study addressing the above-listed factors.
a. Garage Doors. A garage door shall be provided and permanently
maintained for all residential garages. Roll-up garage doors shall be
required for all new residential units unless an alternative has been
approved by the Architectural Review Board.
b. Use of Spaces. Required residential garages, carports and parking
spaces shall be assigned to the occupants of the applicable dwelling
unit and shall not be rented or otherwise utilized. Guest parking shall
be designated as such and restricted to use by guests.
c. Use of Yards for Parking.
1. No portion of a required front yard or street side yard, other than
the driveway, back-up and turning radius, shall be developed or
used for off-street parking of any vehicle, including automobiles,
trucks, buses, trailers, campers, boats, recreational vehicles,
airplanes and motorcycles.
§ 30-21.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-21.9
AO:1059
§ 30-21.10. Loading Facilities. [Ord. #2010, § 1]
2. A maximum of three vehicles, in operating condition, may be
parked behind the front line of the house provided that they are
screened from public view to a height of six feet. Such vehicles may
include automobiles, recreational vehicles, nonhabitable
recreational trailers and campers, boats and motorcycles. The area
used for such parking must be paved.
3. A recreational vehicle used as daily transportation may be parked
overnight in a recognized driveway provided that the vehicle can be
contained entirely on the driveway and not overhang onto public
rights-of-way.
d. Commercial and Towed Vehicles. Commercial vehicles, trucks, buses,
towed equipment or combinations thereof may not be parked or stored
on residential property except during business hours while providing
service to the site. This prohibition shall not apply to construction sites
during the time a valid building permit is in effect and construction is
currently and actively proceeding.
a. Requirements. Separate off-street loading facilities shall be provided
for all commercial, office, industrial and warehousing buildings in
excess of 7,000 square feet.
b. Location. Loading facilities shall be located on the same site as the
building served and shall not in any way block vehicular or pedestrian
movement to or from a street, driveway or parking space. Loading
spaces shall be located and designed as follows:
1. Adjacent to, or as close as possible to, the main structure;
2. Situated to ensure that all loading and unloading takes place onsite
and in no case within adjacent public rights-of-way or other
traffic areas on-site; and
3. Situated to ensure that all vehicular maneuvers occur on-site.
c. Minimum Dimensions. The minimum dimensions for any required
loading area shall be 12 feet wide by 25 feet long.
d. Number of Loading Spaces Required. Off-street loading spaces shall be
provided for all nonresidential uses in accordance with Table 30-21.D.82
At the time of project review, additional spaces may be required if
determined necessary to adequately serve the use.
e. Turning Radius. All loading areas shall be provided with an adequate
turning radius that will enable a vehicle to maneuver into and out of the
loading area without backing onto a street or highway.
82.Editor's Note: The table referred to herein may be found at the end of this subsection.
§ 30-21.9 COMPTON § 30-21.10
AO:1060
§ 30-21.11. Exceptions. [Ord. #2010, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 15; Ord.
#2257 § 1]
§ 30-21.12. Modified Parking Requirement (MPR).
f. Surfacing. All loading areas shall be surfaced and maintained with a
minimum thickness of two inches of asphalt on a minimum of four
inches of aggregate base material or a minimum of four inches of
Portland cement concrete or other approved permanent impervious
surfacing material to prevent mud, dust, loose material, potholes or
other nuisances. The ground to be paved shall be treated with a soil
sterilizer prior to paving.
g. Screening. All loading areas shall be screened from public view to the
maximum extent feasible as determined by the Architectural Review
Board.
Table 30-21.D
Loading Spaces
Loading Spaces Required
Building Size
(gross floor area-square feet) Number of Spaces
Less than 7,000 0
7,001 to 20,000 1
20,001 to 50,000 2
50,001 or more 3
a. Minor Modifications. In order to provide design review flexibility and
implement the goals of the City's design policy, the Architectural
Review Board may approve minor modifications to the parking design
standards in accordance with Section 30-45 of this Chapter.
b. Major Modifications. Specific land uses and designs may justify parking
modifications in excess of the level provided for by Section 30-45 of this
Chapter. Such modifications shall require a variance in accordance with
Section 30-27 of this Chapter.
c. (Reserved)
a. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to create a Modified Parking
Requirement (MPR) to regulate parking for industrial/warehouse uses
on lots greater than 10 acres whose requirements are difficult to
anticipate and cannot be adequately provided for in Section 30-21 Off-
Street Parking and Loading. Except as otherwise indicated, joint
parking arrangements, temporary parking lots, special parking plans,
shared parking plans, valet parking plans and reduced minimum
parking requirements established in accordance with this section shall
§ 30-21.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-21.12
AO:1061
supersede all other requirements of Section 30-21 and shall be referred
to as a "MPR."
b. Definitions. For purposes of this subsection, the following words and
phrases are defined and shall be construed as follows:
CITY COUNCIL — Shall mean the City Council of the City of Compton.
MODIFIED PARKING REQUIREMENT (MPR) — Shall mean parking
requirements that include one, some or all of the following: joint
parking arrangements, special parking plans, shared parking plans,
valet parking plans, temporary parking lot plans and reduced minimum
parking requirements. All MPR's shall be accompanied by a parking
demand or other study based on surveys of similar land uses and/or the
Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) data or other professional sources.
PLANNING COMMISSION — Shall mean the Planning Commission of
the City of Compton.
c. Establishment of Modified Parking Requirement. A Modified Parking
Requirement (MPR) pursuant to this subsection may be adopted by the
Planning Commission and/or the City Council in conjunction with other
discretionary entitlements that are necessary to approve an eligible
industrial/warehouse project.
d. Findings Required. The Planning Commission and/or the City Council,
prior to approving a request to establish, modify, or repeal a MPR shall
find:
1. That the MPR provides adequate parking to meet parking demand
for the project or uses subject to the MPR.
2. That the parking demand or other study is based on surveys of
similar land uses and/or the Institute of Transportation Engineers
(ITE) data or other professional sources.
3. That the parking demand or other study has been adequately
prepared.
e. Conditions of Approval. The Planning Commission and/or City Council
as part of a MPR approval, may impose such conditions and limitations
that it deems necessary to protect the public welfare and assure
compliance with the intent and purpose of this Chapter and the plans
and policies of the City.
f. Modified Parking Requirement Standards.
1. Decreased Parking Requirements. The MPR shall identify each use
that is granted modified parking requirements, along with each
use's minimum parking requirement.
2. Location of Required Parking Spaces. The parking spaces required
by the MPR may be provided on-site or on an abutting contiguous
lot, or on a lot across a public right-of-way that is within 300 feet of
§ 30-21.12 COMPTON § 30-21.12
AO:1062
§ 30-22. SIGN REGULATIONS.83
§ 30-22.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. #1971, § 1]
The purpose and intent of this section is to promote commerce, traffic
safety and community identity while improving the quality of the visual
environment through establishment of sign regulations that:
the land use regardless of underlying ownership, or within a
reasonable walking distance as determined by the approving
authority. Where parking is provided across multiple lots, a
covenant shall be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder by
the owner or owners of such lots or parcels of land, for a period
of not less than 20 years. The required parking as specified by
the MPR shall be maintained as long as the use or building exists
unless it can be demonstrated that parking can be provided onsite
as required under subsection 30-21.3c of this Chapter.
3. Bicycle Parking and Other Transportation Demand Management
Measures. If an MPR is established, bicycle parking shall be
required at the rate provided in subsection 30-21.3g; however,
bicycle parking and other improvements or measures to encourage
alternative transportation modes and vehicle trip reduction may be
required based on the modified parking as determined in the
parking demand or other study.
4. The Modified Parking Requirement shall not apply to residential or
commercial land uses.
5. The Modified Parking Requirement shall only apply to lots of 10
acres or greater.
g. Other Provisions.
1. The MPR shall prohibit the use of any compact parking spaces
onsite.
2. The MPR may require the provision of a landscape planter/tree well
at the head of every fifth parking space. Wheel stops will be not
permitted.
3. The Director of Community Development may recommend
additional conditions of approval as ultimately deemed necessary
by the Planning Commission and/or City Council.
a. Contribute to implementation of the City's Comprehensive General
Plan.
b. Improve the appearance of the community by regulating the design,
location and maintenance of signs.
83.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1557 and 1733.
§ 30-21.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.1
AO:1063
§ 30-22.2. Sign Definitions. [Ord. #1971, § 1; Ord. #2179, § 1]
The definitions listed below shall be used in interpreting the provisions of
this section. Where no definition exists, the definitions found in commonly
accepted planning source material shall prevail.
A-FRAME SIGN — Shall mean a freestanding, moveable sign usually
supported by two upright sign faces (also known as a "sandwich board").
ABANDONED SIGN — Shall mean a sign whose use has ceased or been
discontinued for a period of 90 consecutive days or which identifies a
business or activity that has not occupied the premises for a period of 90
consecutive days.
ACCESSORY SIGN — Shall mean a sign whose copy refers to the products,
facilities or services available on the premises.
ADDRESS — Shall mean the placement of a street number which identifies
the street mailing address of a business or residence. It may also include
the street name for additional clarity.
ADVERTISING DISPLAY — Shall refer to advertising structures and to signs
placed for off-site outdoor advertising purposes on advertising structures.
ADVERTISING STATUARY — Shall mean a three-dimensional imitation or
representation of a person or thing which is designed to promote or
represent a commercial enterprise.
ADVERTISING STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure of any kind or
character erected, used, or maintained for off-site outdoor advertising
purposes, upon which any poster, bill, printing, painting, or other
advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed.
ANIMATED OR MOVING SIGN — Shall mean a sign which uses movement,
lighting or special materials to depict action, movement or rotation.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the administrative, appointed or
legislative agent or body with primary responsibility for approval of a sign
permit.
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD — Shall mean an interdepartmental
board established by the City to review and evaluate new projects to ensure
that they meet the highest standards for design and construction.
AUDIO — Shall mean the inclusion in a sign of any sound emitting
mechanism or production of sound from a sign.
AWNING OR CANOPY SIGN — Shall mean a sign that is mounted or painted
on or attached to the vertical surface or flap of an awning or canopy.
c. Protect the health, safety and welfare of the community through
elimination of visual blight and traffic and safety hazards caused by
excessive and confusing signs.
d. Facilitate straightforward sign permitting and promote sign standards
that identify businesses and premises without confusion.
§ 30-22.1 COMPTON § 30-22.2
AO:1064
BANNER SIGN — Shall mean a nonpermanent sign composed of fabric,
plastic, paper or other lightweight material which contains advertising copy
and is attached to a building, pole, frame or vehicle.
BENCH/TRANSIT ENCLOSURE SIGN — Shall mean a sign displayed on a
transit bench or on any surface of a transit enclosure.
BILLBOARD SIGN — Shall mean a sign, excluding a supergraphic sign,
which advertises goods, products, services or facilities not sold, produced,
manufactured or furnished on the premises on which the sign is located
(also known as outdoor advertising, off-premises sign or off-site sign).
BUILDING FACE OR FRONTAGE — Shall mean that portion of a main
building most nearly parallel to a street or parking area.
BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Shall mean sign copy, including logo,
used to identify the name and address of a premises, business, building or
portion of building upon which it is located, and which includes no other
information.
BUSINESS INFORMATION SIGN — Shall mean a sign in which a business
or occupant's name, address, phone number or hours of operation are
provided, but which contains no advertising copy.
CAN SIGN — Shall mean a sign contained within a structural casing or
canister, often composed of sheet metal or aluminum, covered by glass,
plastic or similar material upon which the sign copy is affixed, and which
may be internally illuminated (also known as a "canister sign").
CANOPY SIGN — See "awning sign."
CENTER IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Shall mean a sign containing the name
and/or primary occupants of a multi-tenant center (also known as a "multitenant
sign").
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — Shall mean a sign in which the copy/text may
be manually changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of
the sign.
CHANNEL LETTER — Shall mean individual letters or figures affixed to a
building, raceway or other sign structure.
CIVIC EVENT SIGN — Shall mean a temporary noncommercial sign, posted
to advertise a civic event sponsored by a public agency, school, church,
civic-fraternal organization or similar civic organization.
CODE — Shall mean The Compton Municipal Code.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT — Shall mean a permit approved by the
Planning Commission at an advertised public hearing for specified types of
signs which are not automatically permitted by the Code.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — Shall mean a temporary sign erected on a parcel
where construction is taking place, limited to the duration of the
construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers, contractors,
owners, financial supporters, sponsors and similar individuals or firms
having a major role or interest in the project.
§ 30-22.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.2
AO:1065
COPY AREA — Shall mean the actual area of sign copy applied to any
background including any lettered, written, pictorial or other visual sign
unit displayed for the purpose of conveying a message.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Shall mean an on-premises sign limited to
directional messages principally to facilitate safe movement of pedestrian
or vehicular traffic, such as "one-way," "entrance" or "exit."
DIRECTORY SIGN — Shall mean a sign listing the tenants or occupants of a
building or group of buildings which may contain suite numbers, names and
logos but no advertising copy.
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — Shall mean a single sign structure with copy on
both sides.
EAVELINE — Shall mean the bottom of the roof eave or parapet.
ELECTRICAL SIGN — Shall mean a sign or sign structure in which
electrical wiring, connections or fixtures are used.
ELECTRONIC READERBOARD — Shall mean a changeable message sign
consisting of a matrix of lamps which are computer controlled (excluding
time/temperature signs).
EMERGENCY SIGN — Shall mean a sign placed temporarily by or with
permission of a public safety agency to protect life and property in the case
of fire, flood, explosion or other threat to public safety.
FACADE — Shall mean visible exterior building walls, including parapet
walls.
FACING — Shall mean the portion of the advertising structure that contains
any poster, bill, printing, painting or other advertisement of any kind
whatsoever.
FASCIA — Shall mean a horizontal band covering the joint between the top
of a wall and the projecting eaves.
FLAGS, FESTOONS, SPINNERS AND PENNANTS — Shall mean ribbons,
tinsel, small flags, pinwheels, pennants, small balloons and similar items
composed of fabric, plastic, paper or other light materials which are
mounted to allow movement by the atmosphere and to attract the attention
of the public (excluding official government flags).
FLASHING, INTERMITTENT OR MOVING LIGHT — Shall mean a light
or message that changes more often than once every four seconds. The
illumination or the appearance of illumination resulting in a change of
message or advertising copy is not the use of flashing, intermittent, or
moving light, unless it changes more often than once every four seconds.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Shall mean a permanent sign not affixed to a
building, including ground signs, pole signs, pylon signs and monument
signs.
FREEWAY — Shall mean a divided arterial highway for through traffic with
full control of access and with grade separations at intersections.
§ 30-22.2 COMPTON § 30-22.2
AO:1066
GRAND OPENING — Shall mean a promotional activity not exceeding
30 consecutive calendar days which occurs within two months of the
establishment of a new business to inform the public of its location and
product or service. Grand openings do not include annual or occasional
promotions.
GROUND SIGN — Shall mean a very low profile, freestanding sign oriented
parallel to the ground, which maintains essentially the same height
throughout its length.
HEIGHT — Shall mean the vertical distance from the natural grade beneath
a sign measured to the highest point of the sign, including embellishments.
ICON SIGN — Shall mean a sign designed to resemble the product or
service (e.g., donuts, keys or shoes) offered on the premises.
ILLEGAL SIGN — Shall mean a sign, advertising display or structure
erected or constructed without first complying with all ordinances and
regulations in effect at the time of its construction, erection or use; a
nonconforming sign which has exceeded its authorized amortization period;
an abandoned sign or any sign which is hazardous due to its location,
physical condition or lack of required maintenance.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Shall mean a sign lighted by or exposed to artificial
lighting either by lights on or in the sign or directed toward the sign.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — Shall mean a small sign, emblem or decal providing
information to the public regarding services available on the premises, such
as credit cards, ATM availability, self service, cashier, etc.
INFLATABLE SIGN — Shall mean inflatable statuary, hot air balloons,
captive balloons or similar three dimensional inflatable objects designed to
convey information or advertise a location and mounted to allow movement
by the atmosphere and to attract the attention of the public.
KIOSK — Shall mean a vertically oriented sign, typically with multiple faces,
which is intended primarily to provide information to passersby.
LEGALLY NONCONFORMING SIGN — Shall mean a sign which was legally
established but no longer conforms to the provisions of this section and (1)
whose amortization period has not expired or (2) whose continued use has
been authorized by the Planning Commission or City Council.
LOGO SIGN — Shall mean a licensed, certified, copyrighted or trademarked
name, symbol, feature or trademark that represents a business, enterprise,
group or activity.
MAIN TRAVELED WAY — Shall mean in the case of a freeway, the traveled
way of each of the separate roadways for traffic in opposite directions.
MARQUEE — Shall mean a sign located on a fixed, roofed structure which
projects from a building and which is designed to advertise changing
performances, attractions or events, either through manually placed copy
or electronically controlled lighting. Information presented may be static or
sequential, depending on the design of the copy system.
§ 30-22.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.2
AO:1067
MENU BOARD — Shall mean a sign on the premises of a drive-thru
restaurant which identifies the type and cost of available food items.
MONUMENT SIGN — Shall mean a low profile, freestanding sign with a
solid or primarily solid support base.
MULTI-FACED SIGN — Shall mean a sign containing three or more faces.
MULTI-TENANT SIGN — Shall mean a sign which identifies or advertises
more than one business or activity within a single sign structure (also
known as a "center identification" sign).
MURAL — Shall mean a display painted onto a wall or display base which
is designed and intended as a noncommercial decorative or ornamental
feature and which does not contain any advertising copy (also known as
"decorative graphic").
NAMEPLATE — Shall mean a non-illuminated, on-premises sign which gives
only the name, address and/or occupation of an occupant or group of
occupants.
NEON SIGN — Shall mean a sign which utilizes neon or other gases with
translucent tubing in or on any part of the sign structure.
PAINTED OR PAINTED-ON SIGN — Shall mean a sign which is applied with
paint or a similar coating directly on the surface of a wall, building, display
base or sign structure.
POLE SIGN — Shall mean a freestanding sign mounted above the ground on
a single pole structure, typically centered on the pole (excludes directional
signs six feet or less in height).
POLITICAL ELECTION SIGN — Shall mean a temporary sign used in
connection with a local, State or national election or referendum.
PORTABLE SIGN — Shall mean a moveable sign which is designed to be
easily moved and is not permanently attached to the ground or a building.
Portable signs include A-frame signs, portable reader-boards and similar
signs.
PREMISES — Shall mean a parcel of land and its improvements including
buildings which is individually identified with a specific business.
PROJECTING SIGN — Shall mean a sign which is attached to and projects
from the exterior wall of a building where the display surface of the sign is
not parallel to the wall of the structure to which it is attached.
PROMOTIONAL ACTIVITY SIGN — Shall mean a sign erected on a
temporary basis to promote the sale of new products, new management,
new hours of operation, a new service or a special sale.
PYLON SIGN, DOUBLE — Shall mean a freestanding sign which is designed
in a "gateway" format, with a double support structure and a connecting,
thematically integrated panel on which is typically placed copy and/or a
logo to mark the name identification of a major business, center or facility.
Double pylon signs are architectural or decorative in character to emulate
gateways.
§ 30-22.2 COMPTON § 30-22.2
AO:1068
PYLON SIGN, SINGLE — Shall mean a freestanding sign which is
incorporated into a single, vertical structure on which is typically placed
copy and/or a logo to mark the name identification of a major business,
center or facility. Single pylon signs are decorative in character to emulate
the form of a monument.
RACEWAY — Shall mean a channel attached to a building which provides
a mounting surface for a facade sign and which generally contains the
electrical connections for illumination.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — Shall mean a temporary sign that relates to the
sale, lease or rental of property or buildings on the premises on which it is
located.
ROOF SIGN — Shall mean a sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or
that is dependent upon a building for support and/or that projects above the
top walk or edge of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with
a gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with a mansard
roof.
SIGN — Shall mean an object, device, display or structure, or part thereof,
situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display,
direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words,
letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected
image.
SIGN FACE — Shall mean the exterior surface of a sign, exclusive of
structural supports.
SIGN PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the Department of Building
and Planning for installation of a sign.
SIGN PROGRAM — Shall mean a comprehensive plan that addresses all
signs within a site that is designed to achieve aesthetically appealing and
compatible signage for projects with major roadway exposure, multiplesignage
requirements or complex or unusual signage needs.
SIGN STRUCTURE — Shall mean the structural supports, uprights, bracing
and decorative skirting for a sign.
SIX HUNDRED SIXTY FEET FROM THE EDGE OF THE RIGHT OF WAY —
Shall mean 660 feet measured from the edge of the right-of-way horizontally
along a line perpendicular to the centerline of the highway.
STREET FRONTAGE — Shall mean the linear measurement of a lot's
property line where it abuts a public street, but not including alleys,
railroads, flood control channels or similar areas.
SUPERGRAPHIC SIGN — Shall mean a sign, consisting of an image
projected onto a wall or printed on vinyl mesh or other material with or
without written text, supported and attached, to a wall with an adhesive,
stranded cable and eye bolts or other materials or methods which covers
more than 20% of a wall, building, facade or other structure.
§ 30-22.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.2
AO:1069
TEMPORARY SIGN — Shall mean a sign, generally constructed of paper,
cloth, canvas or other similar lightweight material, with or without a frame,
intended to be used for a limited period of time.
TIME/TEMPERATURE SIGN — Shall mean a sign which communicates time
and temperature information in digital or analog fashion, frequently in
connection with business logo or identification copy.
UNDER CANOPY SIGN — Shall mean a sign suspended beneath a
projecting canopy, awning, ceiling or marquee.
VEHICLE SIGN — Shall mean a sign which is attached to or painted on a
vehicle the principal purpose of which is to attract attention to a product or
provide directions to an activity or business.
WALL SIGN — Shall mean a sign which is attached parallel to and projects
no more than 12 inches from the exterior wall of a building, building facade,
perimeter wall or fence.
WINDOW SIGN — Shall mean a sign, picture, text or symbol designed
to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event,
sale or service that is placed in or on, or is visible from, the exterior of a
window.
§ 30-22.3. General Regulations. [Ord. #1971, § 1]
The following regulations shall apply to all signs and advertising structures
unless specifically exempted by this section:
a. Licenses and Codes. Sign design, construction and installation shall
comply with the following minimum requirements:
1. No sign, including a copy change or temporary sign, shall be
constructed, displayed or altered without a sign permit approved
by the City. All signs, sign copy, logos, colors and materials shall be
reviewed and approved by the Architectural Review Board prior to
fabrication, unless otherwise exempted by this section.
2. All signs, and all parts, portions and materials thereof, shall be
manufactured, assembled and erected in compliance with the
Uniform Building Code and all applicable City, State and Federal
regulations.
3. All proposed signage, sign plans and sign programs shall be in
substantial conformance with the guidelines, standards and
criteria contained in the Compton Design Manual.
4. All sign contractors shall maintain a valid and current license with
the City and the State of California.
b. Premises Identification. All premises, whether residential, commercial,
industrial or institutional, shall provide signage identifying the location
for the benefit of emergency services and the public. The following
information shall be provided:
§ 30-22.2 COMPTON § 30-22.3
AO:1070
§ 30-22.4. Sign Classifications. [Ord. #1971, § 1; Ord. #2021, § 1;
Ord. #2101, § 16; Ord. #2155, § 5; Ord. #2179, § 1]
Table 30-22.A provides a list of permitted and prohibited signs by zone.
Figure 30-22.1 illustrates sign types, as defined in subsection 30-22.2,
which are permitted. Figure 30-22.2 illustrates sign types, as defined in
subsection 30-22.2, which require a conditional use permit. Figure 30-22.3
illustrates sign types, as defined in subsection 30-22.2, which are
prohibited. Signs not contained in this matrix or otherwise addressed herein
shall be considered as prohibited.84
1. All buildings, including residential structures, shall be identified by
street address numbers. All street addresses shall be in English
lettering and numbering.
2. Business names shall be provided, but need not be in English if the
type of business is readily identifiable and the Roman alphabet is
used. Signs for a business which is not readily identifiable or uses a
non-Roman alphabet must contain alternate identification in
English. Alternate identification shall be clearly visible from
adjacent public rights-of-way and contain the name of the business
in lettering a minimum of 12 inches in height or 1/3 the size of the
non-Roman lettering, whichever is greater. Accessory signs, such
as window signs, need not be in English.
c. Sign Maintenance. Every sign, including temporary signs, banners,
flags, spinners and signs specifically exempt from the permit
requirements of this section, shall be properly maintained and kept in
good repair.
1. Signs, sign frames and sign supports shall be kept clean, neatly
painted and free from rust, corrosion and graffiti.
2. Defective parts shall be replaced and cracks, broken surfaces,
malfunctioning lights, missing sign copy or other unmaintained or
damaged portions of a sign shall be repaired or replaced within 30
calendar days following notification by the City.
3. When a business vacates a premises or discontinues a product or
service all applicable signage must be removed within 30 calendar
days. The underlying facade surface shall be patched and
repainted. Canister sign frames and raceways may remain provided
that they are equipped with a blank face which screens internal
lighting and mounting materials.
a. Exempt Signs. The following signs are exempt from the sign permit
requirement of this section provided they meet the development
standards contained therein:
84.Editor's Note: The figures and tables referred to herein may be found at the end of this
subsection.
§ 30-22.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.4
AO:1071
1. Apartment identification signs with a maximum sign area of 12
square feet and a maximum height of four feet (if freestanding),
limited to one sign per street frontage.
2. Civic event and public service signs with a maximum sign area of
12 square feet.
3. Cornerstones, memorial signs and plaques, not to exceed four
square feet or four per building.
4. Directional and parking lot signs with a two square foot maximum
sign area and four foot height limit, limited to one sign per
entrance.
5. Holiday signs, lights, flags, banners, pennants and balloons in
residential zones provided they are removed following the close of
the holiday period.
6. Incidental signs such as credit card, trading stamp, trade
association, service station informational or similar signs not
exceeding one square foot each.
7. Neighborhood Watch signs authorized by the City not exceeding six
square feet, limited to one sign per block.
8. Nonilluminated window signs no more than three square feet in
size which identify a business, hours of operation, address and
emergency information.
9. Notices posted by a utility or other quasi-public agency in the
performance of a public duty or by any person giving due legal
notice.
10. Official flags of government jurisdictions, except when displayed
for commercial promotion.
11. Official notices of any court, public body or officer.
12. Real estate (including open house) signs, construction signs (with
valid building permit) and future occupant signs restricted to one
sign per street frontage, no more than six square feet in size and six
feet in height in residential zones and 30 square feet in size and
eight feet in height in all other zones. Signs must be removed at
close of escrow, completion of construction or when the site is
occupied.
13. Residential or commercial nameplates, street address or
identification signs with a maximum sign area of one square foot
located at a door, loading dock or entrance facing a public street.
14. Seasonal decorations for commercial uses which do not include
advertising. Christmas decorations may be installed at any time
§ 30-22.4 COMPTON § 30-22.4
AO:1072
during the month of November and December, and must be
removed within the first week of January.
15. Signs within a structure not visible from the outside.
16. Subdivision directional signs advertising the location of a
subdivision within the City when located within 100 feet of a major
highway. A maximum of five such signs, no more than 50 square
feet in size, shall be permitted provided the written permission of
the property owners of the property where the signs are to be
placed is submitted to the Department of Building and Planning
prior to installation.
17. Transit seating signs and public information, timetables,
directional and warning signs erected by a public agency or
nonprofit organization.
18. Window price signs located on individual vehicles located within a
lot licensed by the City for sale of the vehicle.
19. Window signs applied to the interior of the window, with maximum
coverage of 25% of window area and elevated at least 42 inches
above the interior floor. A maximum of two neon signs shall be
permitted on any facade.
20. City sponsored signs and murals subject to Architectural Review
Board approval.
b. Prohibited Signs. The following signs and/or sign structures are
prohibited and are illustrated in Figure 30-22.3:85
1. Signs which by size, location, movement, content, coloring or
illumination resemble or conflict with any traffic control sign or
device or emergency or road equipment vehicle, or obstruct a clear
view of traffic or street signs or pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
2. Signs on public property or which encroach into or over a public
right-of-way except when authorized by the appropriate
government agency.
3. Signs which rotate, move, glare, flash, reflect, blink or appear to do
any of the foregoing or which emit sound, odor or visible matter
which could serve as a distraction to drivers or pedestrians. This
paragraph shall not apply to time and temperature signs or
readerboards or marquees authorized by the approval of a
conditional use permit.
4. Signs advertising an on-site activity, business, service or product no
longer conducted or sold on the premises.
85.Editor's Note: The figure referred to herein may be found at the end of this subsection.
§ 30-22.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.4
AO:1073
5. Signs, including roof signs, that exceed the height of the building
roofline or architecturally integrated parapet wall, except for
approved freestanding signs.
6. Signs or their support structures which obstruct any fire escape,
stairway, exterior door or required exit, access, light or ventilation.
7. Signs that display a message or graphic representation that is
lewd, indecent or otherwise offensive to public morals.
8. Business or advertising signs located on, or affixed to, trucks,
automobiles, trailers, carts or other vehicles for the purpose of
displaying such signs whether parked on public or private property.
This paragraph shall not apply to permanent signs on commercial
vehicles lawfully operated where such signs are inherent to the
vehicle and designed for identification and not advertising.
9. Portable, folding, A-frame and similar signs.
10. Signs advertising home occupations.
11. Signs using colors in the fluorescent "day-glo" color spectrum.
12. Signs supported by trees, rocks, bridges, utility poles, dilapidated
buildings, structures, fences or vehicles.
13. Signs painted on building exteriors (excluding windows and
awnings) or on panels attached to building exteriors.
14. Billboards and off-site advertising displays other than those located
in a B-O Zone.
15. Pole signs.
16. Signs not specifically authorized by this section.
c. Existing Signs. Within 120 days from the date of adoption of this
section, the City shall commence a program to inventory and identify
signs which were illegal, abandoned or nonconforming pursuant to
prior ordinances and signs which became nonconforming due to the
enactment of this section. Thereafter, the City shall conduct a public
hearing in accordance with Section 5491.1 of the California Business
and Professions Code to determine whether there is a continuing need
for these regulations to apply to existing signage.
d. Illegal Signs. Signs or advertising displays which were erected without
first complying with all ordinances and regulations in effect at the time
of erection or which have been abandoned or are inadequately
maintained or have exceeded an authorized amortization period shall
be considered illegal signs and shall be subject to abatement in
accordance with subsection 30-22.8.
e. Nonconforming signs. A legally established sign which fails to conform
to the provisions of this section shall be considered legally
§ 30-22.4 COMPTON § 30-22.4
AO:1074
nonconforming. Legally nonconforming signs shall be regulated as
follows:
1. A legally nonconforming sign may continue in use, provided that it
is not:
(a) Structurally altered so as to extend its useful life;
(b) Expanded, moved or relocated; or
(c) Reestablished after damage or destruction exceeding 50% of
the replacement cost of the sign.
2. Sign copy and sign faces may be changed on legally nonconforming
signs when no change in location or structural alteration is
proposed.
3. The existence of a legally nonconforming freestanding or wall sign
shall not prevent the installation of another conforming sign
provided that total combined signage will not exceed the maximum
permitted for the site.
4. Any legally nonconforming sign may be required to be brought into
conformance with this section in conjunction with a Community
Redevelopment Agency project or approval of a sign program or
conditional use permit.
5. All legally nonconforming signs are subject to all requirements of
this section regarding safety, maintenance and repair.
6. Signs which are legally nonconforming shall either be removed or
brought into conformance with the requirements of the Code
within three years from the date the City Council completes its
hearing and confirms that there is a continuing need for the
enactment of this section. The amortization period for
nonconforming signs may be extended through the approval of a
conditional use permit by the Planning Commission in accordance
with subsection 30-22.5d.
Table 30-22A
Signs Permitted By Zone
Sign Type R-A R-L R-M R-H C-L C-M M-L M-H B-O
A-Frame X X X X X X X X X
Address E E E E E E E E X
Audio X X X X X X X X X
Balloons
(small
helium filled)
X X X X T T T T X
Banner X X X X T T T T X
§ 30-22.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.4
AO:1075
Table 30-22A
Signs Permitted By Zone
Sign Type R-A R-L R-M R-H C-L C-M M-L M-H B-O
Bench X X X X P P P P X
Billboard X X X X X X X X P
Business
Identification
S S S S P P P P X
Canopy
(Awning)
X X X X P P P P X
Center
Identification
X X X X P P P P X
Construction T T T T T T T T X
Directional P P P P P P P P X
Directory X X X X P P P P X
Emergency E E E E E E E E X
Facade
(Wall)
S S S S P P P P X
Flag
(National)
E E E E E E E E X
Flags
(Spinners,
Festoons,
etc.)
X X X X T T T T X
Flashing X X X X X X X X X
Ground S S S S P P P P X
Holiday
Decorations
E E E E E E E E X
Incidental E E E E E E E E X
Inflatable X X X X CUP CUP CUP CUP X
Kiosk X X X X P P P P X
Marquee X X X X CUP CUP CUP CUP X
Menu X X X X P P P P X
Monument S S S S P P P P X
Mural X X X X P P P P X
Painted-on X X X X X X X X X
§ 30-22.4 COMPTON § 30-22.4
AO:1076
Table 30-22A
Signs Permitted By Zone
Sign Type R-A R-L R-M R-H C-L C-M M-L M-H B-O
Pennant
(Spinners,
Festoons,
etc.)
X X X X T T T T X
Pole X X X X X X X X X
Political
Election
T T T T T T T T X
Portable X X X X X X X X X
Projecting X X X X X X X X X
Pylon X X X X P P P P X
Real Estate T T T T T T T T X
Roof X X X X X X X X X
Rotating X X X X X X X X X
Supergraphic X X X X X X CUP CUP X
Temporary T T T T T T T T X
Time &
Temperature
X X X X P P P P X
Under
Canopy
X X X X P P P P X
Vehicle X X X X X X X X X
Wall
(Facade)
S S S S P P P P X
Window X X X X E E E E X
Notes:
E = Exempt
P = Permitted
CUP = Conditional Use Permit
T = Temporary
X = Prohibited
S =Special Purposes
§ 30-22.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.4
AO:1077
Figure 30-22.1: Sign Type Illustrations: Permitted Signs
§ 30-22.4 COMPTON § 30-22.4
AO:1078
Figure 30-22.1: Sign Type Illustrations: Permitted Signs
§ 30-22.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.4
AO:1079
Figure 30-22.1: Sign Type Illustrations: Permitted Signs
§ 30-22.4 COMPTON § 30-22.4
AO:1080
Figure 30-22.1: Sign Type Illustrations: Permitted Signs
Figure 30-22.2: Sign Type Illustrations: Signs Requiring a
Conditional Use Permit
§ 30-22.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.4
AO:1081
Figure 30-22.3: Sign Type Illustrations: Prohibited Signs
§ 30-22.4 COMPTON § 30-22.4
AO:1082
§ 30-22.5. Sign Permit Process. [Ord. #1971, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 16;
Ord. #2179, § 1]
All new, altered or modified signs regulated by this section shall require a
sign permit.
Figure 30-22.3: Sign Type Illustrations: Prohibited Signs
a. Sign Review. All sign permit applications shall be reviewed and
approved by the Architectural Review Board prior to issuance of a sign
permit except for the following:
1. Changes to copy for legally existing signs where no other signage
change is proposed.
2. New signs which conform to the provisions of a sign program
previously approved by the Architectural Review Board.
3. Temporary signs and banners which conform to the provisions of
this subsection.
4. Billboards within a B-O Zone.
§ 30-22.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.5
AO:1083
b. Sign Program. The purpose of the sign program shall be to integrate
signs with building and landscaping design to form a unified
architectural theme which conforms to the goals of the City's
Comprehensive General Plan.
1. This shall be achieved by:
(a) Using the same background colors and limiting the number of
sign colors per site.
(b) Using the same type of cabinet supports, mounting methods,
component construction materials and illumination.
(c) Using uniform sign placement and proportionate letter and
logo heights for large and small tenants.
2. A sign program shall be required for the following projects:
(a) New or substantially rehabilitated commercial, office and
industrial projects with three or more tenant spaces.
(b) Changeable copy signs.
(c) Banners, streamers, flags, spinners and other advertising
displays used on a permanent or rotating basis at multi-tenant
centers of two acres or more.
(d) Existing sites with three or more business identification signs
where there is a request for a new, freestanding sign.
(e) New signs on corner sites adjacent to major or secondary
arterials.
(f) Service stations.
(g) All drive-thru businesses.
c. Temporary Sign Permits. The following temporary signs are permitted.
1. A temporary vinyl business identification sign for use by a business
actively in the process of obtaining permits for permanent signage
(six-month maximum).
2. A sign advertising a temporary use approved by a temporary use
permit.
3. Banners advertising a promotional activity for a licensed business.
Promotional banners shall be limited to one banner per site for a
maximum of 30 days per permit. Such banners shall be affixed to
the facade of the building holding the promotion and shall be no
more than three feet in height.
4. Special event signs for grand openings, sales, carnivals, parades
and charitable events for premises of less than two acres for a
maximum of 30 consecutive days every six months per calendar
§ 30-22.5 COMPTON § 30-22.5
AO:1084
year. Streamers, flags and spinners may be used in conjunction
with special event signs.
5. Supergraphic and inflatable advertising structures for a maximum
of 12 days per calendar year.
d. Conditional Use Permits. A conditional use permit shall be required
prior to initiation of permit processing and subject to the permitted use
provisions of the base zone for the following signs:
1. Advertising statuary.
2. (Reserved)
3. Murals and graphic designs more than 24 square feet in size.
4. Hot air balloons, inflatable statuary and similar three-dimensional
airborne structures.
5. Marquee signs.
6. Extension of use for legally nonconforming signs.
7. Signs representing technological innovations not addressed by this
section.
8. Supergraphic signs.
e. Sign Permit Approval. After an application for a sign permit has been
reviewed, the approving authority shall grant or deny the permit in
accordance with all of the following findings:
1. The proposed signage conforms to the provisions of this section;
2. The proposed signage conforms to the provisions of the Compton
Design Manual; and
3. The proposed signage is compatible in color, design, size and scale
with the proposed location and the properties in the vicinity.
f. Appeals. When an application for a sign permit is denied, the applicant
may submit an appeal requesting administrative review of the decision
by the Planning Director.
1. All such appeals must be submitted, in writing, within 14 days of
permit denial.
2. The Planning Director will review the sign application and
determine if the permit denial conformed to the provisions of this
section. The Planning Director may uphold, reverse or amend the
decision of the approving authority.
3. The appellant shall be notified, in writing, of the decision of the
Planning Director.
§ 30-22.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.5
AO:1085
§ 30-22.6. Sign Standards. [Ord. #1971, § 1]
Table 30-22.B provides standards for the type, number, aggregate area,
height and other standards applicable to permitted signs. In addition to the
information provided in the matrix, the following standards shall apply:
4. The Planning Director may not modify the provisions of this
section. All requests for modification or amendment of the
provisions of this section shall be governed by Section 30-27 of this
Chapter.
5. This subsection shall not apply to appeals regarding conditional use
permit decisions, which shall be governed by Section 30-26 of this
Chapter.
a. Basic Formula. The following formula contains the underlying
assumptions utilized in developing the matrix; it results in the
maximum amount of permitted signage and shall prevail in questions of
interpretation:
1. Facade Signs. Every premises shall be permitted one business
identification sign and four accessory signs for each facade which
fronts on a street or parking lot. Maximum aggregate sign area
shall be 1 1/2 square feet for each lineal foot of building frontage,
not to exceed 200 square feet per facade in commercial zones and
300 square feet in manufacturing zones.
2. Freestanding Signs. Freestanding signs shall be monument,
ground or decorative pylon in style and shall be permitted as
follows:
(a) Individual premises with 150 or more lineal feet of street
frontage shall be permitted one business identification
monument sign for each qualifying street frontage, not to
exceed two. Such signs shall be no more than 32 square feet in
size and eight feet in height.
(b) Multi-tenant premises (three or more separate occupants) with
a street frontage of 200 lineal feet or more shall be permitted
one center directory sign. Maximum individual sign area shall
be four tenths of a square foot (0.4 square feet) for each lineal
foot of street frontage, not to exceed 120 square feet. The sign
area for signs which include noncommercial center
identification may be increased a maximum of 25%, not to
exceed 30 square feet, to be used exclusively for the center
name. The maximum height of a multitenant sign shall be 20
feet or the height of the nearest building, whichever is less.
See Figure 30-22.4.
§ 30-22.5 COMPTON § 30-22.6
AO:1086
Figure 30-22.4: Multi-tenant Signs -Area Calculation
(c) Premises with 300 or more lineal feet of freeway or freeway
exposed frontage shall be permitted one monument or pylon
sign 35 feet in height and no more than 160 square feet in size
in lieu of a business identification or center identification sign.
b. Sign Design. All signs shall be designed and constructed so that they
are proportional to the wall area, building facade and lot area where
they will be displayed. In addition to the guidelines and criteria
contained in the Compton Design Manual, the following standards shall
apply:
1. Sign colors and materials should be selected to be compatible with
the existing building designs and should contribute to legibility and
design integrity.
2. Sign colors and materials should be selected that provide a
contrast to, but do not clash with, the background color and the
lettering.
3. All lettering shall be restricted to the sign area. No projections
above or below the sign area will be permitted.
4. Individual signs should be designed to be simple, direct and
concise, with limited use of color and no more than two rows of
lettering. Design flexibility may be granted by the Architectural
Review Board for registered trademarks and logos.
5. No more than three brand names or business trademarks shall be
used on any one permanent sign.
6. Logos and trademarks may be mounted separately from the
business identification sign.
7. All signs shall be constructed of permanent materials, including
metal, Plexiglas, lexan, wood (excluding plywood), acrylic or other
comparable durable materials. Facade signs should be constructed
§ 30-22.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.6
AO:1087
of individualized channel letters. Where the use of channel letters
would be incompatible with existing signage design, the
Architectural Review Board may authorize alternative compatible
sign materials provided the alternative is part of an approved sign
program and complies with the findings contained in subsection
30-22.5e.
8. In order to facilitate proportional signage and design integrity the
Architectural Review Board may approve modifications to the
standards contained in this section not to exceed 10% of any such
standard.
c. Sign Location. All signs, unless otherwise provided for in this section,
shall be erected upon the premises or property occupied by the person
or business identified by the sign and must meet the following
standards for location within a site:
1. All freestanding signs shall be located within a landscaped area or
planter base with an area no less than four times the area of the
largest sign face.
2. No freestanding sign shall be located within 100 feet of any other
freestanding sign on the same premises.
3. All freestanding signs shall be located a minimum of five feet from
any property line.
4. No freestanding sign shall be located within a required rear or
interior side yard setback.
5. No sign shall be constructed in a location that will restrict or
interfere with traffic circulation or pedestrian or vehicle visibility
or in any way represent a hazard to on-site or off-site traffic.
6. Signs may not be located within a vision clearance area.
(a) Vision clearance areas are triangular-shaped areas located at
the intersection of any combination of streets, alleys or
driveways. The sides of the triangle extend 15 feet from the
intersection of the vehicle travel areas (see Figure 30-22.5).
The height of the vision clearance area ranges from 42 inches
above grade to 10 feet above grade (see Figure 30-22.5).
§ 30-22.6 COMPTON § 30-22.6
AO:1088
Figure 30-22.5: Vision Clearance Area
(b) Support structures for a sign may only be located in a vision
clearance area if the combined total width is 12 inches or less
and the combined total depth is 12 inches or less.
7. Sign area may not be transferred to non-qualifying frontage nor
combined or consolidated with or on any qualifying frontage.
d. Sign Illumination. Lighting devices on or directed toward signs shall not
create glare, conflict with vehicular traffic or spillover to adjacent land
uses. Signs may be internally or externally illuminated. The following
limitations shall apply to all lighted signs:
1. Except for low-intensity, internally illuminated directory or address
signs, illuminated signs shall be prohibited in residential zones.
2. Sign illumination shall not result in glare being directed toward
surrounding properties.
3. Exterior lighting directed at a sign shall be shielded to insure that
the light is projected only upon the sign.
§ 30-22.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.6
AO:1089
Table 30-22.B.1
Sign Matrix
Sign Type Maximum
Number
Maximum
Area
Other
Facade: Wall or Canopy
Business
Identification
1 per street or
parking lot
frontage
1.5 s/f per
lineal foot of
frontage, not to
exceed 200 s/f
in "C" zone or
300 s/f in "M"
zone
Maximum area
applies to
aggregate of
all facade signs
Accessory 4 per street or
parking lot
frontage, with
a maximum of
8 installed on
no more than 2
facades
25% of the size
of the business
identification
sign per
accessory sign
Maximum 1
line copy, 1
product or
service per
sign
May not
project above
height of
primary sign or
first floor
Under Canopy 1 sign per
primary
business
entrance
8 s/f Name/address/
product only
In lieu of an
accessory sign
Free Standing Signs*
Business
Identification:
Monument
1 sign for each
street frontage
of 150 feet or
more; not to
exceed 2
32 s/f Maximum
height: 8 feet
Center
Identification:
Monument/
Pylon
1 sign only per
center with 200
feet or more of
street frontage
located on a
single street
0.4 s/f for each
lineal foot of
frontage, not to
exceed 120 s/f
plus 0.1 s/f for
each lineal foot
for a noncommercial
center name,
not to exceed
30 s/f
Maximum
height: 20 feet
or height of
nearest
building,
whichever is
least
§ 30-22.6 COMPTON § 30-22.6
AO:1090
Table 30-22.B.1
Sign Matrix
Sign Type Maximum
Number
Maximum
Area
Other
Freeway
Adjacent:
Pylon (single
or double)
1 sign only per
location with
300 feet or
more of
freeway/
overpass
frontage
160 s/f In lieu of
freestanding
sign
Maximum
height: 35 feet
Special Purpose Signs
Monument or
Wall: Outside
Storage
Yards, Car
Lots, Auto
Repair
Garages
1 sign per
street frontage,
not to exceed 2
32 s/f Limited to
fenced
locations
where
buildings are
not readily
visible from the
street.
Maximum
height: 6 feet
Monument:
Service
Stations
1 24 s/f for
business
identification, 8
s/f for price
information
Limited to
service stations
with less than
150 feet of
frontage.
Maximum
height: 8 feet
Free-
Standing:
Drive-Thru
Menu/Order
Board
2 per drive
thru lane
30 s/f Maximum
height: 7 feet
Wall/Kiosk:
Directory
Signs/
Multiple
Tenant
Centers
1 wall sign per
building
entrance or 1
kiosk, but no
more than 2,
per pedestrian
concourse
12 s/f per sign
face
Maximum
height: 6 feet
§ 30-22.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.6
AO:1091
§ 30-22.7. Sign Measurements. [Ord. #1971, § 1]
The following standards shall be used to determine the size, area, height
and dimensions for signs and sign components:
Table 30-22.B.1
Sign Matrix
Sign Type Maximum
Number
Maximum
Area
Other
Advertising
Benches:
1 per front and
rear of bench
backrest
75% of
backrest
Subject to
review and
approval of
Public Works
Dept.
Monument or
Wall:
Identification
Signs/
Churches,
Institutions &
Mobile Home
Parks and
Licensed
Nonconforming
Businesses in
Residential
Zones
1 per street
frontage
12 s/f for wall
sign, 24 s/f for
monument sign
Maximum
height: 6 feet
Pennants or
Flags
1 per lineal
foot of street
frontage
100 s/f and 200
lineal feet
Maximum size:
2 s/f for
pennants; 12 s/
f for flags
Wall: Mural or
Decorative
Graphic
1 per business
entrance
24 s/f Permitted as
part of sign
program only
Nonresidential
zones only
* Must be in landscaped planter. Must be 100 feet from any
other freestanding sign, 5 feet from any property line. May not
be in required rear or side yard.
a. Sign Face Area. The area of a sign shall be calculated as follows:
1. Sign Cabinets. The area of a sign face enclosed in a frame or
cabinet is determined by the outer dimension of the frame or
cabinet. See Figure 30-22.6.
§ 30-22.6 COMPTON § 30-22.7
AO:1092
Figure 30-22.6: Sign Cabinet Area
2. Two-Sided Signs. When the faces of a two-sided sign are parallel or
within 10° of parallel, only one side is counted. If the sign faces are
not parallel or within 10° of parallel, each side is considered one
sign face and both sides are counted.
3. Multiple Cabinets. If a sign consists of more than one module or
cabinet the area is calculated by adding the individual cabinets.
Freestanding signs which contain multiple cabinets on one
structure oriented in the same direction shall be calculated by
combining the sign area of each cabinet.
4. Round or Oval Signs. The area shall be that of the smallest
rectangle that will wholly contain the sign.
5. Irregularly Shaped Signs. The area shall be that of the smallest
trapezoid that will wholly contain the sign.
6. Signs on a Base Material. When a sign is on a base material and
attached without a frame, such as wood board or Plexiglas panel,
the dimensions of the base material panel are to be used.
7. Individual Elements. When signs are constructed of individual
elements such as freeformed logos and independent channel letters
attached to a building, wall or base material, the sign area shall be
calculated by enclosing the independent symbols and/or letters in
the sign text within a square, rectangle or circle and computing the
area of that geometric shape. Refer to Figure 30-22.7 for an
illustration of sign area calculations for individual elements.
§ 30-22.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.7
AO:1093
Figure 30-22.7: Sign area calculations for individual
elements
8. Awnings and Canopies. When signs are incorporated into awnings
and canopies, the sign area is determined by computing the area of
an imaginary rectangle drawn around the sign text or face.
b. Height of Signs. Permanent and temporary signs shall meet the
following height standards:
1. No sign shall extend above the eave line or parapet of the building
on which it is located.
2. Signage on multiple-story buildings shall be restricted to the thirdstory
ceiling level and below, except for high-rise identification
signs which shall be located upon the wall area above the highest
story of the building and below the parapet or roof line.
3. The overall height of the sign or sign structure shall be measured
from the ground (existing grade, excluding any filling, berming or
mounding) directly below the sign to the highest point of the sign
or sign structure. See Figure 30-22.8.
c. Sign Clearance. Sign clearance is measured from the ground directly
below the sign to the bottom of the sign structure enclosing the sign
face. See Figure 30-22.8.
1. All signs placed adjacent to or suspended above any pedestrian
walkway shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet.
2. All signs suspended over any roadway, driveway, alley or other
vehicle travel way shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 15
feet.
§ 30-22.7 COMPTON § 30-22.7
AO:1094
Figure 30-22.8: Sign Height and Clearance
d. Determination of Frontage. The amount of street/parking lot frontage
shall be based on the length of the exterior primary building wall for
each occupant's ground floor tenant space.
1. Frontage for single-tenant buildings shall be calculated using the
entire applicable exterior wall.
2. Frontage for multiple-tenant buildings shall be calculated using the
applicable exterior wall area located between the interior "party
walls" which separate one tenant from another.
3. When walls are not parallel to a street/parking lot they shall be
assigned to the frontage to which they are most oriented.
4. Diagonal corner signs that face more than one street/parking lot
must be assigned to a building and street/parking lot frontage by
the applicant. The sign must meet all standards for the building and
street/parking lot frontage to which it is assigned.
e. Determination of Signage Component Dimensions. The sign area of
individual letters shall be centered on the fascia or wall vertically and
horizontally, unless otherwise approved by the Architectural Review
Board.
1. When computing maximum aggregate facade sign area all facade
signs, including logos, trademarks, canopy and accessory signs,
shall be included.
2. Maximum height and width of a wall sign shall not exceed 75% of
the applicable building fascia. See Figure 30-22.9.
§ 30-22.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.7
AO:1095
§ 30-22.8. Abatement. [Ord. #1971, § 1]
Signs which are abandoned, hazardous, broken, inadequately maintained,
have exceeded an authorized amortization period or are otherwise not in
compliance with this section are illegal signs and represent a danger to
the health, safety and welfare of the community. They are hereby deemed
to be a public nuisance maintained in violation of the Code and subject to
abatement.
Figure 30-22.9: Maximum Fascia Sign Dimensions
3. There shall be a minimum clearance of 30% of the height of the
largest letter, but no less than six inches, above and below each line
of copy, whichever is greater. See Figure 30-22.10.
Figure 30-22.10: Sign Lettering
4. Minimum and maximum letter size shall be determined by the
Architectural Review Board based on fascia height, street frontage
and building setback.
5. Logos may not exceed 25% of allowable sign area. The City
acknowledges the jurisdiction of Federal law regarding registered
logos. If challenged on this basis, proof of Federal registration shall
be required.
a. Abatement Procedures. This paragraph sets forth procedures which
may be used by the City to cause the removal or correction of illegal onsite
signs. This paragraph does not establish the exclusive procedure
for abating such signs. As an alternative the City may use any
§ 30-22.7 COMPTON § 30-22.8
AO:1096
procedure established for abatement of a public nuisance or a Code
violation or those procedures set forth in the California Business and
Professions Code, Sections 5499.1 et seq., for sign abatement.
1. When the City identifies an illegal sign it shall notify the tenant,
business and/or property owner that a violation exists and that
abatement is required.
2. The notice shall be provided by registered or certified mail and
shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the property. The
notice shall contain the following:
(a) The address and location of the violation.
(b) The name of the tenant, business owner and/or property owner.
(c) The nature of the violation or reason for abatement.
3. The notice shall require that the sign be abated, either by removal
or compliance with the provisions of this section, within 30 days
from the date of the notice.
4. The notice shall advise the tenant, business owner and/or property
owner that, if the violation is not abated within 30 days, the City
will remove the sign.
5. The notice shall advise the tenant, business owner and/or property
owner that an appeal of the notice may be submitted, in writing, to
the Planning Director prior to the expiration of the thirty-day
abatement period. When a notice to abate is appealed the
abatement process shall be suspended until a decision on the
appeal has been rendered.
6. Signs removed by the City pursuant to this subsection shall be
stored for a period of 30 days, during which time they may be
recovered by the owner upon payment to the City for costs of
removal and storage. If not recovered prior to expiration of the
thirty-day period, the sign and supporting structures shall be
declared abandoned and title thereto shall vest to the City.
7. All costs incurred by the City in the removal and abatement of
abandoned, hazardous or illegal signs shall be the responsibility of
the property owner and if unpaid shall represent a lien against the
property.
b. Appeal. Within 30 days after receipt of an appeal of a notice to abate the
Planning Director shall conduct an administrative hearing to:
1. Determine whether the sign in question is a sign subject to
abatement pursuant to this Code; and
2. If it is determined that the sign is subject to abatement, establish a
time frame for abatement; and
§ 30-22.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.8
AO:1097
§ 30-22.9. Billboard Overlay Zone (B-O Zone). [Ord. #2179, § 1]
3. If the sign is to be abated by removal, determine if the sign was
designed, constructed, created, intended or engineered to have a
useful life of 15 years or more and is eligible for compensation in
accordance with Section 5491 and 5495 of the California Business
and Professions Code.
The appellant shall be notified, in writing, of the decision of the Director.
The decision of the Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission
through the submittal of an application for a variance in accordance with
Section 30-27 of this Chapter.
c. Abatement of Signs in Public Right-of-Way and Unsafe Signs. The City
may, notwithstanding any other provisions of this subsection,
summarily abate, through immediate removal, any sign located within a
public right-of-way or any sign deemed to pose an immediate threat to
the public health or safety.
a. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning Code, off-site
outdoor advertising displays shall be allowed in all B-O Zones, on any
size parcel, whether public or private property, subject to the following
criteria:
1. The advertising display shall be included as part of a disposition
and development agreement, owner participation agreement, lease
agreement or other agreement ("City Agreement") with the City or
the Compton Redevelopment Agency ("CRA") and the City
Agreement contains performance, one time fee, or ongoing revenue
provisions that allow the City or the CRA to undertake projects,
programs, or other activities that improve the visual environment
in a redevelopment project area.
2. The advertising display shall be placed within the specified B-O
Zone and within 660 feet from the edge of the right of way of a
freeway.
3. No advertising display shall be placed within 600 feet from another
advertising display on the same side of any portion of a freeway. In
addition to the spacing requirement, no more than five billboards
shall be placed between Acacia Avenue and S. Wilmington Avenue
on the north side of the freeway and no more than four billboards
shall be placed on the south side of this freeway section. In addition
to the spacing requirement, no more than four billboards shall be
placed between S. Wilmington Avenue and Central Avenue on the
north side of this freeway section and no more than four billboards
shall be placed on the south side of this freeway section.
4. Notwithstanding any other way to measure the sign height per the
Zoning Code, the advertising structure shall not exceed the height
§ 30-22.8 COMPTON § 30-22.9
AO:1098
of 60 feet as measured from either the finished grade under the
sign or from the freeway grade, whichever is higher.
5. No advertising structure shall have a facing that exceeds 672
square feet, but it shall allow extensions of up to two feet on the
sides and 5.5 feet on the top, excluding base or apron supports and
other structural members. This paragraph shall apply to each
facing placed on an outdoor advertising structure. The advertising
structure shall be measured by the smallest square, rectangle,
triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which will encompass the
entire advertisement and is made based on the height and the
length but not the depth of the advertising copy.
6. No advertising display may be placed that is so illuminated that it
interferes with the effectiveness of, or obscures any official traffic
sign, device, or signal; nor shall any advertising display include or
be illuminated by flashing, intermittent, or moving light; nor shall
any advertising display cause beams or rays of light to be directed
at the traveled ways if the light is of an intensity or brilliance as to
cause glare or to impair the vision of any driver, or to interfere with
any driver's operation of a motor vehicle. This subsection does not
prohibit properly maintained reader boards or LED displays that
comply with State and Federal law and subsection 20-22.2 entitled
Flashing, intermittent or moving light.
7. Existing setback and yard requirements of the underlying
commercial or industrial zone shall not be applicable to placement
of any advertising structure. No minimum setback or yard
requirements shall be applied to placement of an advertising
display.
8. No advertising display shall be placed or maintained in violation of
the California Outdoor Advertising Act, chapter 2 (commencing
with section 5200) of division 3 of the California Business and
Professions Code, or any other applicable State, Federal, or local
law.
9. Unless otherwise specified in this section, the general sign
requirements set forth in the Business and Professions Code shall
apply to plans and materials for and to design, construction, street
address numbers, identification and maintenance of outdoor
advertising displays approved under this section.
10. No person shall place an off-site outdoor advertising structure
without first having secured a Zoning Permit, a Sign Permit and a
Building Permit.
(a) A separate Building Permit shall be required for each
advertising structure whether or not the advertising structure
is proposed alone or as one of any number of advertising
structures proposed to be placed on the same parcel,
§ 30-22.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.9
AO:1099
contiguous parcels, or any set of related or unrelated parcels
that are the subject of a single development proposal.
(b) At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, a
separate Zoning Permit shall be issued for one advertising
structure or a single Zoning Permit may be issued for any
number of advertising structures proposed on the same parcel,
contiguous parcels, or any set of related or unrelated parcels
that are the subject of a single development proposal and
equally compliant under all applicable Business and
Professions Code requirements.
11. No permit of any kind shall be issued for an advertising display
without prior approval of the City Council.
(a) An application for approval of a Zoning, Sign and Building
Permit for an off-site advertising structure shall be filed with
the City Council in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) Any person who has an ownership, license or leasehold
interest in the land parcel may file an application for
approval of a Zoning and Building Permit for an off-site
advertising structure. If submitted by the holder of a
license or leasehold interest, the application must include
a statement of consent to proceed with the proposed
development executed by the holder of an ownership
interest and acknowledged before a notary public for the
state of California.
(2) The application may request review of one or multiple
advertising structures.
(3) The application shall be accompanied by photos of all
existing signage and accurate architectural renderings
and elevations of proposed advertising structures, as well
as a scaled plot plan and elevations showing the locations
of all existing structures and improvements on the
property, and the proposed advertising structure(s).
(4) At the time of filing the application for permits, the
applicant shall pay a filing fee in accordance with a City
Council approved resolution. This fee shall be in addition
to any other required fees for permits relative to
development of the property and shall be for the purpose
of defraying the costs associated with City review and
action on the application.
(5) Any permit issued shall be the property of the applicant.
b. The City Council may act on the application directly or refer the
application to the Planning Commission for review, recommendations or
determination.
§ 30-22.9 COMPTON § 30-22.9
AO:1100
1. Before approving any off-site advertising display permit
application, the City Council, or the Planning Commission upon
City Council referral, shall make the following determination
concerning the parcel(s) for which permits are sought:
(a) All existing and proposed advertising displays are
appropriately scaled to the architectural character of all
buildings and structures on the parcel;
(b) All existing and proposed advertising displays result in a
complementary enhancement to the architecture on the
parcel;
(c) All existing and proposed advertising displays result in a
visually uncluttered appearance;
(d) All existing and proposed advertising displays enhance
commercial corridors and properties and do not obscure street
views of public art, Council-designated historical buildings, or
City Council-designated projects;
(e) All existing and proposed advertising displays minimize
potential traffic hazards;
(f) All existing and proposed advertising displays are compliant
with all applicable provisions of this Zoning Code, and Federal,
State and local law relevant thereto.
(g) Not including other financial conditions that the City Council
may impose, all existing and proposed advertising displays
must be conditioned on the removal of one existing poster
panel billboard face 12 feet by 24 feet for every one doublefaced
14 feet by 48 feet billboard built.
(h) All existing and proposed advertising displays must be
conditioned on the incorporation of landscaping that is
acceptable to the City Council or by the Planning Commission
if the Council refers the application thereto.
(1) Subsection 30-43.2 regarding the Architectural Review
Board and Section 30-45 Design Review shall not apply.
(2) All proposed advertising displays shall be designed to have
a single cylindrical column support.
2. The City Council, or the Planning Commission upon City Council
referral, may impose additional conditions as are reasonably
necessary to ensure the development is consistent with the General
Plan, compatible with surrounding land use, meets the provisions
and intent of this Zoning Code, minimizes potential traffic hazards,
and otherwise protects the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 30-22.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-22.9
AO:1101
3. Without exception, every outdoor advertising display approved
under this subsection shall be subject to the following express
conditions and reservations:
(a) If an advertising display is illuminated, any illumination shall
not impair the vision of travelers on any adjacent highway,
including the freeway. Illuminations shall be considered vision
impairing when its brilliance exceeds the values set forth in
section 21466.5 of the California Vehicle Code, or any
successor statute or Caltrans regulation.
(b) When an advertising display is defaced with graffiti, the display
owner shall remove the graffiti within 48 hours after
telephonic notice by City.
4. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. If the
City Council refers the application to the Planning Commission for
determination, the decision of the Planning Commission shall be
final, subject to applicant's right to appeal any decision of the
Planning Commission to the City Council.
5. Any proposed variance to this subsection shall be deemed a major
variance and may be approved only if the City Council determines
that each of the required findings set forth in this Zoning Code are
met.
c. All existing off-site outdoor advertising displays that have previously
obtained required permits, and which remain in compliance with the
terms and conditions of those permits but that are not in conformance
with the provisions of this subsection shall become nonconforming
uses. The owner of a conforming or a nonconforming outdoor
advertising display may perform normal repairs and customary
maintenance to such existing conforming or nonconforming advertising
displays, including, but not limited to, changing the advertising
message and adding an extension to the outside dimension of a facing.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the installation of electronic
readerboards shall only be allowed to be installed on billboards that are
located within a B-O Zone.
d. All off-site outdoor advertising displays approved under this subsection
and existing nonconforming advertising displays may be relocated by
mutual agreement between the display owner and the City Council on
whatever terms are agreeable to both parties under the authority of
California Business and Professions Code section 5412.
1. Relocation as used in this subsection, includes removal of an
advertising structure and construction of a new advertising
structure to substitute for the advertising structure removed.
2. The purpose of this subsection is to allow the City to continue to
develop in a planned manner without expenditure of public funds
while allowing the continued maintenance of private investment
§ 30-22.9 COMPTON § 30-22.9
AO:1102
§ 30-23. NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES.
§ 30-23.1. Purpose. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9163.1]
The purpose of the nonconforming buildings and uses provisions of this
Chapter is to provide for the orderly removal of nonconforming buildings,
structures, and uses and such provisions shall apply to the nonconforming
buildings and uses in any zone and to buildings or uses which become
nonconforming due to rezoning or changes in the text of this Chapter.
§ 30-23.2. Nonconforming Buildings and Structures. [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9163.2; Ord. #2026, §§ 2 — 5]
and a medium of public communication established in outdoor
advertising.
a. Continuation of Nonconforming Buildings and Structures.
Nonconforming buildings and structures are hereby granted an
automatic variance to permit the continuation of such buildings. Such
variances shall remain in force and effect for the following lengths of
time, which shall be computed beginning on the date which such
building or structure became nonconforming due to the enactment of
this Chapter or prior ordinances:
1. Structures which do not require a building permit: three years.
2. Signs and billboards: three years;
3. Type IV and Type V buildings (incombustible frame and wood
frame), as defined in the Uniform Building Code:
(a) Dwellings: 35 years; and
(b) Stores and factories: 25 years;
4. Type II and Type III buildings (heavy timber construction and
masonry), as defined in the Uniform Building Code:
(a) Dwellings, office buildings, hotels, warehouses, stores,
garages, and lofts: 40 years; and
(b) Factory buildings: 50 years; and
5. Type I buildings (fire-resistive), as defined in the Uniform Building
Code:
(a) Dwellings: 50 years;
(b) Offices, stores, and hotels: 55 years; and
(c) Theaters: 60 years.
6. Razor wire, concertina wire and/or cut glass on exterior surfaces:
60 days;
§ 30-22.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-23.2
AO:1103
§ 30-23.3. Nonconforming Uses of Buildings or Structures. [Added
by Ord. #1557, § 9163.3]
7. Fences and gates that must be upgraded in accordance with
Section 30-44 of this Chapter: 180 days.
A nonconforming building may be continued for a period of time as
specified in this subsection provided no additions or enlargements are
made thereto, except those required by law or ordinance. If such
nonconforming building is removed, every future use of, and future
building located on, such premises shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this Chapter.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed or applied so as to require
the termination, discontinuance, or removal, or so as to prevent the
modernization, expansion, alteration, repair, or reconstruction, of such
public utility facilities as are employed for the transmission and/or
distribution of electricity, gas, or water provided there is no change in use
or enlargement of the site.
b. (Reserved)
c. (Reserved)
d. Enlargement of Nonconforming Buildings. Additions may be made to
nonconforming buildings or structures which are nonconforming only
because they do not meet the following development standards;
provided, however, such additions shall be developed pursuant to the
requirements of this Chapter:
1. Yards;
2. Building height limits, but not including floor area ratio provisions;
and
3. Parking space size, driveway width, or turning radii.
e. Restoration of Nonconforming Buildings. Subject to all the other
provisions of this section, a building destroyed to the extent of less than
50% of its replacement value by fire, explosion, or other casualty or act
of God or the public enemy may be restored, and the occupancy or use
of such building, or part thereof, which existed at the time of such
partial destruction may be continued. In the absence of proof to the
contrary, replacement value shall mean four times the assessed value of
the building at the time of the destruction.
a. Nonconforming Uses of Nonconforming Buildings. A nonconforming
use of a nonconforming building may be expanded or extended
throughout such building for a period of time as set forth provided no
structural alterations are made therein except those required by law or
ordinance. A nonconforming use of a nonconforming building may be
changed to another use of the same or more restricted classification
provided no structural alterations are made therein.
§ 30-23.2 COMPTON § 30-23.3
AO:1104
§ 30-23.4. Nonconforming Uses of Unimproved Property. [Added by
Ord. #1557, § 9163.4]
§ 30-23.5. Modifications to Nonconforming Buildings, Structures
and Uses. [Ord. #1987, § 1]
An addition or enlargement to any individual nonconforming building,
structure or use may be permitted and/or the period of time provided
for continuation of said nonconforming building, structure or use may be
extended provided a conditional use permit has been obtained pursuant to
the provisions of Section 30-26 of this Chapter.
§ 30-24. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
§ 30-24.1. Purpose. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9164.1]
The purpose of the performance standards procedures is to insure that an
objective, unbiased determination is made in those cases where there may
be substantial doubts as to whether an individual land use is detrimental to
the public health, safety, and welfare.
§ 30-24.2. Required Data. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9164.2]
Following a staff investigation the Planning Director may require the owner
or occupant of any property to submit such data and evidence as is needed
to make an objective determination. The evidence may include, but is not
limited to, the following items:
b. Nonconforming Uses of Conforming Buildings. A nonconforming use of
a conforming building shall not be expanded or extended into any other
portion of the conforming building. If such nonconforming use is
discontinued or abandoned for a period of six months or more, any
future use of such building shall be in conformity with the provisions of
this Chapter. While such nonconforming use exists no additional use
shall be permitted, even though such additional use would otherwise be
a conforming use unless approved by the Commission by written
resolution.
a. A nonconforming use of unimproved property may continue until May 4,
1979.
b. A nonconforming use of unimproved property shall not be extended or
expanded either on the same or adjoining property. If the
nonconforming use of unimproved land is discontinued or abandoned
for a period of 30 days or more, any future use of such land shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this Chapter.
a. Plans of the existing or proposed construction and development;
b. A description of the existing or proposed machinery, processes, and
products;
§ 30-23.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-24.2
AO:1105
§ 30-24.3. Reports by Expert Consultants. [Added by Ord. #1557,
§ 9164.3]
The Planning Director may require any person, firm, or corporation to
retain an expert consultant or consultants to study and report as to the
compliance or noncompliance with the performance standards and to advise
how an existing or proposed use can be brought into compliance with the
performance standards. Such consultant shall be full qualified to give the
required information and shall be persons or firms mutually agreeable to
the City and to the owner or occupant of the use in question. The cost of
such consulting services shall be borne by the owner or occupant of such
property.
§ 30-24.4. Required Alterations. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9164.4]
The Planning Director may require modifications or alterations in the
existing or proposed construction, or the operational procedures, to insure
that compliance with the performance standards shall be maintained. The
Planning Director shall prescribe a length of time to the owner or occupants
to effect any changes for the purpose of securing compliance with the
performance standards.
§ 30-24.5. Cancellation of Permits. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9164.5]
If, after the conclusion of the time granted for compliance with the
performance standards, the Planning Director finds the violation still in
existence, any permit previously issued shall be void, and the owner or
occupant shall be required to cease operations until the violation is
remedied.
§ 30-24.6. Performance Standards. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9164.6;
Ord. #1784]
The criteria used to determine when any condition, substance, or element
becomes detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare shall be called
performance standards. The following performance standards are hereby
established:
c. Specifications for the mechanisms and techniques used or proposed to
be used in restricting the possible emission of the objectionable
elements set forth in subsection 30-24.6;
d. The number of employees, full-time and part-time; and
e. Measurements of the amount or rate of emission of such objectionable
elements.
Failure to submit the data required by the Planning Director shall constitute
grounds for an administrative revocation of the certificate of occupancy for any
use of the land.
§ 30-24.2 COMPTON § 30-24.6
AO:1106
§ 30-25. SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION.
§ 30-25.1. Purpose. [Added by Ord. #1634, § 9165.1]
This section is provided pursuant to the California Surface Mining and
Reclamation Act of 1975, Chapter 9, Public Resources Code.
§ 30-25.2. Permit and Reclamation Plan Requirements. [Added by
Ord. #1634, § 9165.2]
a. Air Pollution. No smoke, dust, fly ash, vapor, fume, odor, or any other
form of air pollution shall be permitted in excess of the standards set
forth by the Air Quality Management District of the County. In no event
shall such elements be permitted which can cause any damage to
human health, animals, or vegetation or which can cause excessive
soiling at any point of measurement. The point of measurement shall be
the same as utilized by the Air Quality Management District of the
County.
b. Noise. No discrete noise source in the City shall exceed 76 decibels on
the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) weighted scale as
measured on any property line. No discrete noise source in the City
shall exceed 55 decibels on the CNEL weighted scale at any property
line of a residentially zoned property. No discrete noise source in the
City shall exceed 55 decibels on the CNEL weighted scale within 100
feet of an existing building used as a hospital, school, library, rest home,
convalescent home, senior citizens' home, mental institution, or other
similar noise-sensitive land use as determined by the Planning Director.
c. Underground Tanks Out of Service For One Year. Any underground tank
which has been out of service for one year or more shall be permanently
abandoned in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code. Permanent
abandonment shall comply with the requirements of the Los Angeles
County Ordinance No. 83-0206V and meet all standards of Section
25284 of the California Health and Safety Code. The Fire Chief shall
verify that abandonment has been completed prior to any application
for a conditional use permit, variance, change of zone or certificate of
occupancy.
d. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not preclude emergency
work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following
public calamity, or work required to protect persons' property from an
imminent danger, or work by private or public utilities when restoring
utility service.
a. Any person who proposes to engage in surface mining operations, as
defined in the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, enacted as
Chapter 9, Division 2 of the Public Resources Code, shall, prior to the
commencement of such operations, obtain:
1. A conditional use permit; and
§ 30-24.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-25.2
AO:1107
§ 30-25.3. Procedure. [Added by Ord. #1634, § 9165.3]
The provisions of Section 30-26 shall apply. The following items shall also
be submitted with the application for a conditional use permit:
2. Approval of a reclamation plan in accordance with the provisions
set forth both in this Chapter and as further provided in Article 5,
California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.
b. No person has obtained a vested right to conduct a surface mining
operation prior to January 1, 1976, shall be required to secure a permit
pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter as long as such vested right
continues, provided that no substantial change is made in that
operation except in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. A
person shall be deemed to have such vested rights if, prior to January 1,
1976, he has in good faith and in reliance upon a permit or other
authorization (if such permit or other authorization was required),
diligently commenced surface mining operations and incurred
substantial liabilities for work and materials necessitated thereby.
Expenses incurred in obtaining the enactment of an ordinance in
relation to a particular operation in the issuance of a permit shall not be
deemed liabilities for work or materials.
A person who has obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining
operations prior to January 1, 1976, shall submit to the Planning
Department and receive, within 90 days, approval of a reclamation
plan for operations to be conducted after January 1, 1976, unless a
reclamation plan was approved prior to January 1, 1976, and the person
submitting that plan has accepted responsibility for reclaiming the
mined lands in accordance with that plan. Nothing in this subsection
shall be construed as requiring the filing of a reclamation plan for the
reclamation of mined lands on which surface mining operations were
conducted prior to, but not after, January 1, 1976.
c. The State Geologist shall be notified of the filing of all conditional use
permits for surface mining operations.
d. This section shall be continuously reviewed and revised, as necessary,
in order to ensure that it is in accordance with State policy for mined
lands reclamation.
a. Reclamation Plan. All applications for a reclamation plan for surface
mining operations shall be made on forms provided by the Planning
Department, as called for by Section 2772 of the California Surface
Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.
b. Performance Bond. Upon a finding by the Planning Director, Chief
Building Inspector and City Engineer that a supplemental guarantee for
the reclamation of the mined land is necessary, and upon the
determination by the Planning Department of the cost of the
reclamation of the mined land as set forth in the reclamation plan, a
§ 30-25.2 COMPTON § 30-25.3
AO:1108
surety bond, lien or other security guarantee conditional upon the
faithful performance of the reclamation plan, shall be filed with the City
Clerk. Such surety shall be maintained in an amount equal to the cost
of completing the remaining reclamation of the site as prescribed in the
approved or amended reclamation plan during the succeeding two-year
period.
c. Review of Reclamation Plan. The Planning Director, Chief Building
Inspector and City Engineer shall be responsible for the review of the
reclamation plan. If the proposed reclamation plan complies with all
applicable requirements and standards of both this section and the
California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, or if it is found
that these requirements can be adequately met if specified conditions
are observed, the Planning Director shall forward the completed
reclamation plan application to the Commission with recommendation
that the application for a conditional use permit for a "Surface Mining
Operation" be approved, subject to specified conditions. If it is found
that the plan cannot be modified to meet the requirements of this
section, the Planning Director shall recommend that the application for
a conditional use permit be disapproved. In all cases, findings shall be
set forth concerning the grounds for approval or disapproval.
d. Public Records. Reclamation plans, reports, applications and other
documents submitted pursuant to this Chapter shall be public records
unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that the
release of such information or a part thereof would reveal production,
reserves or rates of depletion, data entitled to protection as proprietary
information. The City shall identify such proprietary information for
each application. A copy of all permits, reclamation plans, reports,
applications and other documents submitted pursuant to this Chapter,
including proprietary information, shall be furnished to the District
Geologist of the State Division of Mines and Geology by the City.
Proprietary information shall be made available to persons other than
the State Geologist only when authorized by the mine operator and by
the mine owner in accordance with Section 2778, California Surface
Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.
e. Periodic Review. As a condition of approval for the permit, reclamation
plan, or both, a schedule for periodic inspections of the site shall be
established to evaluate continuing compliance with the permit and the
reclamation plan.
f. Amendments. Amendments to an approved reclamation plan may be
submitted to the City at any time, detailing proposed changes from the
original plan. Substantial derivations from the original plan shall not be
undertaken until such amendment has been both filed with and
approved by the City.
g. Variance. Variances from an approved reclamation plan may be allowed
upon the same request of the operator and applicant, if they are not one
and the same, and upon a finding by the Planning Director that each
§ 30-25.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-25.3
AO:1109
§ 30-26. CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
§ 30-26.1. Purpose. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9170.1]
The purpose of this conditional use permit provisions of this Chapter is to
create a flexible mechanism to control those types of land use which require
special consideration and which possess characteristics of such unique and
special form as to make it impractical to permit them automatically in the
various zones defined in this Chapter.
§ 30-26.2. Findings Required. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9170.2; Ord.
#1808, § 1; Ord. #1840, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 17]
The Commission, before granting a conditional use permit, shall find:
§ 30-26.3. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permits. [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9170.3; Ord. #1635, § 1; Ord. #1733; Ord. #1746, § 1; Ord.
#2101, § 17]
The following uses may be permitted in any zone provided a conditional use
permit has been granted subject to the provisions of this Chapter:
requested variance is necessary to achieve the prescribed or higher
post-mining use of the reclaimed land.
h. Enforcement. The provisions of this Chapter shall be enforced by any
authorized member of the Planning Department or by any other persons
so designed by the Council.
i. Appeal. The provisions of subsection 30-26.5 shall apply.
a. That the proposed use shall be in compliance with this Chapter;
b. That the proposed use will not be detrimental to the public welfare or
the surrounding area; and
c. That the proposed use is substantially in conformance with the General
Plan and compatible with the existing patterns of land use and
development in the surrounding area.
a. The uses set forth in the zones requiring conditional use permits shall
be restricted to the zones specified;
b. Airports and heliports;
c. Athletic fields (privately owned);
d. Cemeteries, columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and pet
cemeteries;
e. Churches, synagogues, temples, convents, monasteries, seminaries and
other religious or eleemosynary organizations;
§ 30-25.3 COMPTON § 30-26.3
AO:1110
§ 30-26.4. Conditions of Approval. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9170.4;
Ord. #1635, § 1; Ord. #1762, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 17]
f. Circuses and circus quarters;
g. Colleges and universities;
h. Dairies and domestic and wild animal farms (excepting those
specifically permitted elsewhere in this Chapter);
i. Golf courses;
j. Halfway houses;
k. Hospitals, rest homes, mental convalescent homes and mental
institutions;
l. Riding academies;
m. Theaters, auditoriums, stadiums, arenas and similar uses involving
large assemblages of people or vehicles;
n. Personal storage facilities; and
o. Any use or building which the Commission finds, as evidence by
resolution in writing, is similar to any other uses or buildings set forth
in this subsection.
a. The Commission, as part of the resolution granting a conditional use
permit, may impose such conditions and limitations that it deems
necessary to protect the public welfare and assure compliance with the
intent and purpose of this Chapter and the plans and policies of the City.
b. The dedications of necessary rights-of-way for public streets adjacent to
property on which a conditional use is proposed shall be made a
condition of the granting of a conditional use permit.
c. No conditional use permit may allow any deviation from the provisions
of this Chapter unless a variance has been obtained pursuant to Section
30-27.
d. Unless otherwise specified in the granting of the conditional use permit
or unless extended by the Commission, a building permit or certificate
of occupancy shall be obtained, and construction, if any, or actual use
shall begin within one year after the granting of the conditional use
permit, or, where no such permit or certificate of occupancy is required,
the use granted by the conditional use permit shall be put into effect on
the property within such period.
e. Any modification of an approved conditional use permit shall require
the filing of a new application which shall be processed as required by
subsection 30-26.5, unless waived by the Planning Director.
§ 30-26.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-26.4
AO:1111
§ 30-26.5. Procedure. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9170.5; Ord. #1718,
§ 1; Ord. #1723, § 1; Ord. #1733, § 1; Ord. #1815, § 2; Ord. #2101,
§ 17; Ord. #2295 § 18]
The following procedure shall be followed for conditional use permits:
f. The Commission, as a condition of approval, may require that a surety
bond be obtained in order to ensure that the construction and the
development of the property shall take place as approved by the
Commission within a prescribed period of time.
g. (Reserved)
h. Conditional Use Permit Standards for New Service Stations.
1. All new stations shall have and maintain a restroom consisting of a
toilet and sink, and properly stocked with toilet paper and paper
towels whether or not a conditional use permit is required. This
requirement shall apply to any type of service station including selfservice
stations. Said restroom shall be available during all hours of
operation of the service station and maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition. The restroom shall be equipped to be accessible
to the handicapped.
a. Initiation. A conditional use permit may be initiated by a resolution of
the Council, a motion of the Commission, or upon a verified application
of the owner of the land in question, or of the purchaser thereof under a
contract in writing duly executed and acknowledged by both the buyer
and seller, or of the lessee in possession of the property with the written
consent of the recorded owner, or the agent of any such persons duly
authorized in writing.
b. Applications; Form. The application shall be on an approved form and
shall show the exact legal description of the property being requested
for a conditional use permit, the street address or exterior boundaries
by streets, alleys or property lines, the proposed use, and such other
information as the Commission deems necessary.
c. Filing Fees. At the time of submission, the applicant shall pay a filing
fee. The amount of such fee shall be set by ordinance or resolution of
the City Council and shall be adjusted periodically to reflect changes in
processing costs borne by the City.
d. Hearing Dates; Notices. Upon the filing of a conditional use permit
application, or upon the motion of the Commission, or upon the receipt
of a duly certified copy of a resolution by the Council requesting the
granting of a conditional use permit, the Planning Director shall set the
matter for a public hearing within not less than 21 days nor more than
120 days. Notice of the time and place of such hearing, unless
otherwise directed by the Commission, shall be given by mailing a
notice not less than 10 days prior to the date of such hearing to the
owners and occupants of property within a radius of 300 feet of the
§ 30-26.4 COMPTON § 30-26.5
AO:1112
exterior boundaries of the property on which the use is proposed,
using for this purpose the information shown upon the latest available
assessment rolls of the County. Such notice shall contain the same
information as is required in a posted notice.
e. Investigations. The Commission shall cause to be made by its own
members or by members of its staff such investigations of the facts as
the Commission shall deem necessary bearing upon such application
set for hearing.
f. Commission Hearings. The public hearings provided for in this section
shall be conducted before the Commission or before any three or more
members thereof. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a
public hearing, and the names and addresses of persons so testifying,
shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent records of the case.
If for any reason testimony on any case set for a public hearing cannot
be completed on the day set for such hearing, the Commissioner
presiding at such public hearing, before the adjournment or recess
thereof, may publicly announce the time and place at which such
hearing will be continued, and such announcement shall serve as
sufficient notice of such continuance without recourse to the form of
notice provided for in this section.
g. Decisions of the Commission. Not more than 60 days following the
conclusion of the hearing, the Commission shall announce its findings
by formal resolution, and such resolution shall state, among other
things, the facts and reasons which, in the opinion of the Commission,
determine whether the conditional use permit shall be granted or
denied and such conditions and limitations as may be imposed. Such
resolutions shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their
adoption and shall become a permanent record of the Commission. The
failure of the Commission to adopt such a resolution within the period
set forth in this paragraph shall automatically refer the matter to the
Council without a recommendation.
h. Notices of Decisions. Not more than 60 days after the final action of the
Commission on an application for a conditional use permit, a copy of the
Commission's resolution setting forth its decision shall be mailed by the
Planning Director to the applicant and the owner of record of the
property on which the use is proposed at the addresses shown on the
application.
i. Finality of Action; Effective Dates; Appeals. The action of the
Commission shall be final and shall take effect on the 15th day after the
adoption of such resolution by the Commission; provided, however, an
appeal in writing filed with the City Clerk by the applicant or by any
interested person prior to such 15th day shall suspend the action of the
Commission until the determination of the appeal by the Council or its
withdrawal by the appellant. Such an appeal, with the same time limit,
may also be initiated by a motion of the Council. Any appeal filed
pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall state the grounds
§ 30-26.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-26.5
AO:1113
wherefore and wherein the Commission failed to conform to the
requirements of this Chapter. An appeal which is not filed within the
time prescribed or which does not set forth the grounds upon which it
is based shall not constitute an appeal in compliance with this Chapter.
j. Appeals; Hearings. Upon the receipt of an appeal from the action of the
Commission, the Council shall set the matter for a hearing and give
notice thereof to the appellant and to the applicant for such conditional
use permit, should the appellant not be the applicant, and to any and all
other persons or organizations who have appeared before the
Commission during any of its proceedings held in connection with such
application or who have addressed written communications regarding
such application to the Commission prior to the conclusion of its
hearings; provided, however, notice need not be given to such other
persons or organizations unless their names and mailing addresses
have been given for the records of the Commission, orally or in writing,
during any of such proceedings or in such written communications.
The notices required by this subsection shall be given by the City Clerk
by the mailing of a notice to the persons or organizations entitled to
the same, as provided in this subsection, not less than five days prior to
the date of such hearing. The Planning Director shall be notified of the
filing of such appeal and, upon the receipt of such notice, shall transmit
to the Council the complete file on the case. The Council may limit the
hearing to a consideration of the grounds of the appeal as set forth
in such appeal and to a review of the proceedings of the Commission
or may consider any new matter pertaining thereto. An appeal may be
withdrawn at any time by the appealing party.
k. Appeals; Decisions. The Council by resolution shall render its decision
on such appeal within 30 days after the conclusion of its hearing on
such appeal, and the Council shall have the power to either affirm,
amend, or reverse the action of the Commission, or, if, in its opinion, the
matter requires further consideration by the Commission, the Council
may refer the matter back to the Commission for such further
consideration, with any recommendations which the Council may see fit
to make, in which event notice of such further hearing shall be given as
required upon an original application.
Not later than 10 days after the final action of such an appeal by
the Council, notice of the decision in the matter shall be mailed to
the appellant and the applicant by the City Clerk, and the file in the
case shall be returned to the archives of the Planning Department. The
decision of the Council on such matters of appeal shall be final.
l. Acceptance: Form. The applicant and the owner of record shall sign,
have notarized, and record with the office of the County Recorder, for
the benefit of the City and within six months after the adoption of the
resolution approving the conditional use permit, an acceptance form,
furnished by the Planning Department, which shall state that the
applicant and the owner of record are aware of and will abide by all the
§ 30-26.5 COMPTON § 30-26.5
AO:1114
conditions of the resolution of approval. Such form shall be returned to
the Planning Department to be filed with, and made a part of, the case.
m. Procedure for Revocation of Conditional Use Permits.
1. A conditional use permit may be revoked upon a finding by the
Commission that any or all of the following circumstances exist:
(a) The applicant has failed to obtain a building permit or
certificate of occupancy or has not begun construction, if any,
or has not commenced the use permitted within one year after
the granting of the conditional use permit as required by
paragraph d of subsection 30-26.4;
(b) The applicant has failed to abide by the conditions imposed by
the resolution adopted by the Commission;
(c) The property is in violation of any provision of this Code;
(d) The use permitted by the conditional use permit is not being
exercised, has been abandoned, or has otherwise been
discontinued for a period of 90 days after the use has
commenced;
(e) The applicant and the owner of record have failed to sign, have
notarized, and record with the office of the County Recorder an
acceptance form as required by subparagraph 1 of this section
within six months after the adoption of the resolution
approving the conditional use permit;
(f) A subsequent conditional use permit has been granted on the
property; or
(g) The applicant or the owner has requested in writing that the
conditional use permit be revoked.
2. The revocation of a conditional use permit shall be accomplished by
a formal resolution of the Commission. Where a circumstance as
set forth in subparagraphs (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e) of paragraph m1
exists, there shall be a public hearing held by the Commission at its
discretion for the purpose of considering whether there is sufficient
cause to revoke the conditional use permit. At least 10 days prior to
such public hearing a written notice shall be mailed to the owner of
the property, as shown on the latest assessment rolls of the County,
and to the occupant (if applicable) and shall be posted in a
conspicuous location on the property. Such notice shall indicate the
time, date, and place of the public hearing and the reason for such
hearing.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in paragraphs m1 and m2
of this subsection the City Council may order a revocation,
modification, temporary revocation or temporary modification of a
conditional use permit when it finds that such an order is needed
§ 30-26.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-26.5
AO:1115
§ 30-26.6. (Reserved)86
for purposes of maintaining the health, safety and welfare of the
City, provided that:
(a) Any such modification or revocation of a conditional use permit
shall be accomplished by a formal resolution of the City
Council; and
(b) There shall be a public hearing held by the City Council at its
discretion for purposes of considering whether or not there is
sufficient cause to revoke, modify, temporarily revoke or
modify the conditional use permit; and
(c) At least 10 days prior to such public hearing a written notice
shall be mailed to the owner of the property, as shown on the
latest assessment rolls of the County, and to the occupant (if
applicable) and shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the
property. Such notice shall indicate the time, date and place of
the public hearing and the reason for such hearing.
A conditional use permit or other Planning Commission land use
approval (special approval, special use, etc.) shall become
automatically null and void when the use for which the permit was
granted has not been exercised for two consecutive years.
4. The City Council may order the immediate temporary revocation or
modification of a conditional use permit in order to protect and
preserve the health, safety and welfare of the City, provided that:
(a) Such an immediate temporary revocation or modification does
not extend for a period of more than 30 days; and
(b) The immediate temporary revocation or modification is
accomplished by a formal resolution; and
(c) A public hearing shall be conducted not later than 15 days
after the effective date of an immediate temporary revocation
or modification to determine whether City Council shall take
action pursuant to this subsection paragraph m3 of this Code;
and
(d) Not later than 48 hours after said immediate temporary
revocation or modification notice shall be mailed to the owner
of the property, as shown on the latest assessment rolls of the
County, and to occupant and shall be posted in a conspicuous
location on the property on or before the effective date. Such
notice shall indicate the effective date and duration of the
immediate temporary revocation or modification and the
nature and extent of any such modification. The notice shall
further indicate the date, time and place of a public hearing
and the reason for such a hearing.
§ 30-26.5 COMPTON § 30-27
AO:1116
§ 30-27. VARIANCES.
§ 30-27.1. Purpose. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9171.1]
The purpose of the variance provisions of this Chapter is to create a flexible
mechanism to avoid unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with the
general purposes of this Chapter which would occur from its strict, literal
interpretation and enforcement.
§ 30-27.2. Findings Required. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9171.2; Ord.
#1808, § 1; Ord. #1840, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 18]
The Commission, before granting a variance, shall find:
§ 30-27.3. Uses Subject to Variances. [Added by Ord. #1557,
§ 9171.3]
The Commission shall have the authority to grant, as a quasi-judicial act
and upon such terms and conditions and for such duration of time as it
deems necessary, such variances as may be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this Chapter so that the spirit of this Chapter shall be
observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.
Variances may be granted for the following purposes:
a. That because of special circumstances applicable to the property,
including its size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the
strict application of the provisions of this Chapter deprives such
property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and in an
identical zone. For the purposes of this subsection, "special
circumstances" shall not include hardships which are self-imposed by
the owner of the property;
b. That the granting of such variance will not constitute a special privilege
inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity
and zone in which the property is located;
c. That the granting of such variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the area in which
the property is located; and
d. That the granting of such variance will be substantially in conformance
with the General Plan and compatible with the existing patterns of land
use and development in the surrounding area.
a. To permit the modification of the automobile parking space
requirements where, in the particular instance, such modification will
not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirements;
86.Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-26.6, Conversion of Mobile Home Parks and/or Trailer
Parks, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1790, was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2101.
§ 30-27 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-27.3
AO:1117
§ 30-27.4. Conditions of Approval. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9171.4]
The conditions which may or shall be made a part of resolutions granting
variances shall be the same as for conditional use permits (see subsection
30-26.4).
§ 30-27.5. Procedures. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9171.5; Ord. #1733,
§ 1; Ord. #1815, § 2; Ord. #2295 § 19]
The procedures which shall be followed for granting variances and for the
revocation of variances shall be the same as for conditional use permits. The
filing fee shall be set by ordinance or resolution of the City Council in the
same manner that it is set for conditional use permits.
§ 30-28. CHANGES OF ZONE AND GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS.
§ 30-28.1. Purpose. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9172.1; Ord. #2101,
§ 19]
The purpose of the change of zone and General Plan amendment provisions
of this Chapter is to create a flexible mechanism to respond to development
pressure and changing conditions where the amendment of the Official
Zoning Map and/or the Land Use Policy Map of the General Plan changing
a property from one zone and/or land use classification to another will be
beneficial to the City and will enhance the goals and objectives stated in the
General Plan.
§ 30-28.2. Findings Required. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9172.2; Ord.
#1808, § 1; Ord. #1840, § 1; Ord. #2101, § 19]
The Commission, in recommending, and the Council in approving, a
proposed change of zone or General Plan amendment, shall find:
b. To permit such modification of the height, yard, and area regulations as
may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a lot or
parcel of land which is of such shape or so located in relation to
surrounding development or physical characteristics that it cannot
otherwise be appropriately improved without such modification;
c. To permit the modification of the conditions under which specific uses
are allowed in certain zones;
d. To permit temporary buildings and uses for periods of not to exceed six
months; and
e. To permit the following uses in zones from which they are prohibited by
this Chapter: governmental enterprises, public libraries, public utilities,
and public service uses and structures.
A variance shall not be granted for a parcel of land which authorizes a
use or activity not otherwise permitted in the zone in which the parcel
exists.
§ 30-27.3 COMPTON § 30-28.2
AO:1118
§ 30-28.3. Procedure. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9172.3; Ord. #1815,
§ 2; Ord. #2101, § 19; Ord. #2295 § 20]
a. That the proposed zone and/or land use classification is substantially in
conformance with the General Plan and compatible with the existing
patterns of zoning, land use and development in the surrounding area;
b. That the property is more suitable for the uses permitted in the
proposed zone and/or land use classification than those permitted in the
existing zone and/or land use classification; and
c. That the uses permitted in the proposed zone and/or land use
classification will not be detrimental to the surrounding area.
a. The procedures which shall be followed for changing a zone shall be the
same as for conditional use permits (see subsection 30-26.5), except as
follows:
1. Filing Fees. There shall be a filing fee in an amount set by
ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
2. Action by the Council. Not more than 60 days after action by the
Commission, its findings and recommendations, together with the
complete records of the case, shall be delivered to the City Clerk
for transmission to the Council. Council shall set the matter for a
hearing, give notice thereof in the same manner as upon an appeal
from a decision of the Commission on a conditional use permit (see
paragraph b of subsection 30-26.5) and shall conduct a hearing
thereon. The decision of the Council shall be final, and any such
change of zone shall be made by ordinance.
b. The procedures which shall be followed for amending the General Plan
shall be the same as for conditional use permits (see subsection
30-26.5), except as follows:
1. Filing Fees. There shall be a filing fee in an amount set by
ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
2. Legal Notice. Legal notice shall be provided in accordance with
Section 65352 of the California Government Code.
3. Action by the Council. Not more than 60 days after action by the
Commission, its findings and recommendations, together with the
complete records of the case, shall be delivered to the City Clerk
for transmission to the Council. Council shall set the matter for a
hearing, give notice thereof in accordance with Section 65352 of
the Government Code and in the same manner as upon an appeal
from a decision of the Commission on a conditional use permit (see
paragraph b of subsection 30-26.5) and shall conduct a hearing
thereon. The decision of the Council shall be final, and any such
General Plan amendment shall be made by resolution.
§ 30-28.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-28.3
AO:1119
§ 30-29. ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND. [Added by Ord. #1557,
§ 9173]
c. Abandonment of Proceedings. Any application for a change of zone or
General Plan amendment in which no action has been taken or which
has been taken under submission or tabled for any reason after the
public hearing by the Commission or City Council shall automatically
become null and void after six months, unless the Commission or the
applicant has requested that the application be considered further
within such six-month period. Such action shall not prejudice the filing
of a new application for a change of zone or General Plan amendment
on the same lot or parcel of land.
a. Comparable County Zoning. Except as provided in this section, an area
annexed to the City shall be zoned in the same or the nearest
comparable zone as the land was zoned in the County immediately prior
to annexation, as follows:
County City
A-1, R-1 to R-L
R-2 to R-M
R-3, R-4 to R-H
P to P
C-H to C-O
C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4 to C-L
C-M to C-M
M-1 to M-L
M-1 1/2, M-2, M-2 1/2, M-3,
M-4
to M-H
B-1, B-2 to B
Where the area is zoned in the County in any other zone than those
set forth in this subsection, the zoning upon annexation shall be
determined in accordance with the requirements set forth in
paragraph b of this subsection.
b. Pre-Zoning. The City may pre-zone and pre-grant conditional use
permits and variances in unincorporated territory adjoining the City for
the purposes of determining the zone and uses that will apply to such
property in the event of subsequent annexation to the City. The method
of accomplishing such predeterminations shall be the same as provided
for property within the City and shall become effective at the same time
the annexation of such territory becomes effective.
§ 30-28.3 COMPTON § 30-30
AO:1120
§ 30-30. UNLISTED USES. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9174]
When a use is not listed in any of the zones or as a conditional use,
the Commission shall determine, by resolution in writing, the proper zone
classification for such use. Such resolution shall be referred to the Council
where such use shall be placed in the proper zone classification by
ordinance.
§ 30-31. CONFORMITY REQUIRED. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9175]
Except as provided in this Chapter, no building shall be erected, and no
existing building shall be occupied, reconstructed, structurally altered,
added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, buildings or premises be used,
designed, or intended to be used for any purpose except in conformance
with the uses and property development standards set forth in this Chapter
for the zone in which such land, buildings or premises are located.
§ 30-32. USES BY THE CITY EXCEPTED. [Ord. #1592, § 1; Ord.
#1975, § 1; Ord. #2097, § 1]
§ 30-33. CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY. [Added by Ord. #1557,
§ 9177]
a. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the use of any property
owned by the City, the Compton Redevelopment Agency or the Local
Housing Authority, but shall apply to the use of property by any other
municipal, political or governmental corporation.
b. The City Council may modify property development standards of this
Chapter as they apply to private property through the adoption of a
resolution which finds that:
1. A public safety emergency exists; and
2. A property development standard contained in this Chapter
prevents the City from addressing or reducing the emergency.
c. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to property owned by the
Compton Unified School District and used for public school facilities,
including classrooms, accessory educational services or administrative
offices, but excluding non-office support services such as central
kitchens, warehouses, equipment and vehicle servicing facilities or
storage yards.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any building, portion of a
building, property or portion of property for any commercial,
professional, industrial, church, public assembly, governmental or other
type of use, except dwelling units, unless a certificate of occupancy
shall have been issued by the Planning Department.
b. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the Building, Fire and
Planning Departments of the City shall have determined, after
§ 30-30 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-33
AO:1121
§ 30-34. INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS. [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9178]
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Chapter, such provisions
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public safety, health, convenience, comfort and general welfare.
§ 30-35. INVALIDITY OF PERMITS AND LICENSES ISSUED IN
ERROR. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9179]
No oversight or dereliction on the part of any official or employee of the
City vested with the authority to issue permits or licenses shall legalize,
authorize, waive, or excuse the violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter, nor shall any permit or license be issued for any use, building, or
purpose which would be in conflict with such provisions or with any other
law in force or adopted on or after May 4, 1978. Any permit or license so
issued shall be null and void.
§ 30-36. ENFORCEMENT. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9180]
It shall be the duty of the Planning Director and/or the Chief Building
Inspector or their designated representatives to determine if a violation
of the provisions of this Chapter exists and to enforce such provisions in
Section 30-35.
§ 30-37. VIOLATIONS: NOTICES. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9180.1]
Upon a determination that a violation exists, the owner of the property and,
when known, the owner of the materials and/or structures in violation, if
any, and, when known, the occupant of the property, if any, shall be notified
of such violation in the following manner:
investigation, that the property and buildings comply with all the
requirements of this Code and the laws of the County and the State for
the specified use, within their respective jurisdiction, and with all the
requirements of the Commission and Council pursuant to the provisions
of this Code.
c. Certificates of occupancy shall state the address of the use, the type of
use, the name, address and signature of the person conducting the use,
the name and address of the property owner, and the certification of the
Building, Fire and Planning Departments that the use meets the
requirements set forth in this section.
d. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any building, portion of a
building, property or portion of property for a different type of use from
that set forth on the certificate of occupancy.
a. By Mail. Such notification shall be in writing and shall contain:
1. The nature of the violation;
§ 30-33 COMPTON § 30-37
AO:1122
§ 30-38. ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE. [Added by Ord. #1557,
§ 9180.2; Ord. #1924, § 3]
§ 30-39. ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE; APPEALS. [Added by Ord.
#1557, § 9180.3]
Within five days after the receipt of notification of the existence of violations
of the provisions of this Chapter or within five days after the end of the
posting period, the owner of the property, the owner of the materials and/
or structures in violation, or the occupant of the property found to be in
violation may make a written appeal to the Commission. The fee for such
appeal shall be $50.
Within 30 days after the receipt of such written appeal, the Commission
shall hear and consider all relevant evidence and shall receive testimony
from the owners, witnesses, City personnel, and interested persons relative
to such appeal.
2. A specified period of time to abate the violation; and
3. The nature of the action to be taken upon failure to abate the
violation or file an appeal pursuant to Section 30-39 within the
specified time period.
b. By Publication. Whenever the owner and/or occupant cannot be notified
by mail as provided in paragraph a of this subsection, the property shall
be posted for 10 days with a notice of violation which shall contain the
information set forth in paragraph a of this subsection.
a. Abatement. After proper notification as provided in Section 30-35, the
Planning Director or the Chief Building Inspector or their designated
representatives may cause the closure of any building, place of
assembly, or activity or may order the removal from the property of
materials and structures which are in violation of this Chapter.
b. Recovery of Costs of Abatement. The costs incurred in the abatement of
a violation may be charged to the owner of the property, the owner of
the materials removed, or the occupant of the property.
c. Administrative Cost/Fee Schedule.
1. Administrative fee shall be $100.
2. Reinspection fee shall be $72 per inspection, after the initial
inspection, if compliance is not met within the stipulated period. No
reinspection fee shall be charged if compliance is obtained after
the initial inspection.
3. Reoccurring violation fee shall be $72 per inspection for each
reoccurring violation within a twelve-month period, plus the
administrative fee.
§ 30-37 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-39
AO:1123
Upon the conclusion of such hearing, the Commission shall announce its
findings by formal resolution, and such resolution shall consider possible
remedies and set a date when full compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter shall be effected.
§ 30-40. PENALTIES. [Added by Ord. #1557, § 9181; Ord. #2282
§ 28]
§ 30-41. REPEAL OF FORMER PROVISIONS. [Added by Ord. #1557,
§ 9182]
Ordinance No. 1095 of the City, as amended, is hereby repealed; provided,
however, such repeal shall not constitute a forgiveness of any violation
of said ordinance, as amended, to the effective date of the repeal or bar
to prosecutions or other remedies with respect thereto. Nothing in this
Chapter shall extend the permitted continuation of any nonconforming use
or structure which was nonconforming under any prior zoning law and
remains nonconforming under this Chapter. Uses and buildings which are
existing under a variance, special approval, or special use permit granted
under any previous law shall not be considered as nonconforming and shall
a. General Zoning Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, or by imprisonment in the City or County jail for a period of not
more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during
any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Chapter is
committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be
punishable therefor as provided for in this Chapter, and any use,
occupation, building, or structure maintained contrary to the provisions
of this Chapter shall constitute a public nuisance.
b. Penalties for Violations of Ord. #2282. Except as otherwise expressly
provided herein, and in accordance with Section 612 of the City
Charter, violation of any provision of this Ordinance (Ord. #2282) shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every day
such a violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct violation
of this Ordinance, to the extent allowable under the law.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this Ordinance shall
authorize a criminal prosecution or arrest prohibited by Health and
Safety Code section 11362.71, et seq. or section 11362.1 et seq., as the
same may be amended from time to time. In the event of any conflict
between the penalties enumerated under this Ordinance and those set
forth in state law, the maximum penalties allowable under state law
shall govern. The remedies set forth in this Ordinance are not exclusive
of any other remedies available at law.
§ 30-39 COMPTON § 30-41
AO:1124
be permitted to continue under the conditions and regulations imposed in
the granting of such variance, special approval, or special use permit.
§ 30-42. PLANNING FEES. [Ord. #1814, § 2; Ord. #2093, § 1; Ord.
#2295 § 21]
The City Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, from time to time
determine and fix the amount to be assessed as fees charged by the
Planning Department to defray the cost of postage, posting and processing
of applicable applications and requests. All fees shall be paid in advance and
shall be nonrefundable.
§ 30-43. LANDSCAPING.
§ 30-43.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2011, § 1]
This section establishes regulations for the installation and maintenance of
landscaping to:
§ 30-43.2. General Regulations. [Ord. #2011, § 1]
a. Improve the aesthetic appearance of landscaped and open areas;
b. Create buffers between land uses and between private property and
traffic zones;
c. Reduce soil erosion, minimize pollutants and dust, and limit noise, heat
and glare; and
d. Promote water conservation by using established drought tolerant
landscaping principles.
a. Provision of Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance
with this section for all residential, commercial, industrial and
institutional sites.
b. Pre-existing Buildings and Landscaping.
1. Pre-existing buildings are not required to upgrade existing
landscaping provided that:
(a) All required front and street side yard setbacks are developed
with a combination of landscaping and paving, which may
include grass, shrubs, vines, flowers, groundcover and trees;
and
(b) All existing landscaping is maintained and irrigated and all
new landscaping is installed in accordance with this section.
2. Pre-existing buildings can be expanded or renovated without
upgrading existing landscaping provided that:
§ 30-41 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-43.2
AO:1125
§ 30-43.3. Landscape Standards. [Ord. #2011, § 1]
Table 30-43.A87 provides standards for the minimum amount of landscaping
required for each land use. In addition to the information provided in the
table, the following standards shall apply:
(a) The site complies with the landscaping provisions of this
Chapter which were in effect when the building was originally
constructed;
(b) The addition, rehabilitation or renovation does not affect
existing landscaping or parking area design; and
(c) The addition, rehabilitation or renovation does not increase
existing floor area by more than 20%.
c. Architectural Review Board. Landscaping for new projects and for
project additions of more than 20% of existing floor area shall be
approved by the Architectural Review Board.
1. A landscaping plan shall be submitted to and approved by the
Architectural Review Board prior to the issuance of a building
permit for any development subject to this section.
2. Landscaping plans shall comply with all applicable Community
Redevelopment Agency Corridor Improvement Programs.
3. The Architectural Review Board may modify the requirements of
this section for projects where full compliance cannot reasonably
be provided.
d. Compliance. All required landscaping shall be properly installed,
irrigated and inspected and a system for permanent maintenance shall
be in place prior to inauguration of use. No certificate of occupancy
shall be approved unless the landscaping is healthy and properly
maintained and the required irrigation system is fully operational.
a. Residential Development.
1. Front yard and street side yard areas shall be landscaped with a
combination of plant materials in order to create a variety of
landscape elevations;
2. Paved areas within required front and street side yard setbacks
shall be limited to walkways and required driveways; and
3. Rear yard, interior yards and courtyard areas shall be fully
landscaped and/or paved as appropriate to the design of the
project.
b. Commercial and Institutional Development.
87.Editor's Note: The table referred to herein may be found at the end of this subsection.
§ 30-43.2 COMPTON § 30-43.3
AO:1126
1. A minimum of 5% of the total land area of lots two acres or less
shall be landscaped.
2. A minimum of 10% of the total land area of lots greater than two
acres shall be landscaped.
3. Unless deed restrictions are more restrictive, a minimum ten-foot
setback from all adjacent public rights-of-way, excluding driveways
and walkways, shall be landscaped with a combination of plant
materials in order to create a variety of landscape elevations.
c. Industrial Development.
1. A minimum of 5% of the total site area shall be landscaped.
2. Unless deed restrictions are more restrictive, a minimum ten-foot
setback from all adjacent public rights-of-way, excluding driveways
and walkways, shall be landscaped with a variety of plant materials
in order to create a variety of landscape elevations.
3. A five-foot landscaped setback shall be provided for solid walls and
fences adjacent to public streets.
4. Paved areas within the minimum setback shall be limited to
walkways and required driveways.
d. Location. A minimum of 50% of required nonresidential setbacks shall
be landscaped. All remaining landscaping shall be located to maximize
its visibility from public rights-of-way.
e. Parkways. Parkways shall be landscaped with one thirty-six-inch box
tree for every 25 lineal feet of adjacent street frontage in commercial
zones and every 50 lineal feet of adjacent street frontage in residential
and industrial zones, unless alternate parkway landscaping is required
by the Architectural Review Board or the Department of Public Works.
f. Phased Developments. Areas which are part of a phased development
plan and which are proposed for construction more than six months
from completion of a previous phase shall be temporarily landscaped
and irrigated for dust control. All parkway landscaping shall be
completed concurrent with construction of the first phase of the
development.
g. Parking Lots. Parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with this
section. Parking lot landscape design shall comply with subsection
30-21.6 of this Chapter.
§ 30-43.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-43.3
AO:1127
§ 30-43.4. Landscape Materials. [Ord. #2011, § 1]
Table 30-43.A
Minimum Landscaping Requirements
Land Use Front &
Street Side
Yard
Setbacks
Rear &
Interior
Yards
Minimum
Percentage
of Lot
Parkway
Residential
Projects
Fully
landscaped,
except
driveways
and
walkways
Fully
improved with
landscaping,
patios, deck
and other
finished
surface
treatments
N/A 1 36 inches
box tree per
50 lineal feet
street
frontage
Commercial
Projects
10 feet
minimum
landscaped
setback, may
include
driveways,
walkways
Improved with
parking areas,
landscaping
and other
finished
surface
treatments
Projects >2
acres: 5%
Projects <2
acres: 10%
1 36 inches
box tree per
25 lineal feet
street
frontage
Industrial
Projects
10 feet
minimum
landscaped
setback, may
include
driveways,
walkways
Improved with
parking areas,
paved storage
areas,
landscaping,
other finished
surface
treatments
5% 1 36 inches
box tree per
50 lineal feet
street
frontage
Institutions10 feet
minimum
landscaped
setback, may
include
driveways,
walkways
Improved with
parking areas,
landscaping,
other finished
surface
treatments
Projects >2
acres 5%
Projects <2
acres 10%
1 36 inches
box tree per
25 lineal feet
in commercial
zones and 50
lineal feet in
residential
and
manufacturing
zones
a. Selection. All landscape materials shall be selected from the approved
materials list maintained by the Architectural Review Board.
1. Landscaping shall be composed of a variety of plant materials,
including grass, shrubs, plants, flowers, vines, trees and ground
§ 30-43.3 COMPTON § 30-43.4
AO:1128
§ 30-43.5. Irrigation. [Ord. #2011, § 1]
§ 30-43.6. Installation, Maintenance and Safety. [Ord. #2011, § 1]
covers. Agricultural products shall not be used within required
front and street side yard landscaping.
2. Materials shall be selected for ease of maintenance, drought
tolerance, soil retention, fire resistance, ability to provide shade
and overall adaptability.
3. Materials shall be compatible as to color, form and pattern with
adjacent properties and integrated with the overall project
including buildings, freestanding structures, parking lots and
streets.
b. Additional Materials Permitted. Landscaping may incorporate materials
other than plants to achieve aesthetic effect. Acceptable materials
include cobbles, crushed rock, woodchips or bark, stepping stones,
decorator edging, fountains and pools and low-intensity lighting. These
materials shall not be used in lieu of planting materials.
a. Automatic Irrigation. An automatic irrigation system shall be installed
in all required landscaped areas, including parkways. The system shall
be adequate to insure the long-term viability of all landscape
improvements.
b. Controls. The system shall include backflow preventers and anti-siphon
valves. The controls shall be placed in appropriate enclosures in order
to reduce vandalism.
c. Sprinkler Heads. Sprinkler heads and risers shall be protected from
pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Pop-up heads shall be installed near
curbs and sidewalks.
d. Excess Irrigation. Water waste resulting from inefficient irrigation
systems that create excessive runoff, overspray and other conditions in
which water flows onto adjacent property or improvements shall be
prohibited.
a. Installation. Plant materials shall be installed to current nursery
industry standards. Plant materials shall be properly supported to
ensure survival. Support devices such as guy wires or stakes shall not
interfere with vehicular or pedestrian movement.
b. Maintenance. Landscape maintenance is the responsibility of the
property owner. Landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, clean and
healthy condition. Maintenance shall consist of, but shall not be limited
to, the following:
1. Regular watering;
2. Routine mowing and pruning;
§ 30-43.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-43.6
AO:1129
§ 30-43.7. Removal of Landscaping or Trees. [Ord. #2011, § 1]
3. Fertilizing;
4. Clearing of debris and weeds;
5. Removal and replacement of dead plants; and
6. Repair and/or replacement of malfunctioning irrigation systems
and integrated architectural features.
c. Safety. Landscape materials shall be located and maintained so they do
not:
1. Interfere with safe sight distances for vehicular, bicycle or
pedestrian traffic;
2. Conflict with overhead or underground utility lines, overhead lights
or walkway lights;
3. Block pedestrian or bicycle ways;
4. Interfere with basic property rights of adjacent property owners,
particularly the right of solar access;
5. Contribute to fire hazards, as determined by the Fire Department;
and
6. Present safety hazards, as determined by the Police Department.
d. Corner Lots and Intersections.
1. A visual clearance triangle shall be established at the intersection
of all streets, alleys and driveways for the purpose of maintaining
adequate sight distance. The triangle shall have a minimum
dimension on the sides of 15 feet.
2. Within a visual clearance triangle, trees shall be pruned so that no
branches extend lower than six feet above curb level. Other plants
shall not exceed 2 1/2 feet in height above curb level.
a. Removal of Approved Landscaping. Architectural Review Board
approval shall be required prior to the removal or alteration of
landscaping previously approved by the City. This does not apply to
routine removal of material that occurs during normal maintenance.
b. Removal or Destruction of Trees. Existing mature trees shall be
preserved during project development whenever possible. Tree
removal or destruction shall conform to the following provisions:
1. When a mature or specimen tree is removed, mutilated or
destroyed the Architectural Review Board may require its
replacement with a tree of equivalent size and species.
§ 30-43.6 COMPTON § 30-43.7
AO:1130
§ 30-44. FENCING.
§ 30-44.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2025, § 1]
These regulations establish standards for fences that:
§ 30-44.2. General Regulations. [Ord. #2025, § 1]
2. When more than five trees are to be cut down, uprooted, destroyed
or removed within a twenty-four-month period, a permit and
replacement plan must be approved by the Architectural Review
Board.
a. Provide for the separation of land uses and ensure that they are
screened from public view.
b. Provide for the delineation of property lines.
c. Enhance the security and private enjoyment of property.
d. Improve the aesthetic appearance of the City.
a. Applicability. These regulations apply to all fences, walls, hedges, gates
or any other structures that are designed to separate or enclose
property or screen activities, materials or equipment from view.
b. Fence Maintenance. Every fence, including temporary fences, shall be
properly maintained and kept in good repair.
1. Fences shall be physically safe and stable and shall not constitute a
dangerous structure as defined in subsection 14-3.2 of the
Compton Municipal Code.
2. Defective parts shall be replaced and cracks, holes and broken
surfaces repaired. Gates, hinges and locks shall be maintained in
working order.
3. Fences shall be kept clean, neatly painted and free from graffiti,
termites, rust, corrosion, holes, or other unsightly conditions.
c. Preexisting Fencing. Fences and gates that were constructed prior to
adoption of this section shall be regulated as follows:
1. Preexisting fences and gates may be continued, without upgrade,
provided they conform to the following standards:
(a) They are physically stable, meet minimum standards for safe
construction and do not constitute a dangerous structure as
defined by subsection 14-3.2 of the Compton Municipal Code.
(b) They were constructed of recognized fencing materials such as
chain link, wrought iron, wood panels or planks which are
§ 30-43.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-44.2
AO:1131
painted or treated for weather resistance, masonry or
enameled steel.
(c) They are in good condition and conform to the standards for
safety, maintenance and repair contained in this section.
(d) They do not exceed five feet in height within a residential front
yard or eight feet in height within a residential rear or side
yard.
(e) Residential rear yard fences and gates which abut a public
right-of-way are constructed so they successfully screen the
rear yard and all visible outside storage from public view.
(f) Fences and gates that separate a commercial or manufacturing
zone from a residential zone are constructed of solid wood or
masonry and are no less than six feet in height.
(g) Fences and gates used to enclose storage of material or
equipment are solid and successfully screen all visible outside
storage from public view.
(h) Gates do not open over or encroach upon public rights-of-way.
2. Preexisting fencing must be replaced with fencing which conforms
to this section when:
(a) The fence has deteriorated to the point that 25% of the fence
must be repaired or replaced.
(b) The property where the fence is located initiates rehabilitation
or renovation the cost of which exceeds 25% of fair market
value.
(c) The buildings occupying the property where the fence is
located are expanded by 25% or more of gross floor area.
3. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to permit razor wire,
concertina wire, cut glass, used or salvaged materials or other
materials which were never permitted for use as fencing.
4. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to permit the use of
barbed wire within residential or commercial zones.
d. Architectural Review Board. The Architectural Review Board shall
approve all fences and gates constructed along major or secondary
highways. Rear yard fences for single-family homes are exempted from
review except as required by the Planning Commission or an approved
Corridor Improvement Plan.
e. Major Corridors. The Community Redevelopment Agency may require
that existing fencing be upgraded in conjunction with an approved
Corridor Improvement Plan.
§ 30-44.2 COMPTON § 30-44.3
AO:1132
§ 30-44.3. Fencing Standards. [Ord. #2025, § 1; Ord. #2080, § 1]
Table 30-44.A provides standards for fence height and construction for each
land use. In addition to the information provided in the table, the following
standards shall apply:
a. Required Fencing.
1. A solid fence shall be provided in accordance with this section for:
(a) All residential rear yards.
(b) All property lines which separate a commercial or
manufacturing zone from a residential zone.
(c) All areas, irrespective of zone, which contain outside storage
or maintenance of vehicles, equipment, machinery or other
goods and materials. Materials may not be stored higher than
the height of the fence.
2. A solid, open or combination fence with a self-closing and locking
gate shall be provided for any public or private swimming pool.
b. Optional Fencing. A fence may be constructed along property lines
where no fence is required provided it is constructed in accordance
with this section.
c. Open Fencing. An open or open work fence shall mean a fence which
permits the free passage of light and in which the component solid
portions are evenly divided and constitute not more than 50% of the
total surface area of the face of the fence.
d. Combination Fencing. A combination fence shall mean a fence with
decorative pilasters and/or a solid base no more than 50% the height of
the fence.
e. Gates. No gate shall swing out over a public right-of-way. All gates shall
open parallel to the fence or swing open onto the property itself.
f. Height Measurement.
1. Fence height shall be measured from the finished grade (excluding
berming or mounding) to the top of the fence.
2. When a difference in grade exists on opposing sides of a rear or
side yard fence, the height of the fence may be measured from the
elevation of the higher grade provided the total height of the fence
does not exceed the maximum fence height for the zone by more
than two feet.
g. Trash Enclosures. All trash from all multiple-family, commercial and
manufacturing uses shall be kept in an enclosure of the type described
in this paragraph.
§ 30-44.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-44.3
AO:1133
1. Trash enclosures shall have a minimum dimension of eight feet by
eight feet and shall be sufficient in size to contain all trash
containers.
2. Trash enclosures shall be bounded on three sides by walls
constructed of masonry, block or a similar material compatible in
color, texture and appearance with the main structure.
3. The height of the enclosure shall be a minimum of six feet and shall
be sufficient to conceal the contents of the enclosure, including all
containers.
4. Trash enclosures shall have a gated opening of sufficient width to
permit the removal and replacement of trash bins and/or
containers. The gate shall be constructed of an opaque material
and shall be equipped with a latch or other device to ensure that
the gate remains closed when not in use.
5. Trash bins and/or containers shall remain in the enclosure except
during trash collection operations.
6. All trash enclosures shall be approved by the Architectural Review
Board.
7. The Architectural Review Board may approve modified provisions
for the storage of trash containers within manufacturing zones
provided that the bins will be fully screened from the public rightof-
way.
8. The Architectural Review Board may approve modified provisions
for the screened storage of trash containers within commercial and
residential zones where construction of a traditional trash
enclosure would be physically impossible.
Table 30-44.A
Fencing Standards
Standard Status Height Provisions
Residential Zones or Uses
Front Yards Abutting Residential
Streets
Optional 0 feet Minimum - 3 1/
2 feet Maximum
Open or Combination
Front Yards Abutting
Nonresidential Streets and Major
and Secondary Highways
Optional 0 feet Minimum - 5
feet Maximum
Open or Combination
Rear and Side Yards Abutting
Residential Zones
Required 5 feet Minimum - 6
feet Maximum
Solid
§ 30-44.3 COMPTON § 30-44.3
AO:1134
§ 30-44.4. Fencing Materials. [Ord. #2025, § 1; Ord. #2155, § 6]
Standards for fencing materials shall be based on land use, irrespective
of the zone in which the use is located. The following materials shall be
permitted:
Table 30-44.A
Fencing Standards
Standard Status Height Provisions
Rear and Side Yards Abutting
Public Rights-of-ways, Schools,
Commercial or Manufacturing
Zones
Required 5 feet Minimum - 8
feet Maximum
Solid
Commercial Zones or Uses
Front Yards Optional 0 feet Minimum - 6
feet Maximum
Open or Combination
Rear and Side Yards Abutting
Residential Zones
Required 6 feet Minimum - 8
feet Maximum
Solid
Rear and Side Yards Optional 0 feet Minimum - 8
feet Maximum
Open, Solid or
Combination
Manufacturing Zones or Uses
Front Yards Optional 0 feet Minimum - 6
feet Maximum
Open, Solid or
Combination
Rear and Side Yards Abutting
Residential Zones
Required 6 feet Minimum - 8
feet Maximum
Solid
Rear and Side Yards Optional 0 feet Minimum - 12
feet Maximum
Open, Solid or
Combination
Outside Storage Required 6 feet Minimum - 12
feet Maximum;
Sufficient to screen
all storage
Solid
Swimming Pools
All Zones Required 6 feet Minimum - 8
feet Maximum
Open, Solid or
Combination - Selfclosing
Gate
a. White Picket Fences: White picket fences shall be allowed to enclose
the front yard setback of any residential use in all zones, except where
solid fencing is required to separate commercial or manufacturing
zones from a residential zone and on vacant lots in residential and
commercial zones. Picket fencing may be made of wood, polyvinyl or
other approved material.
§ 30-44.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-44.4
AO:1135
b. Wrought Iron. Wrought iron fencing may be used for all fences
enclosing required front yard setbacks in all zones. Front yard fences
may include the use of decorative masonry pilasters and may contain a
masonry base no more than 50% the fence height.
c. Masonry. Masonry fencing shall be used in the following situations:
1. On all property lines which separate a commercial or
manufacturing zone from a residential zone.
2. On all property lines which separate a multiple-family residential
zone from a single-family residential zone.
3. On all rear and side yard property lines in all zones when adjacent
to a major or secondary highway.
4. On all rear and side yard property lines in new subdivisions.
d. Wood. Wood panels or planks designed for fencing construction and
painted or treated for weather resistance may be used on interior rear
and side yard property lines in all zones when:
1. The property line is not adjacent to a major or secondary highway.
2. The property line does not separate a commercial or manufacturing
zone from a residential zone or a multiple-family residential zone
from a single-family residential zone.
e. Chain Link. Chain link fencing may be used in the following situations:
1. On interior commercial, manufacturing and institutional property
lines which are not adjacent to a residential zone or visible from a
public right-of-way.
2. To enclose swimming pools which are not visible from a public
right-of-way.
3. To enclose vacant lots and construction sites.
4. In combination with neutral colored slats to screen outdoor storage
areas in manufacturing zones which are not visible from, or
adjacent to, a public right-of-way.
f. Alternate Materials. The Architectural Review Board may approve
alternate fencing materials which are comparable in appearance,
durability and screening capacity to those specified herein provided the
alternate material will be compatible with fencing in the area. The
Board shall maintain a list of approved alternate materials, which shall
include, but not be limited to, split rail fences, enameled steel fences,
hedges and other landscaping treatments.
g. Barbed Wire. A maximum of three strands of barbed wire may be used
along property line fences which do not abut residential zones within
the M-L and M-H Zones.
§ 30-44.4 COMPTON § 30-44.4
AO:1136
§ 30-44.5. Exceptions. [Ord. #2025, § 1]
h. Prohibited Materials. (For exception, see subsection 30-20.5i of this
Chapter.)
1. Corrugated metal, sheet metal, tin and similar materials.
2. Chicken wire.
3. Fiberglass products.
4. Plywood, panel board or other wood products not designed for
exterior fencing.
5. Used and salvaged materials of any kind, including tires, railroad
ties or doors.
6. Electrified fencing.
7. Razor wire, concertina wire or cut glass.
8. Fabric or plastic sheeting.
a. Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
1. Fences required by any law or regulation of the City, the State of
California, the Federal Government or agency thereof.
2. Chain link fences enclosing school grounds.
3. Public parks and playgrounds.
b. Minor Modifications. In order to provide design review flexibility and
implement the goals of the City's design policy, the Architectural
Review Board may approve permits for minor modifications to the
fencing standards as follows:
1. Fencing materials not specified on the approved materials list may
be approved if comparable in appearance, durability and screening
capacity to those materials on the list.
2. Alternate fencing designs may be approved if compatible in design
and appearance with adjacent fencing.
3. Fence height adjustments, not to exceed two feet, along major
corridors may be approved in order to bring property into
conformance with adjacent properties.
4. Fence height adjustments, not to exceed 1 1/2 feet, along
residential property lines may be approved in order to bring
property into conformance with the average fence height along
neighboring properties within 150 feet of the proposed fence.
§ 30-44.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-44.5
AO:1137
§ 30-45. DESIGN REVIEW.
§ 30-45.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2101, § 20]
The purpose of the design provisions of this Chapter is to guarantee that
projects within the City will conform to sound design principles regarding
the construction and appearance of buildings, site layouts, landscaping,
parking, signage, access and other physical design features.
§ 30-45.2. Review Required. [Ord. #2101, § 20]
The following projects shall be subject to design review:
c. Major Modifications. Specific land uses may justify significant
modification of fencing standards. Such modifications shall require a
variance in accordance with Section 30-27 of this Chapter.
a. New multiple-family, commercial, industrial and institutional
construction, including:
1. New buildings,
2. Additions and renovations,
3. Facade improvements, and
4. New paint and stucco.
b. Exterior yard improvements, including:
1. Parking lots,
2. Fences,
3. Landscaping,
4. Outside seating areas,
5. Trash enclosures, and
6. Storage areas.
c. Auxiliary structures, utility structures and mechanical appurtenances.
d. Accessory and temporary uses.
e. Public art, including murals.
f. Residential subdivisions.
g. Projects referred for design review by the Planning Commission.
h. Projects referred for design review by any portion of the Compton
Municipal Code.
§ 30-44.5 COMPTON § 30-45.3
AO:1138
§ 30-45.3. Architectural Review Board. [Ord. #2101, § 20]
An Architectural Review Board shall be established to review those projects
designated by this Chapter as subject to design review.
§ 30-45.4. Project Review. [Ord. #2101, § 20]
§ 30-45.5. Scope of Review. [Ord. #2101, § 20]
The Architectural Review Board shall review all projects to verify
compliance with the development standards in this Chapter as follows:
a. The Architectural Review Board shall be administered by the Planning
Department and shall be composed of the following members:
1. Planning Department.
2. Building and Safety Department.
3. Public Works Department.
4. Community Redevelopment Agency.
5. Fire Department.
6. Water Department.
7. Architectural Consultant.
a. Staff Review. The following minor projects will be reviewed by assigned
City staff for administrative approval:
1. Exterior paint and stucco that conforms to the City's Uniform Paint
Ordinance.
2. Changes in text to existing, conforming signage.
3. Auxiliary structures such as trash and utility enclosures and
mechanical appurtenances that are predominately screened from
public view.
4. Minor modifications to perimeter fencing standards.
b. Design Team Review. Small and medium sized projects shall be
reviewed by a Design Review Team composed of a minimum of two
members of the Architectural Review Board, including a representative
of the Planning Department or the Building and Safety Department.
c. Committee Review. Large projects shall be reviewed by a Design
Review Team composed of a minimum of four members of the
Architectural Review Board, including a representative of the Planning
Department.
a. Minor Modifications. The Architectural Review Board may approve
minor modifications to the property development standards in this
§ 30-45.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-45.5
AO:1139
§ 30-45.6. Procedures. [Ord. #2101, § 20]
Projects that are subject to design review shall be submitted in accordance
with the following application and processing procedures:
§ 30-46. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES ORDINANCE.
Chapter in order to provide design review flexibility and implement the
goals of the City's design policy. Such modifications shall represent no
more than a 10% reduction to the applicable standard and shall only be
approved as a part of the design review process for new or remodeled
projects where conformance to the Code would pose a substantial
hardship and create a significant negative impact on overall project
design.
b. Temporary and Accessory Uses. The Architectural Review Board may
approve the following temporary uses:
1. Nonaccessory tent sales conducted on a vacant, paved site for not
more than 12 days per calendar year.
2. Special event signs, including supergraphics, inflatables and
advertising statuary, for not more than 12 days per calendar year.
a. Application. The application shall be submitted on an approved form
and shall show the street address, the proposed use, pictures, a fully
dimension site plan and such other information as the Architectural
Review Board deems necessary.
b. Finality of Action. Architectural Review Board decisions are final unless
appealed as follows:
1. Staff and administrative design decisions may be appealed to the
full Architectural Review Board within five calendar days of the
applicable decision.
2. Decisions by the full Architectural Review Board may be appealed
to the Planning Commission within five calendar days of Board
action.
3. Decisions by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City
Council within five calendar days of Commission action.
4. Decisions by the City Council shall be final.
c. Filing Fees. At the time of submission or appeal, the applicant shall pay
a filing fee, the amount of which shall be set by an ordinance of the City
Council and shall be adjusted periodically to reflect changes in
processing costs borne by the City.
§ 30-45.5 COMPTON § 30-46.1
AO:1140
§ 30-46.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
The purpose and intent of this section is to establish standards for the
location, siting and design of PWSFs, and the goals of this section are to: (1)
allow for alternative types of PWSFs in any location subject to standards; (2)
encourage the use of the existing right-of-way with new utility poles made
expressly for deploying PWSFs; (3) expedite the review process for those
applications choosing the least intrusive alternative of deploying PWSFs;
(4) encourage users of monopoles and antennas to locate, site and design
them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the monopoles
and antennas; (5) enhance the ability of the providers of personal wireless
services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently; and (6) promote PWSFs' compatibility with surrounding land
uses, as well as protect the health, safety, general welfare, and property
values of the community.
§ 30-46.2. Permits Required. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
Each personal wireless service facility (PWSF) must have at least two
permits: one building permit and one zoning permit, each of which shall be
issued by the City of Compton in accordance with this section.
§ 30-46.3. Definitions. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
a. AESTHETICS – Shall mean a term of art rather than demonstrable fact
that should not be used in the evaluation or denial of a PWSF
application.
b. ANTENNA – Shall mean a whip (omnidirectional antenna), panel
(direction antenna), disc (parabolic antenna) or similar device used for
transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals. An antenna
alone is not a PWSF.
c. ANTENNA ARRAY – Shall mean an antenna array one or more whips,
panels, discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception
of radio frequency signals, which may include omnidirectional antennas
(whips), directional antennas (panels), and parabolic antennas (discs).
The antenna array does not include the mount as defined herein.
d. APPLICANT – Shall mean a person or entity with an application before
the City for a permit for a PWSF. The applicant must be a carrier, a
landowner where the facility will be located or the proposed owner of
the facility. A carrier must be either the applicant or the co-applicant on
each application. If the proposed PWSF is for two or more carriers,
each carrier must file its own application as either the applicant or coapplicant.
e. AGL (ABOVE GROUND LEVEL) – Shall mean the actual height of the
PWSF from the ground to the highest part of the mount or the antenna,
whichever is higher. Beacons, lightning rods and other appurtenances
are included in this calculation.
§ 30-46.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-46.3
AO:1141
f. CAMOUFLAGE – Shall mean a way of painting and mounting a PWSF
that requires minimal changes to the host structure in order to
accommodate the facility.
g. CARRIER – Shall mean a company licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to provide personal wireless
services. A tower company, a tower management firm or a tower builder
is not a carrier.
h. CELLULAR – Shall mean a mobile telephone service operating in the
800 MHz spectrum.
i. CITY – Shall mean City of Compton, California.
j. CO-APPLICANT – Shall mean a person or entity that joins with an
applicant in an application before the City for a permit for a PWSF. The
co-applicant can only be a carrier, a landowner where the facility will be
located or the proposed owner of the facility. A carrier must be either
the applicant or the co-applicant on each application. If the proposed
PWSF is for two or more carriers, each carrier must file its own
application as either the applicant or co-applicant.
k. CO-LOCATION – Shall mean the use of a common support structure or
common site by two or more PWSFs or by one carrier for more than one
type of communications technology. A single carrier mounting on a
structure for any other use, such as electrical transmission or
distribution, is not co-location.
l. COMMERCIAL MOBILE RADIO SERVICES (CMRS) – Shall mean per
section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which amended
Section 332(c)(7)(A) of the Communications Act of 1934, any of several
technologies using radio signals at various frequencies to send and
receive voice, data and video. These services include Cellular PCS,
paging, Enhanced Specialized Mobile Radio and Specialized Mobile
Radio.
m. COMMON CARRIER WIRELESS EXCHANGE SERVICES – Shall mean
those services which initiate, relay or terminate a local exchange
carrier's or competitive local exchange carrier's telephonic message via
a wireless connection.
n. CONCEAL – Shall mean to enclose a PWSF within a natural or manmade
feature resulting in the facility being either invisible or made part
of the feature enclosing it.
o. DESIGN – Shall mean the appearance of PWSFs such as their materials,
colors and shape.
p. DISGUISE – Shall mean to design a PWSF to appear to be something
other than a PWSF.
q. DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM (DAS) – Shall mean a system
combining fiber optic transport and PWSFs. That part of a DAS that
§ 30-46.3 COMPTON § 30-46.3
AO:1142
transmits or receives a personal wireless service carrier's signal is a
PWSF and is governed by this section.
r. ELEVATION – Shall mean the measurement of height above sea level.
Also AMSL, or above mean sea level.
s. ENHANCED SPECIALIZED MOBILE RADIO (ESMR) – Shall mean
private land mobile radio with telephone services.
t. EQUIPMENT CABINET/EQUIPMENT SHELTER – Shall mean an
enclosed structure at the base of the mount within which are housed
the equipment for the PWSF such as batteries and electrical equipment.
u. FALL ZONE – Shall mean the area on the ground within a prescribed
radius from the base of a PWSF. The fall zone is the area within which
there might be a potential hazard from falling debris or collapsing
material.
v. FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC) – Shall mean an
independent Federal agency charged with licensing and regulating
wireless communications at the national level.
w. FUNCTIONALLY EQUIVALENT SERVICES – Shall mean cellular, PCS,
Enhanced Specialized Mobile Radio and Specialized Mobile Radio.
Section 704 of the Telecommunications Act prohibits unreasonable
discrimination among functionally equivalent services.
x. HEIGHT – Shall mean the distance measured from ground level to the
highest point of PWSF, including the antenna array. For purposes of
measuring height, all antennas or other attachments mounted on a
structure shall be included in the measurements to determine overall
(i.e. combined) height.
y. LATTICE TOWER – Shall mean a type of mount that is usually groundmounted
and self-supporting with multiple legs and cross-bracing of
structural steel. This section prohibits lattice towers, other than those
already existing at the time this section is adopted.88
z. LOCATION – Shall mean the area where a PWSF is located on proposed
to be located.
aa. MITIGATION – Shall mean the reduction or elimination of visual
impacts by the use of one or more methods:
1. Concealment.
2. Camouflage.
3. Disguise.
88.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2121, codified herein as Section 30-46 was adopted July 12,
2005.
§ 30-46.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-46.3
AO:1143
bb. MODIFICATION – Shall mean the changing of any portion of a PWSF
from its description in a previously approved permit. This includes
upgrading to different technologies such as "3G" and name changes of
the carriers. The FCC definitions for "modification" are different than
local government rules.
cc. MONOPOLE – Shall mean the shape of mount that is self-supporting
with a single shaft of wood, steel or concrete and antennas at the top
and/or along the shaft.
dd. MOUNT – Shall mean the structure or surface upon which antennas are
mounted, e.g.:
1. Roof-mounted. Mounted on the roof of a building.
2. Side-mounted. Mounted on the side of a building.
3. Ground-mounted. Mounted independently on the ground.
4. Structure-mounted. Mounted on a structure other than a building.
ee. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY (PWSF) – Shall mean a
facility for the provision of personal wireless services, as defined by
Section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which amended
Section 332(c)(7)(A) of the Communications Act of 1934. A PWSF is any
unstaffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of personal
wireless services, usually consisting of an antenna array, transmission
cables, equipment shelter and a mount. The transmission or reception
portion of a Distributed Antenna System is a PWSF and is governed by
this section.
ff. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES – Shall mean any personal wireless
service defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act which includes
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) licensed commercial
wireless communications services including cellular, personal
communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR),
enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging as well as
unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange
access services.
gg. RADIO FREQUENCY RADIATION (RFR) – Shall mean the emissions
from PWSFs that can, in excessive amounts, be harmful to humans. RF
emissions are part of the RF signal.
hh. RADIO FREQUENCY (RF) SIGNAL – Shall mean the actual beam or
radio waves sent and received by a PWSF. A signal is the deliberate
product of a PWSF and an RF emission is part of the signal.
ii. SECURITY BARRIER – Shall mean a locked, impenetrable wall, fence or
berm that completely seals an area from unauthorized entry or
trespass.
§ 30-46.3 COMPTON § 30-46.3
AO:1144
§ 30-46.4. Exclusions and Relationships. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
jj. SHORT MOUNTS – Shall mean alternatives to monopoles or guyed and
lattice towers, such as masts or poles. For example, two poles or three
masts might be an alternative to one monopole.
kk. SITE – Shall mean that portion of a subject property where a PWSF is to
be placed. Any acceptable location may have several potential sites
within it.
ll. SITING – Shall mean the method and form of placement of PWSFs on a
specific area of a subject property.
mm.SPECIALIZED MOBILE RADIO (SMR) – Shall mean a form of dispatch
or two-way communication used by companies that rent space or time
from an SMR carrier. Used primarily for data, delivery vans, truckers or
taxis within a small, definable geographic area.
nn. STANDARDS – Shall mean rules or measures by which acceptability is
determined. PWSFs are measured by standards measuring visibility or
safety. Wireless planning tends to regulate PWSFs on three levels:
location (or where the PWSF site can go), siting (or how the PWSF is
placed within its setting) and design (or what the PWSF looks like).
oo. TOWER – Shall mean a term used as a modifier (e.g., tower builder) or
when modified (e.g., lattice tower). PWSFs are not towers.
pp. UNLICENSED WIRELESS SERVICES – Shall mean commercial mobile
services that can operate on public domain frequencies and therefore
need no FCC license for their sites. Wi-Fi and Wi-Max are examples of
unlicensed wireless services.
qq. UTILITY POLE – Shall mean for purposes of this section, any public,
semi-public or quasi-public vertical element in the City, such as a
distribution pole for electricity, a cable pole, a traffic signal stanchion or
a light pole. All short mounts in the right-of-way shall be new utility
poles and all new utility poles shall be dedicated to the City of Compton.
rr. WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS – Shall mean any form of signaling by
wireless, including personal wireless services, that require a
transmitter, a receiver, and a path - sometimes straight, sometimes
indirect - between them.
a. Exclusion for Amateur Radio Facilities. This section shall not govern the
installation of any amateur radio facility that is owned and operated by
a Federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used
exclusively for noncommercial, receive-only antennas. No amateur
radio facility shall include a PWSF without complying with this section.
b. Relationship to PWSFs Not Approved Under This Section.
1. A PWSF for which a permit has been issued prior to the effective
date of this section shall be deemed a permitted use, subject to the
§ 30-46.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-46.4
AO:1145
conditions of that permit and the regulations in force until this
section is adopted. The issuance of permit renewals or other new
permits for such facilities after this section is adopted shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this section.89
2. Damaged or destroyed facilities, as originally permitted, may be
rebuilt and all such facilities may be replaced by facilities of the
same type and height at the same location and lattice towers
should be changed to mounts of lesser visual intensity.
3. Placement of an attached array or a single antenna on a legally
nonconforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of
the nonconforming structure. However, placement of any attached
array, single antenna or any other portions of a PWSF on an
existing structure, whether legally nonconforming or conforming,
shall require a permit to be obtained for the PWSF under the terms
of this section.
4. Any carrier with a least one pre-existing PWSF in the City of
Compton that is out of compliance with the City of Compton
building and zoning requirements, in existence prior to the
adoption of this section, shall not be eligible for any new approvals
of PWSFs by the City until the pre-existing PWSF or PWSFs are
brought into compliance with this section.
c. Unpermitted Facilities, Mounts or Equipment.
1. Unpermitted facilities are those with permits, including drawings,
that no longer describe the existing facility as well as those with no
permits at all.
2. No issuance of any permit under this section shall occur for a
request to co-locate, attach, or share an existing PWSF site, mount
or facility, when such existing site, mount or facility is found to have
unpermitted PWSFs as described in subsection 30-46.4c1 above
and/or any structure, mount or facility is found to lack one or more
building, electrical or any other permits required by the City of
Compton Building Department and the laws that office is
authorized to implement and enforce.
3. Any application by a wireless carrier or other entity shall not be
accepted by the City of Compton if that wireless carrier or other
entity has a pre-existing PWSF on, or the other entity owns, a
mount, rooftop or tower, on which there is any unpermitted PWSF
as described in Section 30-46.4c1 until that unpermitted PWSF is
brought into compliance with this section.
d. Relationship to Other Ordinances. This section shall supersede
conflicting requirements contained in the City of Compton Municipal
89.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2121, codified herein as Section 30-46, was adopted July 12,
2005.
§ 30-46.4 COMPTON § 30-46.4
AO:1146
§ 30-46.5. Unacceptable Applications for PWSFs. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
§ 30-46.6. Specification of Land Use Classifications. [Ord. #2121,
§ 1]
PWSFs shall be eligible for either an Administrative PWSF Permit or a
Conditional Use Permit in all districts on the Zoning Map of the City of
Compton Zoning Ordinance, provided that such PWSFs comply with the
standards of this section and the permits under which PWSFs are regulated.
A Tier One PWSF may be eligible for approval only when proposed on City
of Compton right-of-way.
§ 30-46.7. Standards. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
The approval of PWSFs shall be subject to meeting or exceeding the
following standards.
Code or enacted as resolutions regarding the regulation and permitting
of PWSFs.
a. Any application for a Conditional Use Permit for a PWSF shall not be
accepted by the Planning Director or any other representative of the
City of Compton if:
1. The applicant owns any other use, structure or facility with an
unpermitted PWSF as described in Section 30-46.4c1 in the City of
Compton.
2. The owner of the property or the owner of the structure to which
the PWSF is proposed for attachment has unpermitted facilities, as
described in Section 30-46.4c1, on that property or on any other
property or structure in the City of Compton.
b. No such application shall be accepted by the City until outstanding
permit violations are satisfied.
a. Location Standards.
1. The only mandatory location standard shall be that no PWSF will be
permitted on existing utility poles.
2. Opportunity Sites. A PWSF should be located at one of the
following Opportunity Sites:
(a) New utility poles in the City-owned right-of-way, provided such
utility poles are dedicated to the City of Compton.
(b) Churches.
(c) Two-story commercial-industrial buildings with the potential of
adding a screen or penthouse to house the PWSF.
§ 30-46.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-46.7
AO:1147
3. Avoidance Areas. A PWSF should not be located in the following
Avoidance Areas:
(a) Schools, nursery schools or child care centers.
(b) Single family homes.
(c) Parks and recreation areas.
4. In all instances except for subsection 30-46.7a1 above, these
location standards shall be considered directory but not mandatory.
5. PWSFs may also be permitted in areas that are not Opportunity
Sites subject to the following siting, design and safety standards
and permitted in Avoidance Areas subject to the following siting,
design and safety standards.
6. These standards apply regardless of radio frequency (RF)
engineering considerations.
b. Siting Standards. PWSFs should meet the following siting standards.
1. To the greatest extent possible, PWSFs should be concealed within
existing structures or where camouflaged conditions surround
them, or on inconspicuous mounts.
2. Placement within trees should be encouraged, but no antennas
should extend higher than 10 feet above the average tree height.
3. Placement on existing roofs or nonwireless structures should be
favored over ground-mounted PWSFs.
4. Roof-mounted PWSFs should not project more than five additional
feet above the height of a legal building, but in no way above the
height limit of the zoning district within which the PWSF is located.
5. Side-mounted PWSFs should not project more than 20 inches from
the face of the mounting structure.
6. These standards apply regardless of RF engineering
considerations.
c. Design Standards. PWSFs should meet the following design standards.
1. Color. All PWSFs should be painted or complementary with natural
tones (including trees and sky), or camouflaged to match the host
structure color.
2. Size. The silhouette of the PWSF should be reduced to the
minimum visual impact.
3. PWSFs near residences should either:
(a) Provide underground vaults for equipment shelters; or
§ 30-46.7 COMPTON § 30-46.7
AO:1148
§ 30-46.8. Fall Zone and Setback Requirements. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
(b) Place equipment shelters within enclosed structures approved
by the City of Compton.
4. Equipment. The following types of equipment are prohibited:
(a) Roof-mounted monopoles, lattice towers or guyed towers.
(b) Ground-mounted lattice towers.
(c) Ground-mounted guyed towers.
5. Antennas, including panels, whips, dishes and any array holding
several antennas, should be kept as close to the mount as possible.
6. Height should be kept to a minimum.
(a) Heights of PWSFs should be no higher than the height of the
uppermost height of nearby structures (within 300 feet
horizontal feet (when measured along the ground) of the
proposed PWSF, regardless of prevailing height limits in the
zoning district.
(b) In the event there are no nearby buildings (within 300 feet
horizontal feet when measured on the ground) of the proposed
site of the PWSF the following should apply:
(1) All ground-mounted PWSFs (including the security
barrier) should be surrounded by nearby dense tree
growth for a radius of 20 feet horizontal feet (when trunk
centerlines are measured on the ground) from the PWSF in
any direction. These trees can be existing on the subject
property or installed to meet the twenty-foot requirement
as part of the proposed PWSF or they can be a combination
of both.
(2) Ground-mounted PWSFs should not project more than 10
feet above the average tree height.
7. These standards apply regardless of RF engineering
considerations.
d. Safety Standards. PWSFs should meet the following safety standards.
1. Hurricane and tornado design standards should be those of the
local building codes used in the City of Compton or EIA-TIA 222
(Version G), whichever is stricter.
2. Roof mounts on buildings should have railings to protect workers.
a. Fall Zone.
§ 30-46.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-46.8
AO:1149
§ 30-46.9. Submittal Requirements. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
An applicant shall submit the following information as part of an application
for a PWSF.
1. No habitable structure or outdoor area where people congregate
should be within a fall zone of a radius equal to the height of a
ground-mounted PWSF or its mount.
2. No adjoining property line may be within the fall zone of a radius
equal to the height of a ground-mounted PWSF or its mount.
b. Setback.
1. All PWSFs, including mounts and equipment shelters or cabinets,
shall comply with the most stringent (e.g., where a side yard abuts
a street) setback requirements on all sides of the lot of the
applicable zoning district as set forth in the City of Compton Zoning
Ordinance.
2. The antenna array for an attached PWSF is exempt from the
setback requirements of this section and from the setback for the
zoning district in which they are located, provided that no such
antenna array shall extend more than five feet horizontally from the
attachment structure at the point of attachment, nor shall such
array extend over the lot line.
3. On parcels with a main building housing a primary use, all
components of the PWSF shall be located behind the main building
line in the front yard.
4. No portion of any PWSF shall project into a required setback
except for the antenna array described in subsection 30-46.8b2
above.
a. Application Information.
1. Name, address and telephone number of applicant and all coapplicants
as well as any agents for the applicant or co-applicants.
2. A carrier must either be an applicant or co-applicant and no more
than one carrier is allowed in one application. If the proposed
PWSF is for two or more carriers, each carrier must file its own
application as either the applicant or co-applicant.
3. A co-location can only be applied for with separate applications
from each carrier proposed for co-location. Each application for the
co-location must show a mount with a designed position for the
other carriers that are applying for co-location.
4. A copy of the lease with the property owner and/or the structure
owner of the proposed PWSF must be submitted, whichever or both
that apply.
§ 30-46.8 COMPTON § 30-46.9
AO:1150
5. Original signatures for the applicant and all co-applicants applying
for the PWSF must be submitted. If an agent will represent the
applicant or co-applicant, original signature authorizing the agent
to represent the applicant and/or co-applicant must be submitted.
Photo reproductions of signatures are not acceptable.
b. Location Information.
1. Identify the subject property by including the name of the nearest
street or streets, and street address, if any.
2. Assessor's parcel number of subject property or, in the case of a
new utility pole in the right-of-way, the nearest property.
3. Zoning district designation for the subject parcel and for all parcels
within 300 feet of the property lines of the subject parcel.
4. A line map to scale showing the subject property and all properties
within 300 feet and the location of all buildings, including
accessory structures, on all properties shown.
5. A City-wide map showing the other existing PWSFs owned or
operated by this carrier in the City and outside the City within one
mile of its corporate limits.
c. Siting Information.
1. A one inch equals 40 feet vicinity plan showing the following (not
required for a new utility pole in the right-of-way):
(a) Property lines for the subject property.
(b) Property lines of all properties adjacent to the subject property.
(c) Tree cover on the subject property and all properties adjacent
to the subject property, by specie and average height, as
measured by or available from a verifiable source.
(d) Outline of all existing buildings, including purpose (e.g.,
residential buildings, garages, accessory structures, etc.) on
subject property and all properties adjacent to the subject
property.
(e) Proposed location of antenna, mount and equipment shelter(s)
and/or cabinet(s).
(f) Cabinets and other equipment marked "future" or "growth"
cannot be approved as part of any application, but may be
shown to demonstrate that there is sufficient expansion space.
(g) Location of all streets, public and private, on the subject
property and on all properties adjacent to the subject property
including driveways proposed to serve the PWSF.
§ 30-46.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-46.9
AO:1151
(h) Distances, at grade, from the proposed PWSF to each building
on the vicinity plan.
(i) Contours at each foot AMSL (above mean sea level).
(j) Lines representing the sight line showing viewpoint (point
from which view is taken) and visible point (point being
viewed) from "sight lines" in subsection 30-46.9c2 below.
2. Sight lines and photographs as described below:
(a) Sight line representation. A sight line representation shall be
drawn from the closest facade of each residential building
(viewpoint) included on the vicinity plan to the highest point
(visible point) of the PWSF. Each sight line shall be depicted in
profile, drawn at one inch equals 40 feet. The profiles shall
show all intervening trees and buildings. In the event there is
only one (or no) residential building on the vicinity plan, there
shall be at least two sight lines from the closest habitable
structures, if any.
(b) Existing (before condition) photographs. Each sight line shall
be illustrated by one four-inch-by-six-inch color photograph of
what can currently be seen from the residential building.
(c) Proposed (after condition) photo simulation. Each of the
existing condition photographs shall have the proposed PWSF
superimposed on it to show what will be seen from residential
buildings if the proposed PWSF is built. All photo simulations
shall be positioned to show maximum exposure of any
proposed street, such street to be represented in its proposed,
finished appearance.
3. A one inch equals 20 feet site plan showing the following (not
required for a new utility pole in the right-of-way):
(a) The entire subject property, including property lines and
streets (public and private) adjacent to the subject property.
(b) All existing buildings, including accessory structures.
(c) All existing vegetation, by mass or individually by diameter
(four feet from the ground) of each stand-alone tree or shrub.
Tree masses or individual stand-alone trees shall be identified
by specie(s).
(d) Proposed security barrier for a ground-mount, indicating type
and extent as well as point of controlled entry.
(e) All proposed changes to the existing property, including
grading, vegetation removal and temporary or permanent
streets and driveways.
§ 30-46.9 COMPTON § 30-46.9
AO:1152
(f) Representations, dimensioned and to scale, of the proposed
mount, antennas, equipment shelters, cable runs, parking
areas and any other construction or development attendant to
the PWSF.
4. Siting elevations, or views at-grade from the north, south, each and
west for a fifty-foot radius around the proposed PWSF plus from all
existing public and private streets that serve the subject property.
Elevations shall be at either 1/4 inch equals one foot or 1/8 inch
equals one-foot scale and show the following:
(a) Antennas, mounts and equipment shelter(s), with total
elevation dimensions and AGL of the highest point.
(b) Security barrier. If the security barrier will block views of the
PWSF, the barrier drawing shall be cut away to show the view
behind the barrier.
(c) Any and all structures on the subject property.
(d) Existing trees and shrubs at current height and proposed trees
and shrubs at proposed height at time of installation, with
approximate elevations dimensioned.
(e) Grade changes, or cuts and fills, to be shown as original grade
and new grade line, with two foot contours AMSL.
d. Design Information.
1. Equipment brochures for the proposed PWSF such as
manufacturer's specifications or trade journal reprints. These shall
be provided for antennas, mounts, equipment shelters, cables as
well as cable runs, and security barrier, if any.
2. Materials of the proposed PWSF specified by generic type and
specific treatment (e.g., anodized aluminum, stained wood, painted
fiberglass, etc.). These shall be provided for the antennas, mounts,
equipment shelters, cables as well as cable runs, and security
barrier, if any.
3. Colors of the proposed PWSF represented by a color board showing
actual colors proposed. Colors shall be provided for the antennas,
mounts, equipment shelters, cables as well as cable runs, and
security barrier, if any.
4. Dimensions of the PWSF specified for all three directions: height,
width and breadth. These shall be provided for the antennas,
mounts, equipment shelters and security barrier, if any.
5. Appearance shown by at least two photographic photo simulations
of the PWSF within the subject property. The photo simulations
shall show the antennas, mounts, equipment shelters, cables as
§ 30-46.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-46.9
AO:1153
well as cable runs, and security barrier, if any, for the total height,
width and breadth.
6. Landscape plan including existing trees and shrubs and those
proposed to be added, identified by size of specimen at installation
and species (not required for a new utility pole in the right-of-way).
e. Narrative Information.
1. Carrier shall provide:
(a) Copy of Form 600 on file with the FCC.
(b) FCC license (Radio Authorization Form).
2. Carrier shall identify:
(a) Site latitude.
(b) Site longitude.
(c) AGL to the radiation center and the top of highest projection
(e.g., lightning rod).
3. Applicants shall provide (not required for a new utility pole in the
right-of-way):
(a) Two alternatives to the proposed PWSF.
(b) Alternatives should comply with criteria in subsection 30-46.10
of this section for differences between the proposed PWSF and
the alternatives.
(c) Failure of the applicant to provide two alternatives does not
constitute an incomplete application.
f. Geographic Information.
1. Area to be served by the proposed PWSF.
(a) Within the City of Compton.
(b) Adjacent to the City of Compton.
(c) Across canals or freeways to neighboring cities and/or
unincorporated Los Angeles County.
2. Tax Map showing adjacent properties.
3. Land use map showing existing land use on adjacent properties.
4. Relationship to other PWSFs.
(a) Existing and/or proposed by the carrier.
(b) Existing for other carriers.
§ 30-46.9 COMPTON § 30-46.9
AO:1154
§ 30-46.10. Alternative Analysis and Comparison. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
Each application for PWSF should also contain at least two alternatives that
differ from the PWSF proposed in the application. These requirements do
not apply to proposals for new utility poles in the right-of-way.
(c) Proposed by other carriers.
g. Fees. The City shall have the right to properly plan for and evaluate
applications for PWSFs and to charge reasonable fees for such services
to the applicant. Fees shall be established and adopted by resolution by
the City Council of the City of Compton. Such fees may include, but
shall not be limited, to the following:
1. Application Fee. The City staff shall evaluate each application on a
case-by-case basis. The application fee shall include, but shall not
be limited to, the cost for City staff to properly evaluate
applications for PWSFs. The application fee shall be equally applied
to all applications seeking a Conditional Use Permit. The fee for an
Administrative PWSF Permit shall be set at the discretion of the
City of Compton Director of Public Works.
2. Special Fee. The City shall have the right to retain independent
consultants and experts that it deems necessary to review and
evaluate applications for individual PWSFs. The special fee shall be
applied to those applications that the City determines require
special review or evaluation.
3. General Fee. The City has retained independent consultants and
experts on wireless planning and may retain future independent
consultants and experts to assist City staff with proper planning for
PWSFs. The general fee shall include, but shall not be limited to,
the pro-rated share for each applicant of such costs for the
independent consultants and experts and for City staff. The general
fee shall be pro-rated among all applications on an equal basis,
regardless of permit requested.
4. Annual Fee. An amount, set by Council resolution, shall be charged
for the administration and inspection of these facilities on an
annual basis.
a. Differences. The alternatives need not be totally different from the
proposed PWSF; however, the alternatives should contain measurable
differences, such as:
1. Height. An alternative can be identical to the proposed PWSF
except to be for a shorter height.
2. Number. An alternative could be for two or more PWSFs that are
shorter than the proposed PWSF.
§ 30-46.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-46.10
AO:1155
§ 30-46.11. Tiered Applications. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
3. Location. An alternative could be located on a different property
than the proposed PWSF.
4. Siting. An alternative could be in a different place on the same
property as the proposed PWSF.
5. Design. An alternative could be of the same height, location and
siting as the proposed PWSF, but be designed to appear differently.
6. Technology. An alternative could be the use of a Distributed
Antenna System instead of the proposed PWSF.
b. Submittal Requirements for Alternatives. The materials submitted for
each alternative should show only the differences between each of the
alternatives and the proposed PWSF.
c. City of Compton Provision of Alternatives.
1. The City staff shall prepare at least one alternative.
d. Comparison of Proposed PWSF and Alternatives. The City of Compton
Architectural Review Board staff shall compare the proposed PWSF to
the alternatives on the basis of the following:
1. Change in community scale, as exhibited in relative height, mass or
proportion of the PWSF within its proposed surroundings.
2. New visible elements proposed on a contrasting background.
3. Different colors and textures proposed against a contrasting
background.
4. Use of materials that are foreign to the existing built environment.
5. Conservation of opportunities to maintain community scale, not
compromising buffering areas and low-lying buildings so as to start
a trend away from the existing community scale.
6. Amount and diversity of landscaping and/or natural vegetation.
7. Preservation of view corridors, vistas, and viewsheds.
8. Continuation of existing colors, textures and materials.
e. Ranking of Proposed PWSF and Alternatives. The City staff shall rank
the proposed PWSF and each alternative based on the criteria listed in
subsection 30-46.10d above. The ranking of the proposed PWSF and
each alternative shall be submitted to the Architectural Review Board
and/or Planning Commission along with each application for review by
the Architectural Review Board and/or Planning Commission. The
Architectural Review Board and/or Planning Commission shall consider
the alternatives along with the proposed PWSF.
§ 30-46.10 COMPTON § 30-46.11
AO:1156
§ 30-46.12. Application Procedures. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
Applicants and City staff shall use the following procedures when reviewing
PWSF applications, although City staff may waive some steps if they are
redundant.
a. Planning Department. The City of Compton Planning Director or his/her
designee shall receive all PWSF applications and assign each
application to one of the following three "tiers":
1. Tier One. This tier is limited to applications that:
(a) Place PWSFs on utility poles within City of Compton right-ofway.
(b) Specify that all PWSFs on new utility poles shall be dedicated
to the City of Compton when the carrier specifies a utility pole
that meets the specifications of the City of Compton Director of
Public Works.
(c) Meet all required location standards, design standards and
safety standards that apply in this section. In the event any of
the standards in the section are in conflict for a particular
application, one or the other conflicting standard shall be met.
(d) Shall be maintained in accordance with all applicable local
ordinances.
2. Tier Two. This tier is limited to applications that:
(a) Attach a PWSF to an existing structure other than a new utility
pole (as described in this section in subsection 30-46.3qq.)
(b) Meet all location standards, siting standards, design standards
and safety standards in this section. In the event any of the
standards in the section are in conflict for a particular
application, one or the other conflicting standard shall be met.
3. Tier Three. All applications that do not qualify as either Tier One or
Tier Two status shall be considered Tier Three applications.
a. Pre-Application Conference. Applicants shall meet with City staff prior
to submitting an application for a PWSF. At the pre-application
conference:
1. The applicant shall inform City staff of the location of the proposed
facility, as well as its scale and design.
2. City staff shall inform the applicant about the application
procedures described in this section.
b. Application Form. The applicant shall submit the City's application form
and all required items as specified in this section to City staff when
applying for PWSFs.
§ 30-46.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-46.12
AO:1157
c. Letter of Completion.
1. Within 30 days of receipt of an application for a PWSF, City staff
shall determine if the application form has been completed and if
all required items have been submitted.
2. If City staff determines that the application form is not complete
and/or if all required items have not been submitted, the City staff
shall send the applicant a Letter of Incompletion. The Letter of
Incompletion shall list those items that are incomplete or missing
and provide the applicant 60 days to complete the application.
3. If the applicant does not complete the application form and all
required items after 60 days, City staff shall send the applicant a
letter asking the applicant to withdraw the application within 30
days.
4. If the applicant neither completes the application and all required
items nor withdraws the application within 90 days, the City shall
notify the applicant that the application is incomplete and cannot
be considered by the City.
5. When the application form is complete and all required items have
been submitted, the City staff should send the applicant a Letter of
Completion.
d. Initial Review by City Staff. The City staff shall:
1. Assign each application to either Tier One, Tier Two or Tier Three.
2. Perform an alternatives analysis in accordance with subsection
30-46.10 for Tier Two and Tier Three applications.
e. Tier One Review.
1. The City staff shall notify or cause to be notified all property owners
within 300 feet of the proposed site. Notice shall be given by first
class mail, to the address shown on the roll of the Los Angeles
Recorder's office. The property owners shall be informed that an
application has been filed and they have the right to inspect the
application and comment thereon. Additionally, they shall be
informed that comments should be directed toward the standards
contained in this section. The applicants shall have the right to
respond to any comments received. The City staff may reassign the
application to a Tier Two or Three review, if comments are received
justifying such reassignment.
2. The City Director of Public Works shall review Tier One
applications for an Administrative PWSF Permit.
3. The City Director of Public Works shall have 90 days to review the
completed application. Following review, the City Director of Public
Works shall either approve or deny the application. Such approval
§ 30-46.12 COMPTON § 30-46.12
AO:1158
or denial shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence
contained in the written record.
4. Either party, applicant or opposition, may appeal a decision of the
Director of Public Works to the City Council.
5. If the application meets the requirements for a Tier One application
in this section, two permits shall be issued to the applicant:
(a) The Director of Public Works shall issue an Administrative
PWSF Permit, which is a prerequisite for:
(b) A Building Permit, which shall be issued by the Building
Department.
f. Tier Two and Three Review.
1. The City staff shall review Tier Two and Three applications for
Conditional Use Permit.
2. City staff shall prepare a staff report to the Planning Commission
containing the information in subsection 30-46.13 of this section.
(a) Recommendation of either approval or denial, in writing and
supported by substantial evidence contained in the written
record.
(b) The recommendation may be for approval with proposed
conditions intended to mitigate the impacts of the proposed
PWSF.
3. The staff report shall be transmitted to the Planning Commission
for a public hearing.
4. The Planning Commission shall conduct public hearing on the
application and take any testimony or additional evidence provided
by either the applicant or other persons.
(a) Following the close of the hearing, the Planning Commission
shall adopt an approval of the application, approval of the
application with conditions, or denial of the application.
(b) Any conditions attached to the adoption shall be designed to
mitigate any adverse impacts of the proposed PWSF. Such
recommendations shall be in writing and supported by findings
of fact based on competent and substantial evidence contained
in a written record.
5. If the application is approved, the City of Compton shall issue two
permits to the applicant:
(a) The Planning Department shall issue a Conditional Use Permit,
which is a prerequisite for:
§ 30-46.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-46.12
AO:1159
§ 30-46.13. Staff Reports. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
(b) The Building Department to issue a Building Permit.
a. Tier One Application. Tier One applications do not need staff reports.
b. Tier Two and Tier Three Applications. The City staff shall prepare staff
reports for Tier Two and Tier Three applications. The staff report shall
contain the following:
1. Description of the proposed PWSF.
(a) Other PWSFs in the area.
(b) Nearest three PWSF sites for the same carrier to the proposed
PWSF.
2. Location.
(a) Identification of whether the proposed PWSF is in an
Avoidance Area.
(b) Identification of whether the proposed PWSF is at any
Opportunity Site.
(c) Determination of whether location standards have been met.
3. Siting.
(a) Determination of whether siting standards have been met.
(b) Identification of any necessary practical measures to avoid,
minimize, and/or mitigate (in that order of preference) for
adverse impacts of the proposed PWSF.
4. Design.
(a) Type of mount.
(b) Type of antenna(s).
(c) Treatment of equipment cabinet or shelter.
(d) Determination of whether design standards have been met.
5. Alternatives analysis.
(a) Alternatives provided by the applicant.
(b) Alternatives studied by City staff.
(c) Comparison and ranking of the proposed PWSF and the
alternatives as provided in subsection 30-46.10.
6. Description of narrative attachments.
§ 30-46.12 COMPTON § 30-46.13
AO:1160
§ 30-46.14. Modifications to PWSFs. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
The City of Compton shall require the review and approval of all
modifications to PWSFs.
7. Recommendation of either approval or denial, in writing and
supported by substantial evidence contained in the written record.
The recommendation may contain proposed conditions intended to
mitigate any adverse impacts of the proposed PWSF.
a. Types of Modification. A modification of a PWSF is any of the following:
1. Change of name of the personal wireless service or of the subject
property. Ownership or branding changes are both included,
whether a "merger," acquisition, sale of stock, turning over or
assigning a PWSF to a tower company, or any other form of name
change.
2. Change in technology used for the PWSF, such as an "overlay."
(a) A change in technology may be obvious, such as the addition of
more antennas, or
(b) A change in technology may be invisible, such as the exchange
of software cards in an equipment cabinet.
(c) Network sharing, thereby enabling another carrier or
unlicensed provider the use of some or all of the equipment at
the PWSF.
3. Addition or replacement of any equipment in the PWSF, excluding
direct, identical substitutions, and including the addition of a
cabinet in a space marked "future" or "growth" on previously
approved drawings.
4. Change in design of the PWSF.
5. Addition to any PWSF for the purposes of co-location, provided that
the previously approved co-location identified the future positions
of the requested modification.
6. Addition to any PWSF for purposes of co-location. When the PWSF
has not been approved as co-location with future positions, the
applicant must apply for a new PWSF.
b. Applications for Modification. Applicants for modifications shall submit
an application to the City for a modified PWSF. The application shall
include all materials required in subsection 30-46.9 that would change
due to the modification.
1. A modification may require a reapplication; or
2. A modification may require no more than a notice to the Registry
required in subsection 30-46.16 of this section.
§ 30-46.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-46.14
AO:1161
§ 30-46.15. Co-Locations/Public Sites. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
§ 30-46.16. Registry, Monitoring, Inspection, Abandonment, and
Obsolescence. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
c. Extent of Review. The Planning Director shall determine the extent that
City staff should review a modification. The Planning Director may
decide that a new Conditional Use Permit is necessary (Planning
Commission Review), a review by the Architectural Review Board is
required or the Planning Director may issue an approved amendment
unilaterally.
a. Tall Mounts Discouraged. Tall mounts are discouraged in the City of
Compton and proliferation of short mounts is considered preferable to
co-location.
b. Co-location Discouraged. Co-location is discouraged for all PWSF
applications.
c. Worst-Case Review. The City of Compton shall review applications for
co-locations on the basis of all positions on the mount, i.e., the
cumulative, worse-case condition.
d. Co-locations Previously Approved. Applications for co-locations on
mounts previously approved for co-location in the position applied for,
require review of only the equipment to be added above and on the
ground, including new contents of the equipment shelter or equipment
cabinet, unless the previous approval will require changes other than
required for the carrier to be co-located (e.g., a strengthened mount).
e. Co-locations Not Previously Approved. Applications for co-locations on
mounts not previously approved for co-location in the position applied
for require review of the existing mount as well as co-location under the
requirements of this section.
f. Public Sites. The City of Compton shall work with carriers to facilitate
the siting of PWSF on City-owned rights-of-way by negotiating the
appropriate leasing procedures.
a. Registry. Each carrier shall file the following information with the City
on an annual basis, beginning with the date of approval.
1. Owner/lessee/intermediary/agent and carrier(s) at the site.
2. Location by latitude and longitude, addresses and parcel numbers.
3. Height, AGL
4. Co-location status and capability (including if a former co-location
has been removed), and whether a co-locatee has applied for a
modification in the past year.
§ 30-46.14 COMPTON § 30-46.16
AO:1162
§ 30-46.17. Environmental Compliance. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
5. Last date at which carrier's PWSF was modified and the nature of
the modification.
6. A list of toxic/hazardous materials at the PWSF (including in the
equipment shelter), and certification that the Fire Department has
been notified in conformance with EPCRA, the Emergency Planning
and Community Right-to-Know Act.
7. Instructions for emergency personnel on the approach action to be
taken in case of an emergency involving any toxic/hazardous
substances.
8. The name and telephone number of a representative of the carrier
to be contacted in the event of any emergency at the PWSF site.
The contact representative is to be available on a twenty-four-hour
a day, seven days a week basis.
9. A site monitoring schedule indicating how often the site is
inspected and monitored by the carrier.
10. A ground maintenance schedule for ground-mounted PWSFs
indicating how often the grounds are maintained and the name and
telephone number of a representative of the carrier to be contacted
in the event the grounds require service before the next scheduled
maintenance.
b. Inspection. The owner or operator of PWSF shall provide for and
conduct an inspection of mounts at least once every five years in
conjunction with the review of the zoning permit required in subsection
30-46.22. A report on this inspection shall be provided to the City of
Compton Building Department verifying the structural integrity of the
mount.
c. Abandonment and Removal. Any PWSF that is not operated for a
continuous period of 18 months shall be considered abandoned, and the
owner of such PWSF shall remove same within 90 days of notice to the
City of Compton Building Department that the PWSF is abandoned. If
such PWSF is not removed within said 90 days, the City of Compton
may have the PWSF removed as the PWSF owner's expense.
d. Performance Security/Bond. The applicant shall provide security or
bond in an amount set by City Council Resolution to insure the
performance and safety of the PWSF and for the termination or
abandonment of service.
e. Hazardous Materials. PWSF shall be registered as a hazardous facility
if petroleum products are used to fuel power supplies or any toxins are
contained in equipment cabinets or shelters or alternative power
sources.
§ 30-46.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-46.17
AO:1163
a. Federal Environmental Assessment Requirements for Tiers One, Two
and Three.
1. The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) applies to all
applications for PWSFs. NEPA is administered by the FCC via
procedures adopted as Subpart 1, Section 1.1301 et seq. (47 CRF
Ch. I). The FCC requires that an environmental assessment (EA) be
filed with the FCC prior to beginning operations for any PWSF
proposed in or involving any of the following:
(a) Wilderness areas.
(b) Wildlife preserves.
(c) Endangered species habitat.
(d) Historical site.
(e) Indian religious site.
(f) Flood plain.
(g) Wetlands.
(h) High intensity white lights in residential neighborhoods.
(i) Excessive radio frequency radiation exposure.
2. At the time of application filing, an EA that meets FCC
requirements shall be submitted to the City of Compton for each
PWSF site that requires such an EA to be submitted to the FCC.
b. Radio Frequency Radiation Emissions Requirements.
1. FCC Guidelines. Each application for a PWSF shall be accompanied
by a statement by a professional engineer certifying that, as
proposed, the PWSF complies with the FCC Guidelines for
Evaluating the Environmental Effects of Radio Frequency
Radiation (FCC Guidelines) concerning radio frequency radiation
and emissions.
2. No Contravention of FCC Guidelines. A PWSF that meets the FCC
guidelines shall not be conditioned or denied on the basis of radio
frequency impacts.
3. Radio Frequency Radiation (RFR) Report for Tiers Two and Three.
The Planning Commission may require applicants for a Tier Two or
Three PWSF to submit a report containing the following
information on the existing and maximum future projected
measurements of RFR from the proposed PWSF, for the following
situations:
(a) Existing, or ambient: the measurement of existing RFR.
§ 30-46.17 COMPTON § 30-46.17
AO:1164
(b) Existing plus proposed wireless facility: maximum estimate of
RFR from the proposed personal wireless facility plus the
existing RFR environment.
(c) Existing plus proposed wireless facilities plus cumulative:
maximum estimate of RFR from the proposed wireless facility
plus the maximum estimate of RFR from the total addition of
co-located wireless facilities plus the existing RFR
environment.
(d) Certification, signed by a professional engineer, stating that
the RFR measurements are accurate and meet the
requirements for radio frequency radiation reports in this
section.
(e) The Planning Commission may require as part of conditions of
approval for Tier Two or Three applications that a radio
frequency radiation report as described in this section be
submitted every five years and every time a modification or a
co-location is proposed for the PWSF.
c. Noise Requirements.
1. Conformance to Compton Noise Ordinance.90 No equipment shall
be operated at a PWSF so as to produce noise in excess of the
applicable noise standards under the City of Compton Code Noise
Ordinance.
2. In emergency situations requiring the use of a backup generator,
where the noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis
until such emergency has passed, the owner or operator shall
obtain relief per the Compton Noise Ordinance.
3. In all instances except emergency situations, the applicable noise
standard shall be 50 dBA at the property line.
4. Noise Filing Requirements. The Planning Commission may require
applicants for a Tier Two or Three PWSF to submit a report
containing the following information on the existing and maximum
future projected measurements of noise from the proposed PWSFs,
measured in decibels Ldn (logarithmic scale, accounting for
greater sensitivity at night), for the following situations:
(a) Existing, or ambient: the measurements of existing noise.
(b) Existing plus proposed PWSF: maximum estimate of noise from
the proposed PWSF plus the existing noise environment.
(c) Existing plus proposed wireless facilities plus cumulative:
maximum estimate of noise from the proposed wireless facility
90.Editor's Note: The Noise Ordinance referred to herein may be found as codified in Section
7-12 of this Code.
§ 30-46.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-46.17
AO:1165
§ 30-46.18. Lighting and Security for Tiers Two and Three. [Ord.
#2121, § 1]
§ 30-46.19. Signs/Identification Plaques. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
No signage shall be permitted on any PWSF other than that required for
public safety purposes or by the FCC or FAA, except that each PWSF shall
plus the maximum estimate of noise from the total addition
of co-located wireless facilities plus the existing noise
environment.
(d) Certification, signed by an acoustical engineer, stating that
noise measurements are accurate and meet the requirements
of subsection 30-46.17c of this section.
5. The Planning Commission may require as part of conditions of
approval for Tier Two or Three applications that a noise report as
described in this subsection be submitted every five years and
every time a modification or a co-location is proposed for the PWSF.
a. Lighting. A PWSF shall not be artificially lighted, except for:
1. Security and safety lighting of equipment buildings if such lighting
is appropriately down-shielded to keep light within the boundaries
of the site; and
2. Such lighting of the PWSF as may be required by the Federal
Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) or other applicable authority installed in a manner to
minimize impacts on adjacent residences. Only red lighting shall be
utilized unless otherwise recommended by FAA guidelines.
b. Security Barriers. A security barrier shall be required around the
perimeter of ground mounts including equipment shelters and/or
cabinets. The security barrier shall be maintained by the operator of the
PWSF or mount for the life of the installation. No security barrier is
needed around side-mounted PWSFs, but distances from windows and
balconies should conform to subsection 30-46.18c2 below.
c. Security Barriers for Certain Populations. The security barriers around
all ground mounted PWSFs shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and found to be acceptable for:
1. Controlled Population. Those persons who are trained in
procedures for working near or around radio frequency radiation.
2. General Population. All other persons, some of whom have no
concept of what radio frequency radiation is or how it can cause
harm. Members of the general population should not be allowed
nearer than 10 meters to the nearest part below an antenna.
§ 30-46.17 COMPTON § 30-46.19
AO:1166
have a weather-proof plaque mounted at eye level identifying the carrier,
frequency and date of approval of zoning permit.
§ 30-46.20. Screening and Landscaping for Tiers Two and Three.
[Ord. #2121, § 1]
§ 30-46.21. Access and Parking for Tiers Two and Three. [Ord.
#2121, § 1]
a. Natural Vegetation. Existing natural vegetation shall be undisturbed to
the greatest extent practicable.
b. Landscaping. Landscaping of disturbed areas on the ground of the
PWSF site and security barriers shall be required as follows:
1. At least one row of evergreen shrubs capable of forming a
continuous hedge at least five feet in height within two years of
planting shall be spaced not more than five feet apart within 15 feet
of the site boundary; and
2. At least one row of evergreen trees or shrubs, at least four feet in
height when planted and spaced not more than 15 feet apart,
located interior to the perimeter of the shrubs required in
subsection 30-46.20b1 above; and
3. Existing vegetation, topography, walls and fences combined with
shrubs, or other features may be substituted for the required
buffers if the Planning Commission finds they:
(a) Achieve the same degree of screening as the required buffer;
or
(b) Do not permit further landscaping due to the limited size of the
lot.
4. Landscaping materials shall consist of xeric or drought-resistant
native species and shall be maintained by the operator of the PWSF
for the life of the installation.
c. Tier One PWSFs require no lighting or landscaping.
a. Parking. Areas sufficient for the temporary off-street parking of at least
one vehicle shall be provided for mounts. The type and configuration of
parking may be approved by the Planning Commission.
b. Private Access. A copy shall be provided to the City of Compton
Planning Department of any street maintenance agreement for any site
accessed by private easement.
c. Tier One PWSFs. No parking areas are required.
§ 30-46.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-46.22
AO:1167
§ 30-46.22. Review of Permit. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
Conditional Use Permits issued under the terms of this section shall be
reviewed by the City of Compton Planning Department every five years
from the date of issuance for compliance with this section and any special
terms or conditions of approval. Such permits are subject to suspension or
revocation at any time if it is determined that the terms of the permit and
any conditions contained therein, or any rules or regulations adopted by the
State or Federal government concerning the use of such facilities, are being
violated.
§ 30-46.23. Procedures for Public Hearings. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
Public hearings required by this section shall be noticed and conducted
pursuant to the City of Compton Municipal Code and the California Code of
Civil Procedure.
§ 30-46.24. Effect of Approval. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
Any application approved pursuant to this section shall result in a written
approval letter. The approval letter shall state the terms of the approval,
including any conditions of approval, and shall authorize the applicant to
apply for a building permit for the approved facilities.
§ 30-46.25. Building Permit. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
An applicant shall apply for a building permit within 180 days of receiving a
Conditional Use Permit for its PWSF. The Building Permit is to be based on
drawings identical to:
§ 30-46.26. Miscellaneous. [Ord. #2121, § 1]
a. Those submitted for approval under this section, or reflecting
conditions of approval granted under this section.
b. The actual construction of the approved PWSF.
c. The construction shall be governed by the International Building Code,
if applicable, or be certified by a professional engineer licensed by the
State of California, that the design meets or exceeds the design
standards for the use for which it is intended.
a. Permits required by this section shall not be subject to variance
procedures.
b. Height limits set by the City of Compton Zoning (Chapter 30) of the
Municipal Code for the zoning district for the permitted location shall
apply unless this section specifically states otherwise.
c. All applicable PWSF locations shall comply with Chapter 30 of the
Compton Municipal Code.
§ 30-46.22 COMPTON § 30-47
AO:1168
§ 30-47. AFFORDABLE HOUSING DENSITY BONUS.
§ 30-47.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2163, § 1]
The purpose of this section is to establish procedures to implement the
State's Affordable Housing Density Bonus as set forth in Government Code
Section 65915. The incentives in this section are used by the City in order to
encourage the provision of affordable housing to all economic groups living
within the City.
§ 30-47.2. Applicability. [Ord. #2163, § 1]
These regulations apply only to residential developments or mixed-use
housing developments of five or more residential units, including singlefamily
and multi-family units, for sale or for rent. For purposes of this
section, housing developments may include subdivisions, planned unit or
condominium developments, the substantial remodel and conversion of an
existing commercial building to residential use, the substantial remodel of
an existing multi-family dwelling where the remodel would create a net of
at least five residential units, qualifying mobile home parks, senior housing
developments or residential developments proposed in the C-L (Limited
Commercial) Zone. Qualified development projects must consist of five or
more dwelling units not including units granted as a density bonus.
§ 30-47.3. Definitions. [Ord. #2163, § 1]
The following definitions shall be used in interpreting the provision of this
section.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING COST — Shall mean the maximum cost of housing
for lower income households, as set forth in Health & Safety Code Section
50052.5 or any successor statute.
CHILD CARE FACILITY — Shall mean a child care facility, other than
a family day care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers,
preschools, extended day care facilities and school age child care centers.
CONCESSIONS OR OTHER INCENTIVES — Shall mean and include a
reduction in a site development standard or modification of another Zoning
Code requirement or design requirement that results in identifiable,
financially sufficient, and actual cost reduction, and that nonetheless
exceeds the minimum building standards of the California Building Code.
Also, approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing project
if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost
of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial or
other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing
or planned development in the area where the proposed housing project
will be located; or another concession or regulatory incentive that results in
identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reduction, as determined
by the City in its sole discretion. A concession or other incentive shall not
include additional density beyond that allowed in this section.
§ 30-47 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-47.3
AO:1169
DENSITY BONUS — Shall mean an increase in density above the otherwise
maximum allowable residential density under this Chapter and the Land
Use Element of the General Plan as of the date the development application
for the project is deemed complete. The amount of the bonus shall vary
according to the percentage of affordable housing provided by income
group and other means established in this section. No development with
less than five dwelling units shall be eligible for a density bonus. When
calculating the number of density bonus units allowed, any fraction of a unit
shall be counted as a whole unit. An applicant may elect to accept a lesser
percentage of density bonus units, but may not seek a density bonus greater
than provided in this section or by State law.
DEVELOPMENT STANDARD — For purposes of this section, shall mean
a site or construction condition that applies to a residential development
pursuant to any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, charter
amendment, or other local condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation. A
development standard subject to waiver does not include additional density
beyond that allowed in this section.
LOW INCOME — A household is "low income" if the total household income
does not exceed 80% of the Los Angeles County median income, as
published annually in the California Code of Regulations, and adjusted for
family size.
MODERATE INCOME — A household is "moderate income" if the total
household income does not exceed 120% of the Los Angeles County median
income, as published annually in the California Code of Regulations, and
adjusted for family size.
QUALIFYING MOBILE HOME PARK — Shall mean a mobile home park that
limits residency based on age requirements of the Federal Fair Housing Act
for housing for persons 55 years of age or older and those who reside with
them.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean a senior citizen
housing development is a housing development limited to seniors who are
at least 55 years of age and their companions and which comply with the
requirements of Civil Code Sections 51.3 and 51.12.
SPECIFIC ADVERSE IMPACT — Shall mean a specific adverse impact is a
significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective,
identified written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions
as they existed on the date an application for an Affordable Housing
Concession Permit is deemed complete.
VERY LOW INCOME — A household is "very low income" if the total
household income does not exceed 50% of the Los Angeles County median
income, as published annually in the California Code of Regulations, and
adjusted for family size.
§ 30-47.4. Density Bonus Allowance. [Ord. #2163, § 1]
§ 30-47.3 COMPTON § 30-47.4
AO:1170
a. Density Bonus Requirement. A request for a density bonus shall be
considered in conjunction with any discretionary approval that may
otherwise be granted by the City in approving the project, however a
request for a density bonus pursuant to this section shall only be
granted if an applicant seeks and agrees to construct one of the
following.
1. At least 5% of the units are dedicated to very low-income
households;
2. At least 10% of the units are dedicated to low-income and very lowincome
households;
3. At least 10% of the units are dedicated to moderate-income
households and are available to the general public for sale; or
4. At least 35 dwelling units are available exclusively to persons aged
55 and older and to those residing with them and the development
qualifies as either a senior citizen housing development or a
qualifying mobile home park.
b. Density Bonus of Up to 35%. In calculating the number of units required
for very low-, low- and moderate-income households, the density bonus
units shall not be included. The maximum density bonus possible for
very low-, low- and moderate-income units is 35%, depending on the
percentage of affordable units, as set forth below.
1. The density bonus for very low-income units shall be calculated as
follows:
Table 30.47.4a
Increase in Allowable Density for Very Low-Income Units
Percentage of Very Low-
Income Units
Percentage Density Bonus
5 20
6 22.5
7 25
8 27.5
9 30
10 32.5
11 35
2. The density bonus for low-income units shall be calculated as
follows:
§ 30-47.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-47.4
AO:1171
Table 30.47.4b
Increase in Allowable Density for Low-Income Units
Percentage of Low Income
Units
Density Bonus Percentage
10 20
11 21.5
12 23
13 24.5
14 26
15 27.5
16 29
17 30.5
18 32
19 33.5
20 35
3. The density bonus for moderate-income ownership units shall be
calculated as follows:
Table 30.47.4c
Increase in Allowable Density for Moderate-Income
Ownership Units
Percentage of Moderate-
Income Units
Density Bonus Percentage
10 5
11 6
12 7
13 8
14 9
15 10
16 11
17 12
18 13
19 14
20 15
21 16
22 17
§ 30-47.4 COMPTON § 30-47.4
AO:1172
Table 30.47.4c
Increase in Allowable Density for Moderate-Income
Ownership Units
Percentage of Moderate-
Income Units
Density Bonus Percentage
23 18
24 19
25 20
26 21
27 22
28 23
29 24
30 25
31 26
32 27
33 28
34 29
35 30
36 31
37 32
38 33
39 34
40 35
c. Senior Housing Bonus and Qualifying Mobile Home Parks. The density
bonus for a senior citizen housing development or a qualifying mobile
home park shall be 20%.
d. Bonuses Not Combined. The bonuses that are available under this
section shall not be combined.
Target Group
Minimum %
Restricted Units Bonus Granted
Additional Bonus
for Each 1%
Increase in
Affordable Units
% Affordable
Units Required
for Maximum
35% Bonus
Very Low Income 5% 20% 2.5% 11%
Low Income 10% 20% 1.5% 20%
Moderate Income 10% 5% 1% 40%
§ 30-47.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-47.4
AO:1173
§ 30-47.5. Concessions, Waivers and Other Incentives. [Ord. #2163,
§ 1]
Target Group
Minimum %
Restricted Units Bonus Granted
Additional Bonus
for Each 1%
Increase in
Affordable Units
% Affordable
Units Required
for Maximum
35% Bonus
Senior Housing/
Mobile Home Park
100% 20% — —
a. Concessions, Waivers and Other Incentives. In addition to the density
bonus, an applicant may request one or more concessions or other
incentives, in the form of waivers of development standards as follows:
1. One concession or other incentive for projects that include at least
5% of the units for very low-income households, 10% of the units
for low-income households, or 10% of for-sale units for moderateincome
households.
2. Two concessions or other incentives for projects that include at
least 10% of the units for very low-income households, 20% of the
units for low-income households, or 20% of for-sale units for
moderate-income households.
3. Three concessions or other incentives for projects that include at
least 15% of the units for very low-income households, 30% of the
units for low-income households, or 30% of for-sale units for
moderate-income households.
4. Affordable Housing Concession Permit Required. An applicant must
submit an application for an Affordable Housing Concession
Permit, for approval of a request for the concessions and other
incentives.
Incentive/Concessions Summary Table
Target Group Affordable Units
Very Low Income 5% 10% 15%
Low Income 10% 20% 30%
Moderate Income 10% 20% 30%
Maximum
Incentive(s)/Concession(s)
1 2 3
b. Application Requirements. An application for an Affordable Housing
Concession Permit shall be filed in compliance with this section. The
application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the
Department handout for the Affordable Housing Concession
application, including the specific economic information described in
the handout. The applicant must provide evidence, to the satisfaction of
§ 30-47.4 COMPTON § 30-47.5
AO:1174
§ 30-47.6. Floor Area Bonus and Concessions for Child Day Care
Center. [Ord. #2163, § 1]
the approval body, that the concession or incentive would result in
identifiable, financially sufficient and actual cost reductions.
c. Procedure. An Affordable Housing Concession Permit shall be
submitted concurrently with the application for Conditional Use Permit
(Section 30-26) required for new construction of a residential
development of five units or more, where an addition or conversion of
units may result in five units or more, in the case or a building move or
where residential units are proposed in the C-L (Limited Commercial)
Zone. The Planning Commission, the approval body, has the following
course(s) of action regarding the Affordable Housing Concession
Permit, provided that the Planning Commission shall grant the
applicant's first choice of concessions if the Commission makes all of
the findings in paragraph d.
1. Approve the concession and/or other incentive described in the
application for the Affordable Housing Concession Permit.
2. Deny the concession and/or other incentive described in the
application for the Affordable Housing Concession Permit.
3. Approve one or more concession(s) and/or other incentives and
deny one or more other concessions and/or incentives, if more than
one concession or other incentives is described in the application
for the Affordable Housing Concession Permit.
d. Findings. A concession or other incentive shall be approved upon
making the following findings.
1. The concession or incentive is required in order for the designated
units to provide for affordable housing costs and the applicant has
submitted evidence, to the satisfaction of the approval body, that
the concession or incentive would result in identifiable, financially
sufficient and actual cost reductions; and
2. The concession or incentive would not have a specific adverse
impact on public health, on public safety, on the physical
environment, or on a property that is listed in the California
Register of Historical Resources; or
3. The concession or incentive would likely have a specific adverse
impact on public health, on public safety, on the physical
environment, or on a property that is listed in the California
Register of Historical Resources, but there is a feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without
rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderateincome
households.
§ 30-47.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-47.6
AO:1175
a. Floor Area Bonus or Concession for Inclusion of Child Day Care Facility.
An applicant for a development project that complies with the density
bonus requirement of this section and that also includes a child day
care center that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or
adjacent to, the project may request one additional bonus or concession
as follows:
1. Additional net floor area for housing units that is equal to the net
floor area in the child day care center. The approval body also has
the discretion to grant additional net floor area for housing units in
excess of the net floor area in the child day care center.
2. A concession that contributes significantly to the economic
feasibility of the construction of the child day care center, in
addition to the concession granted for affordable dwelling units.
b. Application Requirements. An applicant for a Child Day Care Bonus or
Concession Permit shall be filed in compliance with this section. The
application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the
Department handout for a Child Day Care Bonus or Concession Permit
application, including the specific economic information described in
the handout.
c. Procedure. A Child Day Care Bonus or Concession Permit shall be
submitted concurrently with the Conditional Use Permit application.
Planning Commission will review the application and may:
1. Approve the bonus or concession described in the application for
the Child Day Care Bonus or Concession Permit, if the findings
below are made.
2. Deny the bonus or incentive described in the application for the
Child Day Care Bonus or Concession Permit, if the necessary
findings cannot be made.
3. Approve a different bonus or concession that contributes
significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the
child day-care center.
d. Findings. A child day care bonus or concession shall be approved upon
making the following findings.
1. The bonus or concession would contribute significantly to the
economic feasibility of the construction of the child day care center,
and the applicant has submitted evidence, to the satisfaction of the
approval body, that the concession or incentive would result in
identifiable, financially sufficient and actual cost reductions.
2. The bonus or concession would not have a specific adverse impact
on public health, on public safety, on the physical environment, or
on a property that is listed in the California Register of Historical
Resources; or
§ 30-47.6 COMPTON § 30-47.6
AO:1176
§ 30-47.7. Bonus for Donation of Land. [Ord. #2163, § 1]
3. The bonus or concession would likely have a specific adverse
impact on public health, on public safety, on the physical
environment, or on a property that is listed in the California
Register of Historical Resources, but there is a feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact, or
adverse impact, without rendering the development unaffordable
to low- and moderate-income households.
4. The community has inadequate existing child care facilities and the
bonus or concession will contribute toward improving the
availability of child care facilities.
e. Conditions of Approval. The child day care center shall comply with
conditions of approval as follows:
1. The child day care center shall remain in operation for a period of
time that is equal to or longer than the period during which the
designated dwelling units are required to be affordable.
2. Of the children who attend the child day care center, the children of
very low-income households, lower income households, or families
of moderate income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or
greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for
very low- or low-income households or families of moderate
income.
3. The child care facility shall not convert any portion of the facility to
other uses.
a. Bonus for Donation of Land. An applicant for a tentative subdivision
map, parcel map, or other residential development approval who
donates land within the jurisdiction of the City to the City shall be
entitled to a bonus in residential density for the entire development
above the density allowable under this Zoning Ordinance and the Land
Use Element of the General Plan.
b. Requirements for Bonus. An applicant for a bonus for the donation of
land must provide evidence to the City that provides, to the City's
satisfaction, that all of the following requirements would be met:
1. The applicant shall donate and transfer the land no later than the
date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or
residential development application.
2. The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being
transferred shall be sufficient to permit construction of units
affordable to very low-income households in an amount not less
than 10% of the number of residential units of the proposed
development.
§ 30-47.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-47.7
AO:1177
3. The transferred land shall be at least one acre in size or of
sufficient size to permit development of at least 40 units, has the
appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned for
development as affordable housing, and is or will be served by
adequate public facilities and infrastructure. The land shall have
appropriate zoning and development standards to make the
development of the affordable units feasible. No later than the date
of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or of the
residential development, the transferred land shall have all of the
permits and approvals, other than design review approval and
building permits, necessary for development of the very lowincome
housing units on the transferred land.
4. The transferred land and the affordable units shall be subject to a
deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units,
consistent with subsection 30-47.9 (Enforcement of Affordability).
5. The land shall be transferred to the City of Compton
Redevelopment Agency or to a housing developer approved by the
City of Compton.
6. The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed
development or, with approval of the Director, within 1/4 mile of the
boundary of the proposed development.
c. Density Bonus of Up to 35%. The density bonus for donation of land for
very low-income units shall be calculated as follows:
Table 4-3.3
Increase in Allowable Density for Donation of Land for Very
Low Income Units
Percentage of Very Low-
Income Units
Density Bonus Percentage
10 15
11 16
12 17
13 18
14 19
15 20
16 21
17 22
18 23
19 24
20 25
21 26
§ 30-47.7 COMPTON § 30-47.7
AO:1178
§ 30-47.8. Enforcement of Affordability. [Ord. #2163, § 1]
Table 4-3.3
Increase in Allowable Density for Donation of Land for Very
Low Income Units
Percentage of Very Low-
Income Units
Density Bonus Percentage
22 27
23 28
24 29
25 30
26 31
27 32
28 33
29 34
30 35
d. Bonuses May Be Combined. A bonus for the donation of land may be
combined with a bonus granted under subsection 30-47.4.
a. Low and Very Low Income: Covenant for 30 Years. A covenant or other
document satisfactory to the City Attorney shall be recorded before
issuance of a Building Permit, which shall ensure that the low- and very
low-income density bonus units are at all times rented or sold to, and
remain affordable at, the applicable income level for at least 30 years. If
the Compton Redevelopment Agency provides financial assistance to
the developer of the project, a longer term of affordability may apply.
b. Moderate Income: Equity-Sharing. A covenant or other document
satisfactory to the City Attorney shall be recorded before issuance of a
Building Permit, which shall ensure that the moderate-income density
bonus units are initially occupied by persons or families at a moderate
income level. Moderate-income units may be offered for subsequent
sale to an above moderate-income purchaser; provided that the sale
shall result in equity-sharing of a financial interest in the unit with the
City, or its designee.
1. Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any
improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate
share of appreciation. The City shall recapture any initial subsidy
and its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall then be
used within three years for affordable housing purposes.
2. The City's initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of
the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sales price to
the moderate-income household, plus the amount of any publicly-
§ 30-47.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-47.8
AO:1179
§ 30-47.9. Administrative Procedures. [Ord. #2163, § 1]
The City Manager or her/his designee may adopt administrative procedures
for implementation of this section.
§ 30-48. UNATTENDED DONATION BOXES. [Ord. #2247]
This section and the following subsections shall be known as the
"Unattended Donation Box Ordinance" of the City of Compton.
§ 30-48.1. Intent and Purpose. [Ord. #2247]
The purpose of this section is to regulate the placement of unattended
donation boxes within the City. The procedures and requirements of this
section are enacted to:
§ 30-48.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2247]
assisted down payment or mortgage assistance. If upon resale, the
market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value
at the time of resale shall be used as the initial market value.
3. The City's proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to the
ratio of the initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at
the time of the initial sale.
c. Forfeiture of Funds. Any individual who rents units in violation of this
section shall be required to forfeit all rents above the applicable
affordable rate; any individual who sells a unit in violation of this
section shall be required to forfeit all profits from the sale exceeding
the difference between the sale price and the applicable affordable
sales price. Recovered funds shall be deposited to the City of Compton
Housing Trust Fund.
a. Promote the community's health, safety, and welfare by regulating
unattended donation boxes for clothing or other salvageable personal
property within the City.
b. Ensure that unattended donation boxes do not pose a safety hazard to
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
c. Ensure that material is not allowed to accumulate outside of the
unattended donation boxes where it can be scattered by adverse
weather conditions, animal contact or human activities.
d. Establish criteria that avoid attracting vermin, unsightliness and public
health or safety hazards.
a. DIRECTOR – Shall mean the Community Development Director of the
Planning and Economic Development Department of the City of
Compton or designee.
§ 30-47.8 COMPTON § 30-48.2
AO:1180
§ 30-48.3. Permit Requirements and Standards. [Ord. #2247]
b. OPERATOR – Shall mean a person, entity, association or organization
that has been issued a permit pursuant to the provisions of this section
authorizing the placement of an unattended donation box to solicit or
collect donations of clothing or other salvageable personal property.
c. NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION – Shall mean an entity, association or
organization that is exempt from taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(3)
or 501(c)(4) of the United States Internal Revenue Code.
d. PERMIT – Shall mean a permit issued pursuant to this section allowing
the placement of an unattended donation box on a specifically
designated portion of private property.
e. PROPERTY OWNER – Shall mean the person, entity, association or
organization who owns the real property where the unattended
donation box is located.
f. PUBLIC PROPERTY – Shall mean any property owned, leased, or
maintained by any Federal, State or local government.
g. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY – Shall mean any area used or intended for use
by the public for pedestrian or vehicular travel within the City,
including but not limited to public streets, highways, roadways,
sidewalks, median strips, parkways, plazas, or alleys.
h. SALVAGEABLE PERSONAL PROPERTY – Has the same meaning as in
subdivision (b) of Section 148 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
i. UNATTENDED DONATION BOX – Shall mean any unattended
container, box, receptacle, or similar device that is located on any real
property within the City used for soliciting and collecting donations of
clothing or other salvageable personal property. This term does not
include recycle bins or collection boxes for the collection of California
Redemption Value (CRV) recyclable materials.
a. General Provisions. Unless otherwise exempt, it shall be unlawful and a
public nuisance for any person to place, operate, maintain or allow an
unattended donation box on any property without first obtaining a
permit from the City pursuant to this section. All donation boxes must
be placed, operated and maintained in accordance with all the
provisions of this section.
b. Initial Permit Application. Applicants interested in placing an
unattended donation box on private property shall first submit a permit
application to the Planning and Economic Development Department.
Applications that do not include all of the requested information and/or
documents shall be deemed incomplete and will not be processed. The
permit application shall be made on a form provided by the Planning
Department and shall include the following information as to each
unattended donation box:
§ 30-48.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-48.3
AO:1181
1. The name, address, e-mail, website (if available) and telephone
number of the applicant or operator and the owner of the donation
box;
2. Written proof sufficient to establish that the operator who will
utilize the unattended donation box is qualified to solicit donations
of salvageable personal property pursuant to Section 148.3 of the
California Welfare and Institutions Code, as amended;
3. The physical address of the property owner's real property and a
drawing (or site plan) sufficient to indicate the proposed location of
the unattended donation box on the property owner's real property,
as well as the size of the proposed unattended donation box and the
written consent of the property owner to place the unattended
donation box on his/her real property; and
4. An executed Indemnification and Hold Harmless Agreement
pursuant to subsection 30-48.6 below;
5. A nonrefundable application and processing fee in the amount
established by resolution or ordinance of the City Council. This fee
shall be in addition to any fee or tax imposed by the City pursuant
to any other provision of the Compton Municipal Code (Code).
6. Any additional information which the Director may deem necessary
for the proper disposition of the application.
c. Permit Renewal Applications. If an operator is in compliance with this
section, a permit may be automatically renewed for each successive
year by timely payment of the renewal fee established by resolution or
ordinance of the City Council and the filing of a complete permit
renewal application by or before the expiration date of the existing
permit. Applications that do not include all of the requested information
or documents shall be deemed incomplete and shall not be processed.
d. Review of Permit Application. Once submitted, a complete permit
application or renewal application will be reviewed and acted upon
within 15 City business days. If the applicant is not notified in writing by
the fifteenth City business day of approval, denial or extension of the
permit review period, the permit application or renewal application
shall be deemed approved.
e. Issuance of Permits. Upon a finding by the Director that the application
is complete, accurate and compliant with this section, a permit shall be
issued.
1. A permit issued hereunder shall be valid for one unattended
donation box. A separate permit shall be required for each donation
box.
2. The term of the permit shall expire one year from the date of
issuance.
§ 30-48.3 COMPTON § 30-48.3
AO:1182
§ 30-48.4. Donation Boxes - Requirements and Maintenance. [Ord.
#2247]
Unattended donation boxes located in the City shall comply with the
following standards:
3. No operator to whom a permit has been issued shall transfer,
assign, or convey such permit to another person or operator.
4. Prior to the expiration of the permit, the operator or property
owner may voluntarily cancel the permit by notifying the Director
in writing of the intent to cancel the permit. The permit shall
become void upon the Director's receipt of a written notice of
intent to cancel the permit.
f. Denial of Permit. If an application for a permit is denied, the Director
shall notify the applicant in writing within that time period specified in
paragraph d above of the cause for such denial.
a. Donation boxes shall be maintained in good condition and appearance
with no structural damage, holes, or visible rust and shall be kept free
of graffiti.
b. Donation boxes shall be locked or otherwise secured.
c. The front of each donation box shall conspicuously display the following
information, in at least two inch typeface: (1) name, address, telephone
number and e-mail address (if any) of the operator and telephone
number of the property owner; (2) a statement that reads "This
donation box is owned and operated by a non-profit organization"; and
(3) a statement describing the charitable cause that will benefit from
the donations.
d. Donation boxes shall be free of any advertising which is unrelated to the
business of the operator of the donation box.
e. The operator shall place a copy of the current donation box permit in a
prominent and visible location in the front of the box in plain view for
inspection by the public and City officials.
f. Donation boxes shall be no more than 78 inches high and 72 inches
wide and deep.
g. Donation boxes shall be serviced and emptied as often as necessary to
maintain the area surrounding the unattended donation boxes free of
over-flowing contents and any junk, garbage, trash, debris or other
refuse material.
h. The property owner and operator shall be individually and severally
responsible for abating and removing all over-flowing contents, junk,
garbage, trash, debris and other refuse material in the area
surrounding the unattended donation boxes within 24 hours of written
or verbal notice from the City.
§ 30-48.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-48.4
AO:1183
§ 30-48.5. Donation Boxes - Location Standards. [Ord. #2247]
Unattended donation boxes shall be located in accordance with the
following standards:
§ 30-48.6. Indemnification Agreement. [Ord. #2247]
The permit application and any permit renewal application shall include
an Indemnification and Hold Harmless Agreement in favor of the City
in substantial compliance with this subsection, which must be executed
prior to issuance of any permit under this section. Pursuant to the
Indemnification and Hold Harmless Agreement, the operator shall agree
to defend, indemnify, protect and hold the City, and its elected officials,
officers, representatives, agents and employees harmless from and against
all claims asserted or liability established for damages or injuries to any
i. If the City abates and/or removes any over-flowing contents, junk,
garbage, trash, debris and other refuse material from the area
surrounding the unattended donation boxes due to the property owner
and/or operator's failure to do so in compliance with the provisions of
this section, the property owner and operator shall be individually and
severally liable for all costs incurred by the City for said abatement and/
or removal.
j. Each property is limited to a maximum of two unattended donation
boxes at any one time.
a. Unattended donation boxes shall remain only in the exact location for
which they have been permitted and may not be removed unless the
donation box is entirely removed from the property or replaced with
another donation box in the same location. Any relocation on site will
require the operator to first receive approval of an amended permit.
b. Unattended donation boxes shall not be placed on any public property,
including any public right-of-way.
c. Unattended donation boxes shall be located in a well lit area.
d. Unattended donation boxes shall be subordinate to the principal use of
the property on which it is located. Unattended donation boxes cannot
be the sole or primary land use of a property.
e. Except for religious and civic institutions, which shall be limited to two
donation boxes in compliance with this section, it shall be unlawful for
an operator and/or property owner to place any unattended donation
box in any residential district within the City.
f. No unattended donation box shall be placed within 500 feet from
another unattended donation box.
g. No unattended donation box shall be placed in any required parking
spaces, required landscaping, or setbacks.
§ 30-48.4 COMPTON § 30-48.6
AO:1184
person or property, including its own employees, agents or officers which
arise from or are connected with or are caused or claimed to be caused by
any unattended donation box owned by or attributable to the operator.
§ 30-48.7. Revocation of Permit; Removal of Donation Box. [Ord.
#2247]
The Director shall have the right to revoke any permit issued hereunder if
any of the grounds upon which the Director may refuse to issue an initial
permit exists. In addition, the failure of the operator to comply with the
provisions of this section or any other provisions of the Compton Municipal
Code or other law shall constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. Any
permit issued in error may be revoked without liability to the City.
The Director shall provide written notice to the operator stating the specific
grounds for revocation. Upon revocation, the unattended donation box shall
be removed from the property within 15 calendar days and, if not removed
within this time period, the City may remove, store and/or dispose of the
unattended donation box at the sole cost and expense of the operator and/
or property owner. Upon revocation, an operator shall be prohibited from
applying for a permit for a period of one year. Any violation of the provisions
of this section is a public nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to this
Code or as otherwise permitted by law.
§ 30-48.8. Removal of Donation Box. [Ord. #2247]
Upon the discovery on any property within the City of any unattended
donation box lacking the requisite permit, the Director or his/her designee
shall have the authority to remove, or cause the removal, storage and/or
disposal of the unattended donation box at the sole cost and expense of the
operator and/or property owner.
§ 30-48.9. Donation Boxes in Violation of Section. [Ord. #2247]
a. Written Notification. Notwithstanding any condition upon which
summary removal is available, enforcement action may be initiated
upon determination by the Director that an unattended donation box
has been abandoned as set forth in subsection 30-48.10 below, or
installed, used or maintained in violation of this section or any condition
of the permit. The operator will be notified in writing of the alleged
violation, the intent of the City to remove the unattended donation box
if the violation is not corrected within the specified time period, or an
appeal hearing is not requested within five business days after giving of
such written notice and the procedure for requesting an appeal
hearing. Failure to properly correct the violation within the specified
time period or to appeal the notice within five business days of the date
of the notification shall result in the unattended donation box being
summarily removed and stored by the City. A removal and storage fee,
as established by City Council resolution or ordinance, shall be
assessed against each unattended donation box removed and stored. A
§ 30-48.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-48.9
AO:1185
§ 30-48.10. Abandonment. [Ord. #2247]
An unattended donation box shall be deemed abandoned if it is removed
pursuant to subsection 30-48.9 above, and unclaimed for 30 continuous
calendar days from the date of notification of removal. Unattended donation
boxes deemed abandoned may be disposed of pursuant to law. The City may
dispose of an unattended donation box and shall not be responsible for any
unattended donation box, including its contents, deemed abandoned for 30
continuous calendar days.
timely request for an appeal hearing shall stay any removal by the City;
provided, however, if the violation is not corrected within five calendar
days after the decision of the City Manager, the City may remove the
unattended donation box in accordance with paragraph b below.
If the Director determines that the condition or placement of an
unattended donation box poses an imminent threat to the safety of
pedestrians or wheelchair users, or the safe flow of vehicles; or that
an unattended donation box is unlawfully located within the public
right-of-way, the Director may cause the unattended donation box to be
summarily removed without prior notice.
b. Removal. Whenever an unattended donation box is summarily removed
by the City and stored, the Director shall notify the operator by mailing
a notice of summary removal, stating the date the unattended donation
box was removed, the reasons therefor, the procedure for claiming the
unattended donation box and the procedure for obtaining a postremoval
hearing, if desired. Any unattended donation box removed and
stored pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall be released to
the operator if claimed within 30 continuous calendar days from the
date of notice of removal and on payment of reasonably incurred
removal and storage fees. Upon the failure of the operator to claim such
unattended donation box and pay the fees within 30 continuous
calendar days after the mailing of the written notice of removal, the
unattended donation box shall be deemed abandoned property in
possession of the City and may be disposed of pursuant to law.
c. Inability to Contact Operator. If the operator and/or property owner
cannot be readily contacted based exclusively on information provided
in a current permit, related permit application or information affixed to
the unattended donation box, no further action on behalf of the City is
required. If the operator and/or property owner thereafter notifies the
Director to reclaim the offending unattended donation box, and the
donation box has not been deemed abandoned and/or disposed of by the
City, a notice of summary removal and procedure for obtaining a postremoval
hearing shall be served in accordance with paragraph b above,
unless waived by the responsible party.
§ 30-48.9 COMPTON § 30-48.11
AO:1186
§ 30-48.11. Appeals. [Ord. #2247]
Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order
or action taken under the provisions of this section may appeal the same
by filing an appeal. An appeal must be perfected within five business days
after receipt of notice of any protested finding, determination, notice, order
or action by filing with the City Manager a letter of appeal briefly stating
therein the basis for such appeal. A hearing shall be held on a date no
more than 15 business days after receipt of the letter of appeal unless
appellant requests a longer time period. The City Manager shall give the
appellant, and any other interested party, a reasonable opportunity to be
heard, in order to show cause why the finding, determination, notice, order
or action should not be upheld. Within 15 calendar days of the conclusion of
the hearing, the City Manager shall affirm, overrule or modify the finding,
determination, notice, order or action. The decision of the City Manager
shall be final and conclusive.
§ 30-48.12. Recovery of Costs, Fees and Penalties. [Ord. #2247]
The City Council shall set fees, by resolution or ordinance, to recover
all reasonable costs incurred by the City in the regulation of unattended
donation boxes.
§ 30-48.13. No Substitute for Business License. [Ord. #2247]
A permit issued under this section shall not substitute for any business
license otherwise required under this Code.
§ 30-48.14. Exemption. [Ord. #2247]
Unattended donation boxes located entirely within the interior of a building
are exempt from the requirements of this section.
§ 30-48.15. Penalty. [Ord. #2247]
Any violation of the provisions of this section is an infraction, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50 for a first
violation; a fine not exceeding $100 for a second violation in the same
calendar year; and a fine not exceeding $200 for each additional violation
in the same calendar year. Each day that such violation is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder.
§ 30-48.16. Applicability of Section Provisions. [Ord. #2247]
a. The provisions of this section shall apply to all unattended donation
boxes, whether installed and maintained prior to or after the effective
date of this section. Those unattended donation boxes installed prior to
the effective date of this section shall be brought into compliance with
the provisions of this section within 60 calendar days of the effective
date of this section.
§ 30-48.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-48.16
AO:1187
§ 30-49. (RESERVED)
§ 30-50. (RESERVED)
§ 30-51. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES ESTABLISHMENT
REGULATIONS.92
§ 30-51.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
This section shall be known as the City's Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Establishment Regulations. This section requires conditional use permits
for newly established Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activities, confers Deemed
Approved Status for existing Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activities that
constitute legal nonconforming uses, and establishes standards and an
administrative hearing process to review violations of those standards in
order to protect the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents
of the City and to prevent nuisance activities where Alcoholic Beverage
Sales Activities occur. The City has adopted the regulations described in this
section for the following purposes:
b. Any unattended donation box not brought into compliance within 60
days after the effective date of this section91 shall be deemed to be in
violation of this section.
c. Nothing in this section is intended to diminish or otherwise alter the
requirements of any other Federal, State, or local law governing the
regulation of unattended donation boxes.
a. To protect residential, commercial, industrial, civic and institutional
areas and minimize the adverse impacts of nonconforming and
incompatible uses;
b. To provide mechanisms to address problems often associated with the
public consumption of Alcoholic Beverages such as litter, loitering,
graffiti, unruly behavior and escalated noise levels;
c. To provide that Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments are not the
source of public nuisances in the community;
d. To provide for properly maintained Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Establishments so that the negative impacts generated by these
activities are not harmful to the surrounding environment in any way;
e. To monitor Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments
to ensure they do not substantially change in mode or character of
operation; and
91.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2247 codified herein as Section 30-48, was adopted March 4,
2014.
92.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ord. Nos. 2275, 2279, 2281.
§ 30-48.16 COMPTON § 30-51.1
AO:1188
§ 30-51.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
The meaning and construction of the words and phrases set forth below
shall apply throughout this Section 30-51, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning or construction.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and
any liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine or beer, that
contains 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by volume and that is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other
substances, the sale of which requires an ABC license.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES ACTIVITY — Means the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages for onsite or offsite consumption.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES ESTABLISHMENT — Means an
establishment where Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity occurs. Alcoholic
Beverage Sales Establishments include but are not limited to the following
recognized types of establishments: grocery stores/major retailers, liquor
stores, beer and wine stores, convenience stores/markets, specialty food
markets, retail sales establishments, wine shops, theaters, comedy clubs,
bowling alleys, billiard or game parlors, service stations, social halls,
taverns, cocktail lounges, dance halls, nightclubs, bars, and alcoholic
beverage tasting rooms. This definition excludes fast food establishments,
restaurants (serving of Alcoholic Beverages with meals only),
manufacturing, wholesale, and temporary events.
CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL OR
ABC — Refers to the department of the State of California empowered to
act pursuant to Article 20, section 22, of the California Constitution and
authorized to administer the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Act.
CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL — Means all requirements that must be
carried out by the owners engaged in the activity of: (A) a new Alcoholic
Beverage Sales Activity in connection with a conditional use permit, or (B)
f. To provide opportunities for Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments
to operate in a mutually beneficial relationship to each other and to
other surrounding uses.
g. To encourage the development of small grocery stores selling food
products that require Home Preparation.
h. To promote a healthier lifestyle and healthier food options for the
residents of Compton by increasing access to safe, nutritious food to
maintain a healthy and active life. This Section 30-51 alone does not
allow or permit Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activities, but only applies to
these activities where otherwise allowed or permitted within an
applicable zoning district. The provisions of this Ordinance No. 2300
are intended to complement the State of California alcohol-related
laws. The City does not intend to replace or usurp any powers vested in
the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 30-51.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-51.2
AO:1189
by an existing permitted, conditionally permitted, or Legal Nonconforming
Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity to comply with Deemed Approved
Performance Standards and to retain its Deemed Approved Status.
DEEMED APPROVED ACTIVITY — Means any existing permitted,
conditionally permitted, or Legal Nonconforming Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Activity. Such activity shall be considered a Deemed Approved Activity as of
the effective date of this ordinance enacting this Section (date) as long as
it complies with the Deemed Approved Performance Standards set forth in
subsection 30-51.6.
DEEMED APPROVED ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES ESTABLISHMENTS
— Means any existing establishment engaged in permitted, conditionally
permitted, or Legal Nonconforming Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity and
in compliance with the Deemed Approved Performance Standards set forth
in subsection 30-51.6.
DEEMED APPROVED ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES REGULATIONS —
Means the those standards and regulations contained in subsection 30-51.6
applicable to Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activities for
Onsite Alcoholic Beverage Sales or Offsite Alcoholic Beverage Sales that
have been legally established and operating, with or without a conditional
use permit, within the City as of the effective date of the ordinance
establishing this section.
DEEMED APPROVED PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — Means those
standards set forth in subsection 30-51.6.
DEEMED APPROVED STATUS — Means the permitted use of land for
a Deemed Approved Activity. Deemed Approved Status replaces legal
nonconforming status with respect to an Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity
and remains in effect as long as the activity complies with the Deemed
Approved Performance Standards.
FLOOR AREA — Means the sum of the gross area of all floors in all buildings
on a site, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls.
ILLEGAL ACTIVITY — Means an activity which has been determined to be
in noncompliance with the Deemed Approved Performance Standards. Such
an activity shall lose its Deemed Approved Status and shall no longer be
considered a Deemed Approved Activity.
LEGAL NONCONFORMING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES ACTIVITY OR
LEGAL NONCONFORMING ACTIVITY — Means an Alcoholic Beverage
Sales Activity that was a nonconforming use pursuant to the City's
nonconforming use regulations and for which a valid ABC license had been
issued and used in the exercise of the rights and privileges conferred by the
license at a time immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance
establishing this section. Such an activity shall be considered a Deemed
Approved Activity and shall no longer be considered a Legal Nonconforming
Activity.
§ 30-51.2 COMPTON § 30-51.2
AO:1190
OFFSITE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES — Means any Alcoholic Beverage
Sales Establishment licensed to engage in the retail sale of Alcoholic
Beverages for offsite consumption. Offsite alcohol sales shall include:
ONSITE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES — Means any Alcoholic Beverage
Sales Establishment licensed to engage in the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages for onsite consumption. Onsite alcoholic beverage sales shall
include:
LIQUOR STORES — Which means any licensed retail business
containing more than 4,000 square feet authorized by the state and
licensed by the City that engages in the sale of packaged alcoholic
beverages (distilled spirits, beer, wine or combination thereof).
1.
CONVENIENCE STORES — Which means a place of business used for
the retailing of a general food and drink products not intended for home
preparation and consumption with more than half the square footage
50% of the retail sales floor area dedicated to the sale of such foods and
non-alcoholic drinks, tobacco, magazines, toiletries, or any combination
thereof. Convenience stores shall only be permitted to sell Beer, and
Wine.
2.
GROCERY STORE/MAJOR RETAILER — Which means any licensed
retail grocery/retail business over 10,000 square feet in size, selling
a variety of consumer goods and does not fall within the definition of
Convenience Store. For no Conditional Use Permit to be required less
that 15% of the retail floor space can be devoted to display and sales of
alcoholic beverages.
3.
SMALL GROCERY STORE — Means any licensed retail food
establishment under 10,000 square feet that has more than 50% of the
retail floor area dedicated to food products requiring home preparation
(including fruits and vegetables). Small grocery stores shall only be
permitted to sell Beer, and Wine with less than 10% of the retail floor
space devoted to the display and sales of alcoholic beverages, unless
they meet the requirements of a Liquor store.
4.
RETAIL STORE — Means any licensed retail store under 10,000 square
feet, including, but are not limited to boutiques, department stores,
outlets and discount stores that offer a wide variety of consumer goods
including food and non food items for sale and does not fall within the
definition of Convenience or Small Grocery store. All food items sold
shall be less than 40% of the retail floor space. Retail stores shall only
be permitted to sell Beer and Wine with a Conditional Use Permit.
5.
BARS AND LOUNGES — Which means any retail business authorized
and licensed by the state and the City that engages in the sale of some
or all types of alcoholic beverages, including beer, ale wine, distilled
spirits, or any combination thereof, for consumption on the premises
and in which food is not sold or served to the public as in a bona
fide eating place or restaurant, or where the sale and service of food
products is incidental to the sale or service of alcoholic beverages.
1.
§ 30-51.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-51.2
AO:1191
OPERATIONAL STANDARDS — Means regulations for the business practice
activities and land use for locations with a conditional use permit
enumerated by subsection 30-51.11 or those further requirements imposed
to achieve these goals. Operational Standards constitute requirements that
must be complied with by an establishment in order to maintain its
conditional use permit.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — Means regulations for the business
practice activities and land use for locations with Deemed Approved Status
or those further requirements imposed to achieve these goals. Performance
Standards constitute requirements that must be complied with by an
establishment in order to retain its Deemed Approved Status.
PERMIT — Means a conditional use permit issued pursuant to this section.
PERMITTEE — Means the individual or entity that owns an Alcoholic
Beverage Sales Establishment and to whom a conditional use permit to
operate an Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment has been issued by the
City.
SURROGATE SALES — Means the purchasing of alcohol by an individual on
behalf of another individual, typically an adult purchasing alcohol on behalf
of or for consumption by a minor.
§ 30-51.3. Administrative Hearing Officer. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
There is created an Alcoholic Beverages Sales Establishment Administrative
Hearing Officer. The City Manager shall appoint an Alcoholic Beverages
Sales Establishment Administrative Hearing Officer and shall conduct
public hearings and make recommendations intended to encourage and
achieve the compliance of particular sites as appropriate. This section is
not intended to restrict the powers and duties otherwise pertaining to other
City officers or bodies, in the field of monitoring and ensuring the harmony
of Alcoholic Beverages Sales Activities in the City. These parties shall have
the powers and duties assigned to by this Code, by zoning regulations, by
other codes and ordinance, by the City Charter, or by valid administrative
authority.
ENTERTAINMENT USE — Means any entertainment business
authorized and licensed by the state and the City such as a theater,
discotheque, banquet facility, a comedy club or a jazz club, where the
sale of alcoholic beverages is an accessory to the primary purpose of
entertainment or recreation. The primary source of revenue must come
from a source other than alcoholic beverage sales.
2.
RESTAURANT — Means a bona fide eating place whose predominant
function is the service of a full range of food selections in a sit-down
setting with table service, and little, if any emphasis on 'take out' food
with onsite accessory sales of alcohol. "Restaurant" shall include the
incidental serving of alcoholic beverages provided a conditional use
permit has been obtained pursuant to the provisions of Section 30-26 of
this Chapter.
3.
§ 30-51.2 COMPTON § 30-51.4
AO:1192
§ 30-51.4. Automatic Deemed Approved Status. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
All Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activities that were Legal Nonconforming
Activities immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance
establishing this Section 30-51 shall automatically become Deemed
Approved Activities as of the effective date of such ordinance and shall
no longer be considered Legal Nonconforming Activities. Each Deemed
Approved Activity shall retain its Deemed Approved Status as long as it
complies with the Performance Standards of this section.
§ 30-51.5. Applicability of Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage
Sales Regulations. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
The Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Sales Regulations shall apply
to all Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activities for Onsite Alcoholic Beverage
Sales or Offsite Alcoholic Beverage Sales that have been legally established
and operating without a conditional use permit, within the City as of the
effective date of the ordinance establishing this section with a current valid
business license, and having obtained all applicable building permits.
§ 30-51.6. Deemed Approved Performance Standards. [Ord. #2300
§ 1]
The provisions of this section shall be known as the Deemed Approved
Performance Standards. The purpose of these standards is to control
dangerous or objectionable environmental effects of Alcoholic Beverage
Sales Activities. These standards shall apply to all Deemed Approved
Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments that hold Deemed Approved
Status pursuant to this section. An Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment
shall retain its Deemed Approved Status only if it conforms to all of the
following Performance Standards:
a. That the establishment does not result in adverse effects to the health,
welfare, peace or safety of persons visiting, residing, working, or
conducting business in the surrounding area.
b. That the establishment does not jeopardize or endanger the public
health or safety of persons visiting, residing, working, or conducting
business in the surrounding area.
c. That the establishment does not result in or cause repeated nuisance
activities within its premises or in close proximity of the premises,
including but not limited to disturbance of the peace, illegal drug
activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of
passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination,
theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, littering, loitering, graffiti,
illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially in the late night or
early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct,
or police detentions and arrests.
§ 30-51.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-51.6
AO:1193
d. That the establishment complies with all provisions of local, state and/
or federal laws, regulations or orders, including but not limited to those
of the ABC, California Business and Professions Code Sections 24200,
24200.6, and 25612.5, as well as any condition imposed on any permits
issued pursuant to applicable laws, regulations or orders. This includes
compliance with annual City business license fees.
e. That the establishment's upkeep and operating characteristics are
compatible with, and will not adversely affect the livability or
appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding
neighborhood.
f. That the owners and all employees of the establishment complete an
approved course in "Responsible Beverage Sales" (RBS) within 60 days
of hire for employees hired after the passage of the ordinance
establishing this section, or within six months of the passage of the
ordinance establishing this section for existing employees. To satisfy
this requirement, a certified program must meet the standards of the
California Coordinating Council on Responsible Beverage Service
(CCC/RBS) or other certifying/licensing body designated by the State of
California.
g. That a copy of these Performance Standards, any applicable ABC or
City operating conditions, and any training requirements shall be
posted in at least one prominent place within the interior of the
establishment where it will be readily visible and legible to the
employees and patrons of the establishment.
h. All window signs excluding emergency signs and hours of operation
shall be prohibited.
i. That the Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment operator shall not
maintain interior displays which impair visibility from the exterior of
the premises.
j. That the Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment operator shall provide
adequate interior and exterior lighting to make easily discernible the
appearance and condition of persons.
k. That music and other forms of amplified noise shall not be audible from
the exterior of any premises.
l. That the Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment, if subject to a
conditional use permit approved prior to the effective date of the
ordinance adding this provision to the code, shall conform to the
conditions of approval imposed by the applicable conditional use
permit. In the event of a conflict between the conditions of approval and
the Performance Standards, the more strict provision shall apply.
m. That there shall be no visible advertising of alcohol or signs containing
any word or reference to alcohol, liquor, beer or wine from the exterior
of the store.
§ 30-51.6 COMPTON § 30-51.7
AO:1194
§ 30-51.7. Notification to Owners of Establishments Conducting
Deemed Approved Activities. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
The City or its Hearing Officer shall notify the owner of each Deemed
Approved Activity, and also, if not the same, any property owner at the
address shown on the County's property tax assessment records, of the
Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment's Deemed Approved Status. The
notice shall be sent by U.S. first class mail and certified mail return receipt
requested and shall include a copy of the Deemed Approved Performance
Standards in this section with the requirement that they be posted in
a conspicuous and unobstructed place visible from the entrance of the
establishment for public review. This notice shall also provide that the
activity is required to comply with all performance standards and that the
activity is required to comply with all other aspects of the Deemed Approved
regulations. Failure of any person to receive notice given pursuant to this
section shall not affect the Deemed Approved Status of the activity.
§ 30-51.8. Grounds for Deemed Approved Status Suspension,
Revocation, or Termination. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
An Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment's Deemed Approved Status may
be modified, suspended for up to one year, or revoked by the Administrative
Hearing Officer if, after investigation as provided in subsection 30-51.17,
and holding a public hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer finds and
determines that violations of this section have occurred, are occurring, or
are likely to occur, for failure to comply with the Performance Standards set
forth in subsection 30-51.6. Notice of such hearing by the Administrative
Hearing Officer at which it will consider the modification, suspension or
revocation of an establishment's Deemed Approved Status shall be in
writing and shall state the grounds therefore. Notice shall be mailed by U.S.
first-class mail and certified mail return receipt requested at least 10 days
before the date of the hearing.
The occurrence of any one of the following shall immediately terminate the
Deemed Approved Status of an Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment,
requiring the immediate termination of all Alcoholic Beverages Sales
Activity, and require the application of a conditional use permit in order to
reestablish the Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity:
a. An existing Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment changes its activity
so that ABC requires a different type of license.
b. The Alcoholic Beverages Sales Establishment with unabated violations
of the Deemed Approved Performance Standards lasting more than 12
consecutive months or more than three violations of the Deemed
Approved Performance Standards in a twelve-month period
commencing upon the issuance of the first violation.
c. There is a substantial modification to the mode or character of
operation.
§ 30-51.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-51.8
AO:1195
d. As used herein, the phrase "substantial modification to the mode or
character of operation" includes but is not be limited to the following:
1. The Offsite or Onsite Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment
increases the floor area or shelf space devoted to the display or
sales of any Alcoholic Beverage.
2. The Offsite or Onsite Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment
increases the number of customer seats primarily devoted to the
sale or service of any Alcoholic Beverages.
3. The Offsite or Onsite Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment
extends its normal hours of operation.
4. The Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment proposes to reinstate
Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity after the ABC license has been
either revoked or suspended for a period greater than 14 days by
ABC.
5. The Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment discontinues active
operation for more than 90 consecutive days or ceases to be
licensed by the ABC.
e. A substantial modification in the mode of character or operation shall
not include:
1. Re-establishment, restoration or repair of an existing Alcoholic
Beverage Sales Establishment on the same premises after the
premises have been rendered totally or partially inaccessible by a
riot, insurrection, toxic accident, or act of God, provided that the
reestablishment, restoration or repair does not extend the normal
hours of operation of any establishment or add to the capacity, floor
area, or shelf space devoted to Alcoholic Beverages of any
establishment that engages in any Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Activity.
f. If it is determined by the City that there has been a discontinuance of
active operation for more than 90 consecutive days or a cessation or
lapse of ABC licensing, an Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment may
resume Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity only upon the granting of a
conditional use permit as provided in this section. In the event that any
active operation is discontinued on a property for a period of 90
consecutive days or more, such discontinuance shall be presumed to be
abandonment of the use by the property owner. At any time after any
active operation is discontinued for a period of 90 consecutive days or
more, the City Manager's designee shall notify the property owner in
writing of the determination of presumed abandonment of the active
operation. Pursuant to Section 30-26 of this chapter, the property
owner may appeal the determination to the Planning Commission,
which may overturn the determination only upon making a finding that
the evidence supports the property owner's position that the Deemed
Approved Activity was not discontinued for a period of 90 consecutive
§ 30-51.8 COMPTON § 30-51.8
AO:1196
§ 30-51.9. Conditional Use Permits for New Alcoholic Beverage
Sales Activities. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
The general purposes of these regulations are to protect and promote the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare
by requiring consideration and approval of a land use permit before a new
Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity will be permitted. This section alone does
not allow or permit Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activities, but only applies to
these activities where otherwise allowed or permitted within an applicable
land use or zoning district. All new Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments
are required to comply with the Operational Standards and objectives set
forth in this Section. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no
new Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment, with the exception of Grocery
Stores and Major Retailers as defined in this Section, may be established
unless a conditional use permit is first obtained in accordance with the
requirements of this section.
§ 30-51.10. Distance and Minimum Size Requirements Applicable to
New Offsite Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activities. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
days or more. The property owner shall be notified by the city of the
termination of the Deemed Approved Status and shall be informed of
the property owner's right to appeal the City's decision to the Planning
Commission.
a. All new Offsite Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments shall comply
with the following distance requirements:
1. All Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments, with the exception of
Restaurants, shall only be located on Major Highways, Secondary
Highways, and Collector (Industrial) Streets, as defined in the
General Plan. Access to the Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Establishments shall not create any traffic disruptions, delays, or
safety issues for vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic.
2. Liquor Stores, Bars, lounge and Convenience Stores shall be
separated by a minimum distance of at least 1,000 feet from any
other Liquor Store, Bar, lounge or Convenience Store, inside or
outside the City.
3. Bars, Lounge, Liquor, and Convenience Stores shall be located at
least 1,000 feet from City Hall, public parks, schools, day care
facilities, medical clinics and churches.
4. Each Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment shall meet the
minimum Code standards for parking, landscaping, access and
signage.
5. All new Liquor and Convenience Stores shall maintain a minimum
of at least 4,000 square feet of retail floor area and shall be limited
to locations within commercial centers with at least 25,000 square
§ 30-51.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-51.10
AO:1197
§ 30-51.11. Operational Standards. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
All new Offsite Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments shall be designed,
constructed, and operated to conform to all of the following Operational
Standards:
feet of retail, restaurant, or entertainment floor area or if located at
a standalone building with a minimum of 10,000 square feet of floor
area with approval of a CUP. Convenience stores in gas stations
shall be 2,500 square feet. Gas station convenience stores that do
not have an approved conditional use permit when this ordinance
take effect shall be prohibited from selling alcoholic beverages of
any type.
6. Existing liquor and convenience stores that have an approved
conditional use Permit when these regulations become effective
and subsequently desire to expand or modify their operations, are
subject to these regulations except subsections 30-51.10a5 and a7.
7. Small grocery stores and retail stores that do not fall under the
definition of convenience or liquor stores may be permitted to sell
Beer and Wine only if less than 10% of the retail floor space is
devoted to the display and sales of alcoholic beverages.
8. Large retailers of 10,000 square feet or greater that sell alcohol do
not require a CUP provided they limit the alcohol sales and display
area to no more than 15% of the gross floor area.
9. A fraternal organization or veterans club may be exempted from
the size and location restrictions, subject to evaluation of sitespecific
conditions through the Conditional Use Permit review
process and considering recommendations from the Sheriffs
Department.
10. Temporary uses issued a Temporary License by the California
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control and established in
compliance with all City laws and regulations are exempt from the
size and location restrictions and do not require a CUP. Temporary
uses are special events/uses lasting less than 48 hours and receive
a Special Event Permit.
11. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, no new on-site
or off-site alcoholic beverage sales activity may be established
without full compliance with this ordinance except Conditional Use
Permit applications that have been filed prior to the effective date
of this Ordinance. Convenience stores that have been issued
building permits and are under construction prior to the adoption
of this ordinance are not subject to the minimum size or location
requirements.
§ 30-51.10 COMPTON § 30-51.11
AO:1198
a. That the establishment does not result in adverse effects to the health,
welfare, peace or safety of persons visiting, residing, working, or
conducting business in the surrounding area.
b. That the establishment does not jeopardize or endanger the public
health or safety of persons visiting, residing, working, or conducting
business in the surrounding area.
c. That the establishment does not result in or cause repeated nuisance
activities within its premises or in close proximity of the premises,
including but not limited to disturbance of the peace, illegal drug
activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of
passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination,
theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, littering, loitering, graffiti,
illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially in the late night or
early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct,
or police detentions and arrests.
d. That the establishment complies with all provisions of local, state and/
or federal laws, regulations or orders, including but not limited to those
of the ABC, California Business and Professions Code Sections 24200,
24200.6, and 25612.5, as well as any condition imposed on any permits
issued pursuant to applicable laws, regulations or orders. This includes
compliance with annual City business license fees.
e. That the establishment's upkeep and operating characteristics are
compatible with, and will not adversely affect the livability or
appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding
neighborhood.
f. That the establishment complies with the following alcohol sale
limitations in order to discourage nuisance activities:
1. No wine shall be displayed, sold or given away in containers less
than 750 milliliters, except multipack containers of wine, and
multipack wine coolers containing no more than 6% alcohol by
volume.
2. No malt beverage products shall be displayed, sold or given away
with alcohol content greater than 5 1/2% by volume.
3. No wine shall be displayed, sold or given away with an alcohol
content greater than 15% by volume unless aged at least two years.
4. No distilled spirits shall be displayed, sold or given away in
containers of less than 375 milliliters, including but not limited to,
airline bottles, except pre-mixed cocktails.
5. Notwithstanding subsection (4) above, no distilled spirits shall be
displayed, sold or distributed in 375 milliliters hip flask containers.
§ 30-51.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-51.11
AO:1199
§ 30-51.12. Conditional Use Permit Applications. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
6. No beer, ale, or malt liquor shall be offered for sale in single
containers or in containers of beer, ale, or malt liquor not in their
original factory packages of six-packs or greater.
7. No beer, ale or malt liquor shall be offered for sale in a container
with a volume greater than 24 ounces. This restriction is not
intended to prohibit the sale of such beverages in kegs or other
types of containers, with a volume of two or more gallons, which
are clearly designed to dispense multiple servings.
8. No display, sale or distribution of beer or wine, wine coolers or
similar alcoholic beverages shall be made from an ice tub, barrel,
or similar container.
g. That the owners and all employees of the establishment complete an
approved course in "Responsible Beverage Sales" (RBS) within 60 days
of hire for employees hired after the passage of the ordinance
establishing this section, or within six months of the passage of the
ordinance establishing this section for existing employees. To satisfy
this requirement, a certified program must meet the standards of the
California Coordinating Council on Responsible Beverage Service
(CCC/RBS) or other certifying/licensing body designated by the State of
California.
h. A copy of these operational standards, any applicable ABC or City
operating conditions, and any training requirements shall be posted in
at least one prominent place within the interior of the establishment
where it will be readily visible and legible to the employees and patrons
of the establishment.
i. That the Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment operator shall not
maintain interior displays which impair visibility from the exterior of
the premises. Signs both inside and outside buildings shall be limited to
the provisions of the City of Compton Zoning Code Chapter 30. No
exterior sign shall incorporate any words, logos, symbols, or graphics
denoting the sale of alcohol. Any sign having the words liquor, beer,
wine, or spirits is prohibited. All window signs excluding emergency
signs and hours of operation shall be prohibited. No alcohol related
signs located inside the alcohol-related sales business building shall be
visible from the outside of the building.
j. That the Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment operator shall provide
adequate interior and exterior lighting to make easily discernible the
appearance and condition of persons.
k. That music and other forms of amplified noise shall not be audible from
the exterior of any premises.
l. Convenience Store and Small Grocery Store Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Activity shall be limited to beer, ale, and wine.
§ 30-51.11 COMPTON § 30-51.12
AO:1200
a. Any person, association, partnership, corporation or other entity
desiring to obtain an Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity conditional use
permit shall file an application with the City's Planning and Economic
Development Department on a form provided by the City. The
application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
processing fee in an amount established by resolution of the City
Council. The application for a conditional use permit shall contain the
following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall set forth the name of
the corporation exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation. An
applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its
officers or general partners to act as its responsible management
officer.
2. The name, address, and telephone number of the person who shall
manage and operate the establishment.
3. The name, address, and telephone number of a person authorized
to accept service of legal notices.
4. The proposed business name of the Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Establishment and description of all operating aspects of the
proposed business.
5. The type of ABC license the applicant is seeking for the Alcoholic
Beverage Sales Establishment.
6. The street address of the proposed establishment and the assessor
parcel number for the property.
7. A site plan for the property depicting the location of the building
housing the Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity on the property, and
all existing and proposed parking, exterior lighting, signage, and
landscaping, trash enclosures, waiting or queuing areas.
8. A plan for community outreach and community engagement
meetings to take place prior to any Planning Commission public
hearing related to the approval or processing of the application.
9. A map of all other Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments both
onsite and offsite within a 1,000-foot radius of the proposed
location.
b. The application shall be forwarded to the Community Development
Department which may refer the application to other City departments
to determine whether the premises where the Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Establishment will be located, complies with the City's building, health,
zoning and fire ordinances or other applicable ordinances or laws. City
departments may conduct an inspection of the premises to determine
compliance with the ordinances and other laws they administer. City
§ 30-51.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-51.12
AO:1201
§ 30-51.13. Action on Permit Application. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
The Planning Commission may approve issuance of the conditional use
permit to allow a new Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment upon making
the following findings:
departments may prepare reports summarizing their inspections and
recommending whether to approve or deny the application based on
their inspections.
a. The establishment is located in a zoning district in which the
establishment is a conditionally permitted use.
b. That the operations of the establishment do not cause or result in
adverse effects to the health, welfare, peace or safety of persons
visiting, residing, working, or conducting business in the surrounding
area.
c. That the establishment does not jeopardize or endanger the public
health or safety of persons visiting, residing, working or conducting
business in the surrounding area.
d. A finding of "public convenience and necessity" (Business and
Professions Code Section 23958.4(b)(2)), if the activity will be located
in an area that has been determined by the ABC to have an undue
concentration of licenses as defined in Business and Professions Code
Section 23958.4(a).
e. That the operations of the establishment will not aggravate existing
problems in the neighborhood created by the sale of alcohol such as
disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness,
drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution,
sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of
vandalism, littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking, excessive loud
noises, especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic
violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, or police detentions and
arrests.
f. The establishment will not detrimentally affect nearby neighborhoods
considering the distance of the alcohol establishment to residential
buildings, schools, parks, playgrounds or recreational areas, nonprofit
youth facilities, places of worship, hospitals, alcohol or other drug
abuse recovery or treatment facilities, social service offices, or other
Alcoholic Beverages Sales Activity Establishments.
g. The establishment will otherwise be compatible with existing and
potential uses within the surrounding area.
§ 30-51.12 COMPTON § 30-51.14
AO:1202
§ 30-51.14. Conditions of Approval. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
The Planning Commission may impose reasonable Conditions of Approval as
necessary to make the required findings including, but not limited to, the
following:
a. Soundwalls: If the proposed Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment
abuts residential areas, a soundwall may be required between the
establishment conducting the Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activity and the
abutting residential areas. The soundwall must comply with all state
and local requirements for construction and location and must not
obstruct the view of the building and parking areas from the street.
Landscaping may be required to be planted along the soundwall to
improve the appearance of the soundwall. Exterior landscaping must be
planted and maintained in a manner that minimizes its use as a hiding
place.
b. Trash Receptacles: Permanent, nonflammable trash receptacles may be
required to be located at convenient locations appropriately screened
from view outside the establishment and in any establishment parking
area. The operators of the establishment may be required to remove on
a daily basis, or more frequently if needed to maintain a litter free
environment, all trash from these receptacles and from the sidewalk
adjacent to the establishment. The operators of the establishment also
may be required to remove at least three times per week all trash
originating from its establishment deposited on public property within
250 feet of any boundary of its premises.
c. Pay Telephones: Pay telephones on the site of the establishment may
either be (i) prohibited; or (ii) required to be of the type that only allow
outgoing calls and be located in a visible and well-lighted location.
d. Lighting: Exterior areas of the premises and adjacent parking lots shall
be provided with sufficient lighting in a manner that provides adequate
illumination for alcohol establishment patrons while not spilling onto
surrounding residential and commercial properties. A photometric
study may be required to determine compliance.
e. Program: A "complaint response community relations" program
established and maintained by the establishment may be required. The
program may include the following:
1. Posting at the entry of the establishment a sign providing the
telephone number for the area commander of the Los Angeles
County Sheriffs Department substation.
2. Coordinating efforts with the Los Angeles County Sheriffs
Department to monitor community complaints about the
establishment activities.
3. Having a representative of the establishment meet with neighbors
or any applicable neighborhood associations on a regular basis and
§ 30-51.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-51.14
AO:1203
at their request attempt to resolve any neighborhood complaints
regarding the establishment.
f. Activities: If appropriate, the following activities may be prohibited on
the premises: pool or billiard tables, football or pinball games, arcade
style video and electronic games, and amusement devices.
g. Chilled Alcoholic Beverages: An Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Establishment engaged in Offsite Alcoholic Beverage Sales may be
prohibited from maintaining refrigerated or otherwise chilled Alcoholic
Beverages on the premises or displaying, selling, or distributing beer,
wine, malt, wine coolers, or similar alcoholic beverages from an ice
tube, barrel or similar container.
h. Hours of Operation: The sale of Alcoholic Beverages may be restricted
to certain hours of each day of the week at Offsite Alcoholic Beverage
Sales Establishments, unless limited further by the ABC.
i. Cups: The sale or distribution to the customer of paper or plastic cups
in quantities less than their usual and customary packaging may be
prohibited at Offsite Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments.
j. Signs: The following signs may be required to be prominently posted in
a readily visible manner in English, Spanish, and the predominant
language of the patrons:
1. "California State Law prohibits the sale of Alcoholic Beverages to
persons under 21 years of age."
2. "No Loitering or Public Drinking."
3. "It is illegal to possess an open container of alcohol in the vicinity of
this establishment."
k. Presentation of Documents: A copy of the Conditions of Approval and
the ABC license may be required to be kept on the premises of the
establishment and presented to any law enforcement officer or
authorized state or city official upon request.
l. Mitigating Alcohol Related Nuisances: The establishment may be
required to operate such that it does not result in nuisance activities
within the premises or in close proximity to the premises, including but
not limited to sales to minors, surrogate sales, solicitation, disturbance
of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in
public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen
goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism,
littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking, excessive loud noises,
especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic violations,
curfew violations, lewd conduct, or police detentions and arrests.
m. Drug Paraphernalia: the establishment may be prohibited from selling
drug/tobacco paraphernalia products as defined in Health and Safety
Code Sections 11014.5 and 11364.5. "Drug Paraphernalia" means all
§ 30-51.14 COMPTON § 30-51.14
AO:1204
equipment products and materials of any kind that are used intended
for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of the California Uniform Controlled Substances
Act commencing with Health and Safety Code Section 11000.
n. Loitering: The establishment's operators or employees may be required
to discourage loiterers and to ask persons loitering longer than 15
minutes to leave the area and contact local law enforcement officials for
enforcement of applicable trespassing and loitering laws if persons
requested to leave fail to do so. The establishment's operators or
employees may be required to ensure that no fixtures or furnishing that
encourage loitering and nuisance behavior are permitted on the
premises. This includes, but is not limited to chairs, seats, stools,
benches, tables, crates, etc.
o. Security Cameras: The establishment may be required to implement a
video camera safety plan that may include:
1. Digital video camera system capable of color recording that
continuously records activity of patrons and employees at service
counters, entrances and exits, and primary parking areas.
2. Requirement to store video recordings and make them retrievable
for a minimum period of 30 days from the time of recording.
3. Video clarity must be such that a person's facial features can be
identified from the video.
4. The video system must be engaged, and recording at all times and
the system must be maintained in working order at all times.
5. The video system must be approved by the Los Angeles County
Sheriff's Department before it is installed to ensure compliance
with City requirements, and approved again after the system is
operational.
6. All criminal and suspicious activities recorded on the video system
must be reported to local law enforcement. To the extent allowed
by law, the establishment operators may be required to provide any
tapes or other recording media from the security cameras to the
police department.
p. Security Guards: An establishment may be required to retain a
specified number of security guards. The number of security guards
and the time periods for which the guards must be present shall vary
based upon the specific facts and circumstances of each establishment
site and operation. All security guards shall have all required state and
City permits and licenses. All Liquor Stores, Convenience Stores, and
§ 30-51.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-51.14
AO:1205
§ 30-51.15. Appeals from a Determination on an Application for
Permit. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
Pursuant to subsections 30-51.13 and 30-51.14, any applicant or other
person aggrieved by a decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer may
appeal that decision to the Planning Commission. A decision of the Planning
Commission may be appealed on an application for a permit required by this
section to the City Council in accordance with Section 30-26.
§ 30-51.16. Grounds for Conditional Use Permit Suspension or
Revocation. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
An Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment conditional use permit may be
suspended by the Planning Commission and/or the City Council for up
to one year, or revoked upon the recommendation of the Administrative
Hearing Officer, for failure to comply with Operational Standards, training
requirements, or conditions imposed through the conditional use permit in
accordance with subsection 30-51.14 of this Code. Notice of intention to
suspend or revoke shall be in writing and shall state the grounds therefore
pursuant to subsection 30-51.17. Notice shall be mailed by U.S. first-class
mail and certified mail return receipt requested. The Administrative
Hearing Officer shall hold a public hearing on the revocation or suspension
of the conditional use permit and shall provide notice in accordance with
subsection 30-51.17.
§ 30-51.17. Investigative Procedures for Potential Violation of
Conditions of Approval, Operational Standards, or Performance
Standards. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
The City Manager shall appoint an Alcoholic Beverages Sales Establishment
Administrative Hearing Officer to determine whether violations of this
section, including the Operational Standards, Conditions of Approval,
Performance Standards, where applicable, as well as whether undue
negative impacts or public nuisance activities have occurred, are occurring,
or are likely to occur in the future. The Hearing Officer shall exercise all
powers relating to the conduct of the administrative hearing as set forth in
subsection 1-7.10 of this Code.
Upon the City's receipt of a complaint from the public, City official, or any
other interested person, that a conditional use permit activity or Deemed
Bars shall employ a licensed security guard during hours of operation
after nightfall.
q. Landscaping: Any required exterior vegetation shall be planted in
accordance with this Code, and shall be maintained in a manner that
minimizes its use as a hiding place.
r. That there shall be no visible advertising of alcohol or signs containing
any word or reference to alcohol, liquor, beer or wine from the exterior
of the store.
§ 30-51.14 COMPTON § 30-51.17
AO:1206
Approved Activity is in violation of the Operational Standards, Performance
Standards, and/or Conditions of Approval where applicable, the following
procedure shall be followed:
a. The City code enforcement officer (or other designated City
representative) shall assess the nature of the complaint and its validity
by conducting an on-site observation and inspection of the premises to
assess the activity's compliance with Operational Standards,
Performance Standards and/or Conditions of Approval, where
applicable. The enforcement officer shall provide the business owner
and any manager on the premises during the on-site inspection with a
copy of any complaint made in writing or with information about the
details of any oral complaint.
b. If violations are observed during the observation and inspection, the
enforcement officer shall record the violations and send via both U.S.
first class mail and certified mail return receipt requested a "Notice to
Abate" to the owner of the activity and the property owner, if not the
same person or entity. Such "Notice to Abate" shall notify the owner and
property owner of the violations recorded by the officer and that
continued non-compliance may result in the penalties and shall set forth
a reasonable period of not less than 10 calendar days within which to
abate any violations. The enforcement officer may extend the 10
calendar day period where required if abatement requires the
installation or construction of improvements or changes to the
establishment.
c. At the end of the abatement period prescribed in the "Notice to Abate,"
the code enforcement officer shall conduct a reinspection visit. If the
violations have not been abated within the prescribed abatement period
and the officer determines that it is unlikely that further efforts to
compel compliance by the owner with the Operational Standards,
Performance Standards and/or Conditions of Approval, where
applicable, the officer shall determine that the activity is in persistent
violation of the Operational Standards, Performance Standards and/or
Conditions of Approval, where applicable, and shall refer the matter
and all material evidence to the Administrative Hearing Officer for
adjudication. A copy of the officer's determination of continued noncompliance
shall be sent via both U.S. first class mail and certified mail
return receipt requested to the owner of the Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Establishment and the property owner, if not the same person or entity.
d. Upon referral from the code enforcement officer that an activity is in
persistent violation of the Operational Standards, Performance
Standards and/or Conditions of Approval, where applicable, the
operating status of the activity in question shall be reviewed by the
Administrative Hearing Officer at a public hearing. The purpose of the
administrative hearing is to receive information as to whether the
activity is in compliance with the Operational Standards, Performance
Standards and/or Conditions of Approval, where applicable.
§ 30-51.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-51.17
AO:1207
e. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall determine whether the
activity is in compliance with the Operational Standards, Performance
Standards and/or Conditions of Approval, where applicable. For
Deemed Approved Activities, the Administrative Hearing Officer may
suspend, revoke, or terminate an Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Establishment's Deemed Approved Status, pursuant to subsection
30-51.8, based on the determination of the Administrative Hearing
Officer. For Conditionally Permitted Uses, the Administrative Hearing
Officer may continue the Conditional Use status for the use in question,
and may make a recommendation to the Planning Commission to
impose administrative penalties for violations of the Operational
Standards and/or Conditions of Approval or to revoke the activity's
Conditional Use Permit, based on the determination of the
Administrative Hearing Officer. Upon a recommendation of the Hearing
Officer, the Planning Commission may impose further, new conditions
on the activity; such conditions shall be based upon the information
then before the Planning Commission. In reaching a determination as to
whether a use has violated the operational standards, or as to the
appropriateness of imposing conditions on a use, assessing
administrative penalties, or the amount of administrative penalties to
assess, the Planning Commission may consider:
1. The length of time the activity has been out of compliance with the
performance standards.
2. The impact of the violation of the operational standards and/or
Conditions of Approval on the community.
3. Any information regarding the owner of the activity's efforts to
remedy the violation of the operational standards and/or
Conditions of Approval. "Efforts to Remedy" shall include, but are
not limited to:
(a) Timely calls to the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department
that are placed by the owner of the Deemed Approved activity,
his or her employees, or agents.
(b) Requesting that those persons engaging in activities causing
violations of the Operational Standards and or Conditions of
Approval cease those activities, unless the owner of the
activity, or his or her employees or agents feels that their
personal safety would be threatened in making that request.
(c) Making improvements to the establishment's property or
operations, including but not limited to the installation of
lighting sufficient to illuminate the area within the use's
property line, the installation of security cameras, clear
unobstructed windows, clean sidewalks and graffiti abated
within three days.
f. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final unless appealed to the
Planning Commission, by written form approved by the City and
§ 30-51.17 COMPTON § 30-51.17
AO:1208
§ 30-51.18. Inspection and Right of Entry. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
The sale of Alcoholic Beverages is a closely regulated industry. The officials
responsible for enforcement of this Code, and their duly authorized
representatives, may enter on any site or into any structure open to the
public for the purpose of investigation provided they do so in a reasonable
manner whenever they have cause to suspect a violation of any provision
of this section or whenever necessary for the investigation of violations of
the Conditions of Approval or Deemed Approved Performance Standards
prescribed in this section. If an owner, occupant or agent refuses permission
to enter, inspect or investigate, the officials or their representatives may
seek an inspection warrant under the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure
Section 1822.50 et seq. All such inspections shall be conducted in
compliance with the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
§ 30-51.19. Penalties. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for
a period of not more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Any use, occupation, building, or structure maintained contrary to the
provisions of this section shall constitute a public nuisance.
§ 30-51.20. Separate Offenses for Each Day. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
Any violator shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this section is
committed, continued, permitted, or caused by such violator and shall be
punishable accordingly.
§ 30-51.21. Injunction as Additional Remedy. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
Any violation of any provision of this section shall be and is declared to be
contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the City, create
a cause of action for injunctive relief.
§ 30-51.22. Administrative Penalties. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
In addition to any other penalties provided in this section, the
administrative penalties set forth in Section 1-7 of this Code shall apply for
any violation of this section.
payment of the applicable hearing fee, within 10 calendar days after the
date of the decision.
g. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless appealed
to the City Council in accordance with Section 30-26, by written form
approved by the City, within 15 calendar days after the date of the
decision.
§ 30-51.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-51.23
AO:1209
§ 30-51.23. Liability for Expenses. [Ord. #2300 § 1]
In addition to the punishment provided by law, a violator is liable for such
costs expenses and disbursements paid or incurred by the City or any of
its contractors in correction, abatement and prosecution of the violation.
Both the owner of the Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment and owner
of the property where the establishment is located shall be jointly and
severally liable for any re-inspection fees to ascertain compliance with
previously noticed or cited violations. The inspection official shall give the
owner and other responsible party of such affected premises a written
notice showing the itemized cost of such chargeable service and requesting
payment thereof. Should the bill not be paid in the required time the
charges may be placed as a lien against the property.
§ 30-52. A MORATORIUM ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF ALL
COMMERCIAL MEDICAL MARIJUANA USES IN THE CITY,
INCLUDING DELIVERIES; PROHIBIT ALL MEDICAL MARIJUANA
CULTIVATION, WITH CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS.93
§ 30-52.1. Findings of Facts. [Ord. #2276 § 1]
The City Council finds that the facts set forth in the Recitals, Part A
(Preamble of Ord. No. 2276), of this Ordinance are true and correct.
§ 30-52.2. Authority. [Ord. #2276 § 2]
Pursuant to Government Code Section 65858, the City Council may adopt
as an urgency measure, an Ordinance that prohibits any uses that may be
in conflict with a contemplated zoning proposal which a legislative body,
Planning Commission, or Planning and Economic Development Department
is considering or studying or intends to study within a reasonable period of
time.
§ 30-52.3. Extension of Interim Ordinance No. 2274; Definitions.
[Ord. #2276 § 3]
The City Council hereby extends the current, interim prohibition on the
establishment, operation, maintenance, or conduct of any commercial
medical marijuana activity, medical marijuana deliveries, and commercial
medical marijuana cultivation in all zones of the City, as established by
Interim Ordinance No. 2274. For purposes of this Ordinance, the following
terms apply:
CANNABIS — Shall have that meaning set forth in the MCRSA, as the same
may be amended from time to time, and shall include all parts of the plant
cannabis sativa linnaeus, cannabis indica, or cannabis ruderalis, whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified,
93.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2276 extended Interim Ordinance No. 2274 prohibiting all
commercial medical marijuana uses in the City including deliveries and all medical
marijuana including cultivation for medical use by a qualified patient or primary
caregiver.
§ 30-51.23 COMPTON § 30-52.3
AO:1210
extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin.
"Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified,
obtained from marijuana. "Cannabis" also means marijuana as defined by
Section 11018 of the Health and Safety Code as enacted by Chapter 1407
of the Statutes of 1972. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of
the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom),
fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination. For the purpose of this Ordinance, "cannabis" does not mean
"industrial hemp" as defined by Section 81000 of the Food and Agricultural
Code or Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code.
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY — Shall have that meaning set forth
in the MCRSA, as the same may be amended from time to time, and
shall include cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing,
laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, or distribution, as those terms are
defined or used in the MCRSA, and/or sale, of medical cannabis or a medical
cannabis product, except as provided in Section 7 of Senate Bill No. 643
(2015-2016).
COOPERATIVE — Shall mean two or more persons collectively or
cooperatively cultivating, using, transporting, possessing, administering,
delivering or making available medical cannabis, with or without
compensation.
CULTIVATION — Shall have the same meaning set forth in the MCRSA,
as the same may be amended from time to time, and shall include any
activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading,
or trimming of cannabis.
DELIVERY — Shall have the same meaning as set forth in the MCRSA,
as the same may be amended from time to time, and shall include the
commercial transfer of medical cannabis or medical cannabis products from
a dispensary, up to an amount determined by the bureau to a primary
caregiver or qualified patient as defined in Section 11362.7 of the Health
and Safety Code, or a testing laboratory. "Delivery" also includes the use
by a dispensary of any technology platform owned and controlled by the
dispensary, or independently licensed under the MCRSA, which enables
qualified patients or primary caregivers to arrange for or facilitate the
commercial transfer by a licensed dispensary of medical cannabis or
medical cannabis products.
DISPENSARY — Shall have the same meaning as set forth in the MCRSA,
as the same may be amended from time to time, and shall include any
facility where medical cannabis, medical cannabis products, or devices for
the use of medical cannabis or medical cannabis products are offered,
either individually or in any combination, for retail sale, including an
establishment that delivers, pursuant to express authorization by local
ordinance, medical cannabis and medical cannabis products as part of
a retail sale. "Dispensary" shall also include "dispensary" as defined in
§ 30-52.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-52.3
AO:1211
Compton Municipal Code subsection 9-24.2, and a cooperative as defined
herein.
MCRSA — Shall collectively mean the Medical Cannabis Regulation and
Safety Act as contained, codified, enacted, and signed into law on October 9,
2015, as Assembly Bill No. 243, Assembly Bill No. 266, and Senate Bill 643,
as the same may be amended from time to time. The MCRSA was formerly
known as the MMRSA or Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act.
MEDICAL CANNABIS, MEDICAL CANNABIS PRODUCT, OR CANNABIS
PRODUCT — Shall have the same meanings as set forth in the MCRSA, as
the same may be amended from time to time.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Compton Municipal Code subsection 9-24.2,
"Primary caregiver" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Health and Safety
Code § 11362.7, as the same may be amended from time to time.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Compton Municipal Code subsection 9-24.2,
"Qualifying patient" or "Qualified patient" shall have the same meaning as set forth
in Health and Safety Code § 11362.7, as the same may be amended from time to
time.
§ 30-52.4. Prohibition. [Ord. #2276 § 4]
a. Commercial cannabis activities of any type or nature are expressly
prohibited in all zones and all specific plan areas in the City of
Compton. No person shall establish, operate, maintain, conduct or
allow commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the City. No
application for a building permit, conditional use permit, business
license, or any other entitlement authorizing the establishment,
operation, maintenance, development, or construction of any
commercial cannabis activity, shall be approved during the term of the
prohibition established in this Ordinance.
b. To the extent not already prohibited by paragraph a above, all deliveries
of medical cannabis and/or medical cannabis products to or from the
City of Compton are expressly prohibited within the City of Compton.
No person shall conduct or perform any delivery of any medical
cannabis or medical cannabis product, which delivery either originates
or terminates within the City.
c. This section is meant to prohibit all activities for which a State license is
required pursuant to the MCRSA. Accordingly, the City shall not issue
any permit, license or other entitlement for any activity for which a
State license is required under the MCRSA.
d. Cultivation of cannabis for commercial or non-commercial purposes,
including cultivation by a qualified patient or a primary caregiver, is
expressly prohibited in all zones and all specific plan areas in the City of
Compton. No person, including a qualified patient or primary caregiver,
shall cultivate any amount of cannabis in the City, even for medical
purposes. Due to the passage of Proposition 64, this prohibition will not
§ 30-52.3 COMPTON § 30-52.4
AO:1212
§ 30-52.5. Interpretation of Ordinance. [Ord. #2276 § 5]
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted to the effect that the City's
permissive zoning scheme allows any other use not specifically listed
therein.
§ 30-52.6. Public Nuisance. [Ord. #2276 § 6]
Any use or condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any
provision of this Ordinance shall be, and hereby is declared to be, a public
nuisance and may be summarily abated by the City pursuant to Code of Civil
Procedure section 731 or by any other remedy available to the City.
§ 30-52.7. Penalty. [Ord. #2276 § 7]
Violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor
and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment
for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each and every day such a violation exists shall constitute
a separate and distinct violation of this Ordinance. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, nothing in this Ordinance shall authorize a criminal prosecution
or arrest prohibited by Health and Safety Code section 11362.71, et seq.
§ 30-52.8. Civil Penalties. [Ord. #2276 § 8]
In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this Ordinance, the City
Attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties
against any person or entity that violates this Ordinance. In any civil action
brought pursuant to this Ordinance, a court of competent jurisdiction may
award reasonable attorneys' fees and costs to the prevailing party.
apply to the cultivation of up to six live marijuana plants within a
single private residence, or inside an accessory structure to a private
residence located upon the grounds of private residence that is fully
enclosed and secure, as this activity is specifically authorized by Health
and Safety Code section 11362.2.
e. Nothing in this Ordinance, or its adoption, shall be deemed to affect any
other prohibitions or regulations relating to marijuana contained in the
Compton Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, the provisions
of subsections 9-24.1 through 9-24.6 of the Compton Municipal Code. In
the event of any conflict between said subsections and this Ordinance,
the most restrictive provision shall govern. Nothing in this Ordinance
shall be deemed to affect or excuse any violation of subsections 9-24.1
through 9-24.6 of the Compton Municipal Code.
f. In the event of any conflict between this Ordinance and State law, State
law will govern.
§ 30-52.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-52.9
AO:1213
§ 30-52.9. CEQA. [Ord. #2276 § 9]
This Ordinance is exempt from CEQA pursuant to CEQA Guidelines section
15061(b)(3) which is the general rule that CEQA applies only to projects
which have the potential for causing a significant effect on the environment,
and CEQA does not apply where it can be seen with certainty that there
is no possibility that the activity may have a significant effect on the
environment. Provisions of the City's permissive zoning ordinance already
prohibit uses that are being expressly prohibited by this Ordinance.
Therefore, this Ordinance has no impact on the physical environment as it
will not result in any adverse changes to the environment.
§ 30-52.10. Severability. [Ord. #2276 § 10]
If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase or portion
of this Ordinance, is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional
by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. The City
Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this Ordinance and
each section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions thereof be declared
invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 30-52.11. Operative Date of Ordinance; Expiration. [Ord. #2276
§ 11]
This Ordinance shall become operative concurrent with the expiration of
Interim Ordinance No. 2274 and shall expire, and the prohibition
established hereby shall terminate, 10 months and 15 days after said
effective date pursuant to and subject to California Government Code
Section 65858, unless further extended by the City Council pursuant to
California Government Code section 65858.
§ 30-53. AN INTERIM ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE
CITY OF COMPTON PROHIBIT ALL COMMERCIAL NON-MEDICAL
MARIJUANA ACTIVITY IN THE CITY; PROHIBIT OUTDOOR
MARIJUANA CULTIVATION ON PRIVATE RESIDENCES.
§ 30-53.1. Finding of Facts. [Ord. #2277 § 1]
The City Council finds that the facts set forth in the Recitals of this
Ordinance are true and correct.
§ 30-53.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2277 § 2]
Hereinafter in this Ordinance the following words shall have the meanings
set forth below, unless the context otherwise permits or requires:
COMMERCIAL NON-MEDICAL MARIJUANA ACTIVITY — Shall include the
cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing,
§ 30-52.9 COMPTON § 30-53.2
AO:1214
laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of marijuana
and marijuana products for non-medical purposes.
CULTIVATION — Shall include any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana.
DELIVERY — Shall mean the commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana
products to a customer. Delivery also includes the use by a retailer of any
technology platform owned and controlled by retailer, or independently
licensed under Proposition 64 that enables customers to arrange for or
facilitate the commercial transfer by a State licensed retailer of marijuana
or marijuana products.
MARIJUANA — Shall include all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L.,
whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any
part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include
(a) industrial hemp, as defined in Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety
Code; (b) the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to
prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product; and
(c) marijuana that is cultivated, processed, transported, distributed, or sold
for medical purposes under Chapter 3.4 of Division 8 of the Business and
Professions Code.
PROPOSITION 64 — Refers to the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of
Marijuana Act.
§ 30-53.3. Prohibition. [Ord. #2277 § 3]
a. Commercial non-medical marijuana activity is expressly prohibited in
all zones and all specific plan areas in the City of Compton. No person
shall establish, operate, maintain, conduct or allow commercial nonmedical
marijuana activity anywhere within the City. No application for
a building permit, conditional use permit, business license, or any other
entitlement authorizing the establishment, operation, maintenance,
development, or construction of any use that allows for commercial
non-medical marijuana activity shall be approved during the term of the
prohibition established in this Ordinance.
b. Paragraph a of this subsection is meant to prohibit all activities for
which a State license is required pursuant to Proposition 64.
Accordingly, the City shall not issue any permit, license or other
entitlement for any activity for which a State license is required under
Proposition 64. The City shall also not issue any local license to a nonprofit
pursuant to provisions of Business and Professions Code section
26070.5.
c. To the extent not already prohibited by Interim Ordinance No. 2274,
marijuana shall not be cultivated outdoors upon the grounds of a
private residence. Indoor marijuana cultivation will be allowed
consistent with State law which permits no more than six live marijuana
plants to be planted, cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a
§ 30-53.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-53.3
AO:1215
§ 30-53.4. Interpretation of Ordinance. [Ord. #2277 § 4]
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted to the effect that the City's
permissive zoning scheme allows any other use not specifically listed
therein.
§ 30-53.5. Public Nuisance. [Ord. #2277 § 5]
Any use or condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any
provision of this Ordinance shall be, and hereby is declared to be, a public
nuisance and may be summarily abated by the City pursuant to Code of Civil
Procedure Section 731 or by any other remedy available to the City.
§ 30-53.6. Penalty. [Ord. #2276 § 6]
Violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor
and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment
for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each and every day such a violation exists shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation of this Ordinance.
§ 30-53.7. Civil Penalties. [Ord. #2277 § 7]
In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this Ordinance, the City
Attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties
against any person or entity that violates this Interim Ordinance. In any civil
action brought pursuant to this Interim Ordinance, a court of competent
jurisdiction may award reasonable attorneys' fees and costs to the
prevailing party.
single private residence or inside an accessory structure located upon
the grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secured.
Any marijuana cultivation that exceeds the limits set forth in this
subsection is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance.
d. Nothing in this Ordinance, or its adoption, shall be deemed to affect any
other prohibitions or regulations relating to marijuana contained in the
Compton Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, the provisions
of subsections 9-24.1 through 9-24.6 of the Compton Municipal Code
and Interim Ordinance No. 2274, except to the extent that marijuana
cultivation is prohibited by Interim Ordinance No. 2274. The City will
not be enforcing the provisions of Interim Ordinance No. 2274 that
prohibit the personal cultivation of marijuana. Consistent with State
law, persons are permitted to cultivate up to six live marijuana plants
indoors so long as they abide by the standards set forth in paragraph c
above. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to affect or excuse
any violation of the Compton Municipal Code or of Interim Ordinance
No. 2274, except as otherwise described in this paragraph d.
§ 30-53.3 COMPTON § 30-53.8
AO:1216
§ 30-53.8. CEQA. [Ord. #2277 § 8]
It can be seen with certainty that there is no possibility that the adoption
of the Interim Ordinance may have a significant effect on the environment
because the Interim Ordinance will only impose greater and temporary
limitations on marijuana-related uses allowed in the City, and will thereby
serve to prevent potentially significant adverse environmental impacts. The
City Council has reviewed staff's determination of exemption and based
on its own independent judgment, concurs in staff's determination that
the Interim Ordinance is exempt from CEQA. The adoption of the Interim
Ordinance is therefore not subject to the California Environmental Quality
Act review pursuant to Title 14, Chapter 3, Section 15061(b)(3) of the
California Code of Regulations.
§ 30-53.9. Severability. [Ord. #2277 § 9]
If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase or portion
of this Ordinance, is for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional
by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. The City
Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this Ordinance and
each section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions thereof be declared
invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 30-53.10. Urgency Ordinance. [Ord. #2277 § 10]
This Ordinance is adopted as an urgency, interim ordinance and shall take
effect immediately. This Ordinance will only become operative if Proposition
64 is approved by the voters. If Proposition 64 is not approved by the
voters at the November election, this Ordinance shall be null and void and
shall be deemed repealed. This Ordinance shall expire, and the prohibition
established hereby shall terminate, 45 days after the date of adoption unless
extended by the City Council pursuant to California Government Code
Section 65858.94
Chapter 31
RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL
Editor's Note: Prior Ordinance history includes portions of
Ordinance No. 1972.
§ 31-1. PURPOSE AND REGULATIONS.
94.Editor's Note: Proposition 64 was approved by the voters at the election of November 8,
2016.
§ 30-53.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-1.1
AO:1217
§ 31-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2047, § 1]
The purpose of this Chapter, is to protect and improve water quality of
receiving waters by:
§ 31-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2047, § 1]
a. Reducing illicit discharges to the municipal stormwater system to the
maximum extent practicable.
b. Eliminating illicit connections to the municipal stormwater system.
c. Eliminating spillage, dumping, and disposal of pollutant materials into
the municipal stormwater system.
d. Reducing pollutant loads in stormwater and urban runoff, from land
uses and activities identified in the municipal NPDES permit.
The intent of this Chapter is to enhance and protect the water quality of
the receiving waters of the United States in a manner that is consistent with
the Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto;
applicable implementing regulations; the municipal NPDES permit and any
amendment, revision, or reissuance thereof.
a. Definitions Generally. For the purpose of the provisions of this Chapter
concerning water quality hereinafter set forth, the following words and
phrases shall be construed to have the meanings set forth, unless it is
apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE OR BMP — Shall mean any program,
technology, process, siting criteria, operating method, measure, or
device which controls, prevents, removes, or reduces pollutants in
stormwater and non-stormwater runoff.
CLEAN WATER ACT — Shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act as amended, 33 U.S.C. 125 1, et seq.
EXECUTIVE OFFICER — Shall mean Executive Officer of the California
Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles.
GOOD HOUSEKEEPING PRACTICE — Shall mean a best management
practice related to the transfer, storage, use, or cleanup materials
performed in a regular manner that minimizes the discharge of
pollutants to the storm drain system and/or receiving waters.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Shall mean any device through or by which
an illicit discharge is conveyed into the municipal stormwater system
without a permit, including but not limited to floor drains, pipes or any
fabricated or natural conduits, excluding roof drains which convey only
stormwater.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Shall mean the entry of any material other
than stormwater unless such discharge is exempted under California
Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region, NPDES
No. CAS614001 [CI 6948] unless such discharge is allowed under a
§ 31-1.1 COMPTON § 31-1.2
AO:1218
separate NPDES permit, including but not limited to a point source
permit, a General Industrial Activity Storm Water permit, or a General
Construction Activity Storm Water permit. Illicit discharge shall mean
any discharge to the storm drain system that is prohibited under local,
State, or Federal statutes, ordinances, codes or regulations. Illicit
discharge includes all non-stormwater discharges except discharges
pursuant to a NPDES permit or discharges that are excepted or
conditionally excepted by such permit.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Shall mean any of the 10 classifications of
industrial facilities specified in 40 Code of Federal Regulations § 122.26
(b)(14), defined by Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and which
is required to obtain a NPDES permit, not including construction
activities that cause the disturbance of five acres of soil by clearing,
grading, excavation, or a combination thereof.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — Shall mean, within the context
of BMP selection, choosing effective BMPs, and rejecting applicable
BMPs only (i) where effective BMPs will serve the same purpose, (ii)
the BMPs would not be technically feasible, or (iii) the cost would be
prohibitive.
MUNICIPAL NPDES PERMIT — Shall mean California Regional Water
Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region, Order NO. 96-054, NPDES
NO. CAS614001 (CI 6948) Waste Discharge Requirements for
Municipal Stormwater and Urban Runoff Discharges within the County
of Los Angeles.
MUNICIPAL STORMWATER SYSTEM OR MS4 — Shall mean those
facilities within the City by which stormwater discharge is conveyed to
waters of the United States, including but not limited to flood control
channels, roads with drainage systems, alleys, streets, catch basins,
grates, inlets, curbs, gutters, ditches, storm drains, canals, pipes, and
fabricated and natural channels.
NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE — Shall mean any fluid discharge to
the storm drain system and/or receiving waters that is not composed
entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean, within the context of this Chapter, any natural
person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust,
corporation, or company.
POLLUTANT — Shall mean the same as it is defined in California
Water Code § 13373 and includes but is not limited to garbage, debris,
lawn clippings, leaves, fecal waste, biological waste, sediment, sludge,
manure, fertilizers, pesticides, oil, grease, gasoline, paints, solvents,
cleaners, and any fluid or solid containing toxic or nontoxic chemicals,
metals, including batteries.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR — Shall mean the Director of Public Works
of the City of Compton.
§ 31-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-1.2
AO:1219
§ 31-1.3. Illicit Discharges and Non-Storm Water Discharges. [Ord.
#2047, § 1]
RECEIVING WATERS — Shall mean rivers, lakes, oceans, or other
bodies of water that receive runoff.
REGIONAL BOARD — Shall mean the appointed members of the
California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region.
RUNOFF — Shall mean the portion of rainfall or irrigation water or
other water activities also known as dry-weather flows that flow across
the ground surface and eventually to receiving waters. Runoff can pick
up pollutants from the air or the land and carry them to receiving
waters.
STATE BOARD — Shall mean the State Water Resources Control Board
of the California Environmental Protection Agency (hereinafter
"SWRCB").
STORM WATER RUNOFF — Shall mean any surface water flow
produced by rain or snow melt.
URBAN RUNOFF — Shall mean surface water flow produced by nonstormwater
resulting from residential, commercial and industrial
activities.
a. No person shall allow an illicit discharge to enter the municipal
stormwater system.
b. Any person causing an illicit discharge to the MS4 may be required by
the Public Works Director to pay for the cost of clean-up and
remediation.
c. Any owner of any private property from which a non-stormwater
discharge is observed may be required by the Public Works Director to
pay for the cost of collecting and analyzing the discharge to determine
if it is an illicit discharge.
d. The following non-stormwater discharges are not considered illicit
discharges.
1. Exempt discharges specified in the municipal NPDES permit,
including flows from riparian habitats, diverted stream flows,
springs, rising ground waters, uncontaminated groundwater
infiltration; and discharges or flows from emergency fire fighting
activities.
2. Conditionally exempt non-stormwater discharges that have been
determined by the Executive Officer not to be significant sources of
pollution. Such discharges include, but are not limited to landscape
irrigation, potable water, foundation drains, footing drains, air
conditioning condensate, irrigation water, lawn watering, water
from crawl space pumps, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges,
individual residential car washing, street or sidewalk washing, or
§ 31-1.2 COMPTON § 31-1.3
AO:1220
§ 31-1.4. Illegal Disposal/Dumping. [Ord. #2047, § 1]
No person shall intentionally place, litter, accumulate, maintain, discharge,
or cause to enter into the MS4 any pollutant or any foreign object such as
batteries, tires, waste receptacles, yard debris, refuse, rubbish, food waste,
chemicals, animal waste or oil cans.
§ 31-1.5. Illicit Connections. [Ord. #2047, § 1]
§ 31-1.6. Reduction of Pollutants in Runoff. [Ord. #2047, § 1]
§ 31-1.7. Control of Pollutants from Commercial Facilities. [Ord.
#2047, § 1]
Commercial facilities specified in the municipal NPDES permit shall
implement BMPs prescribed by the Regional Board or its Executive Officer,
through programs or actions made pursuant to the municipal NPDES
permit, or by the City's Director of Public Works, to minimize the discharge
of pollutants to the MS4.
any other discharge that the Executive Officer deems not to be
a significant source of pollution such non-stormwater discharges
shall be conducted in a manner not in violation of other provisions
of this Chapter.
3. Non-stormwater discharges specifically allowed under a separate
NPDES permit including but not limited to a General Industrial
Storm Water Activity Permit or General Construction Storm Water
Activity Permit.
a. No person shall maintain or intentionally use a connection that
operates to convey an illicit discharge to the municipal stormwater
system.
b. Upon discovery of an illicit connection, the person owning or operating
such connection shall either remove it or render it incapable of
conveying an illicit discharge.
c. If any person fails to eliminate an illicit connection after being called
upon by the City to do so, the Public Works Director shall take
appropriate measures to remove or disable the illicit connection and
may recover such costs from the owner of such illicit refuse, residual
oil, grease, or other pollutants that might otherwise be discharged to
the MS4 by runoff.
a. No person shall cause or threaten to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the MS4 by exposing such pollutants to stormwater runoff.
b. The owner of parking lot surfaces, public or private, with a capacity of
25 spaces or more, shall cause the parking lot surface to be cleaned as
often as necessary to remove refuse, residual oil, grease, or other
pollutants that might otherwise be discharged to the MS4 by runoff.
§ 31-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-1.8
AO:1221
§ 31-1.8. Control of Pollutants from Industrial Activities. [Ord.
#2047, § 1]
§ 31-1.9. Control of Pollutants from Construction Activities
Requiring General Construction Activity Storm Water Permit. [Ord.
#2047, § 1]
a. It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any industry in the City that is
subject to waste discharge requirements specified in the SWRCB Water
Quality Orders No. 97-03DWQ Permit No. CAS00001, to operate
without a NPDES General Industrial Activities Storm Water Permit.
b. Industries that require a NPDES General Industrial Activities Storm
Water Permit shall retain onsite the following documents which
evidence compliance with permit requirements: (i) a copy of the Notice
of Intent for General Permit to Discharge Storm Water Associated with
Industrial Activity; (ii) a waste discharge identification number issued
by the SWRCB; (iii) a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan and
Monitoring Program plan.
c. Any industry in the City requiring a NPDES General Industrial Activities
Storm Water Permit shall, upon reasonable request from a duly
authorized officer of the City, provide any of the documents described in
paragraph b of this subsection.
a. No person shall be granted a grading permit or shall commence or
continue any construction activity in the City that causes the
disturbance of five acres or more of soil by clearing, grading, and
excavating without demonstrating to the City that such person has
obtained a NPDES General Construction Activity Storm Water Permit
from the SWRCB. NPDES construction activity does not include: (i)
routine maintenance to maintain original inspections, compliance and
non-compliance reports, evidence of self-inspection and good
housekeeping practices.
b. Any person engaged in a construction activity in the City requiring a
NPDES construction permit shall retain at the construction site the
following documents: (i) a copy of the Notice of Intent to Comply with
Terms of the General Permit to Discharge Water Associated with
Construction Activity; (ii) a waste discharge identification number
issued by the SWRCB; (iii) a stormwater pollution prevention plan and
monitoring program plan for the construction activity requiring the
construction permit; and (iv) records of all inspections, compliance and
non-compliance reports, evidence of self-inspection and good
housekeeping practices.
c. Any person engaged in a construction activity in the City requiring a
General Construction Storm Water Activity permit shall, upon
reasonable request from a duly authorized officer of the City, provide
any of the documents specified in paragraph b of this subsection and
§ 31-1.8 COMPTON § 31-1.9
AO:1222
§ 31-1.10. Control of Pollutants from Other Construction Activities.
[Ord. #2047, § 1]
Any person engaged in a construction activity subject to municipal NPDES
permit, shall be required to implement BMPs specified by the regional
board, its Executive Officer, or the City's Public Works Director.
§ 31-1.11. Planning and Land Use Development and Standard Urban
Stormwater Mitigation Plan. [Ord. #2047, § 1; Ord. #2252]
shall retain said documents for at least three years after completion of
construction.
a. Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation. Subject new development and
redevelopment projects are required to comply with SUSMP conditions
assigned by the City that shall consist of: (1) low impact development
("LID") structural and non-structural best management practices
("BMPs"); (2) source control BMPs; and (3) structural and nonstructural
BMPs for specific types of uses. LID controls effectively
reduce the amount of impervious area of a completed project site and
promote the use of infiltration and other controls that reduce runoff.
Source control BMPs prevent runoff contact with pollutant materials
that would otherwise be discharged to the MS4. Specific controls are
also required to address pollutant discharges from certain uses
including but not limited to housing developments, retail gasoline
outlets, automotive-related facilities, restaurants, and industrial and
commercial facilities where pollutant materials are disposed, stored, or
handled.
b. Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan Review and Approval. An
applicant subject to new development or redevelopment requirements
shall submit a SUSMP for City review and approval, which shall be
incorporated into the applicant's project plans.
c. California Environmental Quality Act ("CEQA"). Any project subject to
CEQA review, but is not specified in a redevelopment or development
project category may be required to comply with any of the SUSMP
requirements at the City's discretion.
d. Stormwater Management/Watershed Management Program. The City's
Stormwater Management Program ("SWMP") plan or watershed
management program ("WMP") plan, whichever is in effect at the time
of review, shall contain specific conditions and procedures for meeting
Planning Land Development and SUSMP requirements. The program
plans shall contain guidance documents to facilitate compliance
including but not limited to an updated SUSMP guidance manual, a LID
impact design manual, and USEPA's Green Street guidance manual.
e. Certificate of Occupancy. As a condition for issuing a Certificate of
Occupancy for new development or redevelopment project identified in
paragraph a of this section, the authorized enforcement officer shall
§ 31-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-1.11
AO:1223
§ 31-1.12. Violation. [Ord. #2047, § 1]
A violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be a misdemeanor.
§ 31-1.13. Notices of Violation; Administrative Orders. [Ord. #2047,
§ 1]
The City Manager or the Director of Public Works, or any designee thereof,
may issue Notices of Violation and Administrative Orders to achieve
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. Failure to comply with the
require facility operators and/or owners to build all the stormwater
pollution control Best Management Practices and structural or
treatment control BMPs that are shown on the approved project plans
and to submit a signed certification statement stating that the site
and all structural or treatment control BMPs will be maintained in
compliance with the SUSMP and other applicable regulatory
requirements.
f. Transfer of Properties.
1. The transfer or lease of a property subject to a requirement for
maintenance of structural and treatment control BMPs shall
include conditions requiring the transferee and its successors and
assigns to either (a) assume responsibility for maintenance of any
existing structural or treatment control BMP, or (b) to replace
existing structural or treatment control BMPs with new control
measures or BMPs meeting the then current standards of the City
and the SUSMP. Such requirement shall be included in any sale or
lease agreement or deed for such property. The condition of
transfer shall include a provision that the successor property owner
or lessee conduct maintenance inspections of all structural or
treatment control BMPs at least once a year and retain proof of
inspection.
2. For residential properties where the structural or treatment
control BMPs are located within a common area which will be
maintained by a homeowner's association, language regarding the
responsibility for maintenance shall be included in the project's
conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs). Printed
educational material will be required to accompany the first deed
transfer to highlight the existence of the requirement and to
provide information on what stormwater management facilities are
present, signs that maintenance is needed, and how the necessary
maintenance can be performed. The transfer of this information
shall also be required with any subsequent sale of the property.
3. If structural or treatment control BMPs are located within an area
proposed for dedication to a public agency, they will be the
responsibility of the developer until the dedication is accepted.
§ 31-1.11 COMPTON § 31-1.13
AO:1224
terms and conditions of such Notice of Violation or Administrative Order
shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
§ 31-1.14. Nuisance. [Ord. #2047, § 1]
The violation of any provision of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a
nuisance, and may be abated by the City in accordance with its authority to
abate nuisances.
§ 31-1.15. Remedies Not Exclusive. [Ord. #2047, § 1]
The remedies listed in this Chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available to the City under any applicable Federal, State or local law and it
is within the discretion of the City to seek cumulative remedies.
§ 31-1.16. Inspections; Searches. [Ord. #2047, § 1]
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provisions of this
Chapter, the enforcement officer for the City may enter any property in the
City regulated by this Chapter in a manner authorized by State law.
§ 31-1.17. Fees. [Ord. #2047, § 1]
The City Council may establish fees for the services provided under this
Chapter and such fees shall be fixed and established from time to time by
the City Council by resolution.
§ 31-1.18. Recovery of Costs. [Ord. #2047, § 1]
The City Manager, Director of Public Works, or any designee thereof, may
recover from any other person who has been found in violation of this
Chapter any cost incurred in issuing and enforcing any provision of this
Chapter. Actual costs shall include, but are not limited to the cost to the
City for the reinspection of the property, monitoring, clean-up, and the
preparation, issuance and enforcement of any subsequent notice or order.
Chapter 32
REVENUE BONDS
§ 32-1. ISSUANCE AND SALE OF REVENUE BONDS. [Ord. #2036,
§ 1]
The City Council, exercising the powers reserved to the City under Section
5 of Article XI of the Constitution of the State of California and pursuant
to Sections 400 and 401 of the Charter of the City of Compton, may, by
resolution, issue and sell revenue bonds for any City purpose or purposes.
§ 31-1.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-2
AO:1225
§ 32-2. PROCEDURES FOR BOND ISSUANCE. [Ord. #2036, § 1]
Except as otherwise expressly provided in the Charter of the City of
Compton, the procedure for the issuance of such bonds shall be the
procedure now set forth in the Revenue Bond Law of 1941 (commencing
with Government Code Section 54300), and by this reference, with the
exception herein after stated, the provisions of such Revenue Bond Law
are incorporated herein, provided, however that no election to authorize
the issuance of such bonds shall be required and to that end Government
Code Sections 54380 through 54387 are not incorporated herein and shall
not be applicable to the issuance of such bonds. The City Council may,
by resolution, supplement the procedures for the issuance of such bonds
now set forth in such Revenue Bonds Law, or by resolution may follow any
procedure which is hereafter amendatory of such Revenue Bond Law.
Chapter 33
(RESERVED)
Chapter 34
(RESERVED)
Chapter 35
HEALTH CODE
§ 35-1. ADOPTION OF COUNTY HEALTH CODE. [Added by Ord.
#1317, § 5300; Ord. #1367; Ord. #2062, § 1; Ord. #2071, § 2]
Subject to the amendments, deletions, and additions set forth in this
Chapter, the Public Health Code (Ordinance No. 7583) of the County of Los
Angeles, including rules and regulations of the County Health Department,
as altered and amended and shown in the Public Health Code, is adopted
as the Public Health Code of the City of Compton for the protection of the
public health in the City of Compton. In adopting the "Health and Safety
Code of the County of Los Angeles," the same being Title 11 of the Los
Angeles County Code, and the "Public Health Licenses Code of the County
of Los Angeles," the same being Division 1 of Title 8 of the Los Angeles
County Code, the City of Compton adopts by reference all amendments
adopted by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors which pertain
to the Public Health Code, subject to certain amendments, additions and
deletions as may hereinafter be provided.
At least one copy of the Health Code shall be kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk and shall be maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination
by the public.
§ 32-2 COMPTON § 35-1
AO:1226
In the event any provision of Title 8 or Title 11 of the Los Angeles County
Code referenced above conflicts with any provision of the Compton
Municipal Code now or hereinafter enacted, the provision of the Compton
Municipal Code shall prevail over the conflicting County Code provisions.
§ 35-2. INTERPRETATION. [Added by Ord. #1317, § 5301]
The following rules shall govern the interpretation of said Health Code:
§ 35-3. ADDITIONS; SECTION 385. [Added by Ord. #1317, § 5302]
Section 385 is hereby added to said Health Code to read as follows:
Sec. 385. Enclosure of Food Establishments. All public eating places, food
establishments, and slaughterhouses shall be completely enclosed on all
sides.
§ 35-4. AMENDMENTS: SECTION 608. [Added by Ord. #1317,
§ 5303]
Section 608 of said Health Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Sec. 608. Domestic Animals. It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain a
premise, yard, coop, or building in which fowl or animals are maintained in
a foul or unsanitary condition.
§ 35-5. AMENDMENTS: SECTION 801. [Added by Ord. #1317,
§ 5304]
Section 801 of said Health Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Sec. 801. Dwelling Defined. A building or portion thereof designed for or
occupied exclusively for residential purposes, including one-family, twofamily,
and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, and
boarding and lodging houses.
a. Whenever the word "County", or any abbreviation thereof, appears in
said Health Code, it shall be interpreted and deemed to mean the word
"City".
b. Whenever the words "Los Angeles" or any abbreviation thereof, appear
in said Health Code, they shall be interpreted and deemed to mean the
word "Compton".
c. Whenever there is a conflict between any of the provisions of said
Health Code and other laws of the City heretofore or hereafter adopted
relating specifically to the same subject matter, the latter shall prevail.
d. The definition or regulation of any activity, condition, or structure in
said Health Code shall not be interpreted or deemed to permit or allow
the conduct of any such activity, or the construction or maintenance of
any such condition or structure, as may be otherwise prohibited or
restricted by any other laws of the City heretofore or hereafter adopted.
§ 35-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-6
AO:1227
§ 35-6. AMENDMENTS: SECTION 802. [Added by Ord. #1317,
§ 5305]
Section 802 of said Health Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Sec. 802. Family Defined. An individual, or two or more persons related
by blood or marriage, or a group of not more than five persons, excluding
servants, who are not related by blood or marriage, living together as a
single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
§ 35-7. AMENDMENTS: SECTION 804. [Added by Ord. #1317,
§ 5306]
Section 804 of said Health Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Sec. 804. Dwelling Unit Defined. Two or more rooms in a dwelling or
apartment hotel designed for or occupied by one family for living or
sleeping purposes and having only one kitchen.
§ 35-8. AMENDMENTS: SECTION 810. [Added by Ord. #1317,
§ 5307]
Section 810 of said Health Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Sec. 810. Apartment House Defined. A building or portion thereof occupied,
designed, built, or rented exclusively for residential purposes by three or
more families living independently of each other.
§ 35-9. AMENDMENTS: SECTION 812. [Added by Ord. #1317,
§ 5308]
Section 812 of said Health Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Sec. 812. Hotel Defined. A building designated for or occupied by
individuals who are lodged with or without meals in which there are six or
more guest rooms and in which no provision is made for cooking in any
individual room or suite. Hotel shall include any lodging house, rooming
house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, public club, and
private club, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. Hotel
shall not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison,
rest home, detention home, mental convalescent home, or other building in
which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint or in
which human beings are maintained under convalescent, mental, or nursing
care.
§ 35-10. AMENDMENTS: SECTION 851. [Added by Ord. #1317,
§ 5309]
Section 851 of said Health Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Sec. 851. Institution Defined. When the work institution is used alone in this
section it shall mean and include homes for the aged, rest homes, mental
§ 35-6 COMPTON § 35-10
AO:1228
convalescent homes, mental institutions, private or parochial boarding
schools, colleges, day nurseries, day schools, private or parochial day
schools and colleges, children's boarding homes.
§ 35-11. AMENDMENTS: SECTION 853. [Added by Ord. #1317,
§ 5310]
Section 853 of said Health Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Sec. 853. Mental Institution Defined. Any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, or
other place receiving or caring for one or more insane, allegedly insane,
mentally ill, mentally retarded, alcoholic, epileptic, or mentally incompetent
persons. Any place or facility limiting care to juveniles below the age
of eight years or to persons of any age having cerebral palsy shall be
specifically excluded from this definition.
§ 35-12. AMENDMENTS: SECTION 855. [Added by Ord. #1317,
§ 5311]
Section 855 of said Health Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Sec. 855. Day Nursery School Defined. Any establishment providing day or
hourly care for children under six years of age, but shall not include any day
nursery maintained by any public school.
Reference Table
Chapter RT
REFERENCE TABLE
§ RT-1. LOCATION OF SECTIONS FROM THE 1951 CODE IN THE
1985 CODE.
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
1100. 1-1
1101. 1-2
1102. Adopting Ordinance
1103. Adopting Ordinance
1103.1. 1-7
1104. —
1105. 1-5
1106. 1-8
1107. 1-9.1
1108. 1-9.2
§ 35-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1229
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
1109. —
1110. 1-9.3
1111. 1-9.4
1200. 1-6.1
1201. 1-6.6
1202. 1-6.7
1203. 1-6.8
1204. 1-6.9
1205. 4-5
1300. 1-4
1301. 1-4
1302. 1-4
1303. 1-4
1304. 1-4
1305. 1-4
1306. 1-4
1307. 1-4
1308. 1-4
1309. 1-4
1310. 1-4
1311. 1-4
1312. 1-4
1313. 1-3
1314. 1-3
1315. 1-3
1316. 1-3
1317. 1-3
1318. 1-3
1319. 1-3
1320. 1-3
1321. 1-3
1322. 1-3
1323. 1-3
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1230
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
1324. 1-3
1325. 1-3
2100. 2-1.1
2100.1. 2-1.2
2100.2. 2-1.3
2100.3. 2-1.4
2100.4. 2-1.5
2100.5. 2-1.6
2100.6. 2-1.7
2100.7. 2-1.8
2100.8. 2-1.9
2100.9. 2-1.10
2100.10. 2-1.11
2210. 5-1.1
2220. 5-3.1
2220.1. 5-3.1a
2220.2. —
2220.3. —
2220.A. —
2220.B. —
2221. 5-3.2
2222. 5-3.3
2223. 5-3.4
2223.A. 5-3.4a
2224. 5-3.5
2225. 5-3.6
2226. 5-3.7
2227. —
2228. 5-3.8
2230. 5-2.1
2300. 2-4.1
2301. 2-4.2
2302. 2-4.3
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1231
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
2303. 2-4.4
2304. 2-4.5
2305. 2-4.6
2306. 2-4.7
2307. 2-4.8
2308. 2-4.9
2309. 2-4.10
2320. 2-5.1
2330. 2-6.1
2331. 2-6.2
2332. —
2340. 2-7.1
2341. 2-7.2
2342. 2-7.3
2343. 2-7.4
2344. 2-7.5
2350. 2-8.1
2351. 2-8.2
2352. 2-8.3
2353. —
2354. —
2355. —
2356. —
2357. 2-9.2
2358. 2-9.3
2360. 2-10.1
2361. 2-10.2
2362. —
2363. —
2370. 2-11.1
2380. —
2380.1. —
2381. —
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1232
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
2382. —
2383. —
2384. —
2385. 2-12.1
2385.1. 2-12.2
2385.2. 2-12.3
2385.3. 2-12.4
2386. 2-12.5
2386.1. 2-12.6
2387. 2-12.7
2387.1. 2-12.8
2391. —
2392. —
2393. —
2394. —
2395. 2-13.1
2395.1. —
2395.2. 2-13.2
2395.3. 2-13.3
2395.4. 2-13.4
2395.5. 2-13.5
2395.6. 2-13.6
2396. 2-14.1
2396.1. 2-14.2
2396.2. 2-14.3
2397. 2-15.1
2397.1. 2-15.2
2397.2. 2-15.3
2398. 2-18.1 — 2-18.3
2398.1. —
2399. —
2-2300. 2-16.1
2-2301. 2-16.2
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1233
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
2-2302. 2-16.3
2-2303. 2-16.4
3-2300. 2-17.1
3-2301. 2-17.2
3-2302. 2-17.3
3-2303. 2-17.4
3-2304. 2-17.5
2400. 3-1.1
2401. 3-1.2
2402. 3-1.3
2403. 3-1.4
2404. 3-1.5
2510. 4-1.1
2511. 4-1.2
2512. 4-1.3
2520. 4-2.1
2521. 4-2.2
2522. 4-2.3
2523. 4-2.4
2524. 4-2.5
2525. 4-2.6
2530. 4-7.1
2531. 4-7.2
2532. 4-7.3
2540. 4-3.1
2540.1. 4-3.2
2541. 4-3.3
2542. 4-3.4
2543. 4-3.5
2544. 4-3.6
2550. —
2600. 4-4.1
2601. 4-4.2
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1234
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
2602. 4-4.3
2603. 4-4.4
2604. 4-4.5
2605. 4-4.6
2606. 4-4.7
2607. 4-4.8
2608. 4-4.9
2609. 4-4.10
2610. 4-4.11
2611. —
2700. 6-1
2701. 6-2
2702. 6-3
2703. 6-4
2704. 6-5
2705. 6-6
2706. 6-7
2707. 6-8
2708. 6-9
2709. 6-10
2710. 6-11
2711. 6-12
2712. 6-13
2713. 6-14
2714. 6-15
2715. 6-16
2716. 6-17
2717. 6-18
2718. 6-19
2719. 6-20
2720. 6-21
2800. 2-22
2801. 2-23.1
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1235
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
2801.1. 2-23.2
2801.2. 2-23.3
2801.3. 2-23.4
2801.4. 2-23.5
2801.5. 2-23.6
2802. 2-24.1
2802.1. 2-24.2
2802.2. 2-24.3
2802.3. 2-24.4
2803. 2-25.1
2803.1. 2-25.2
2900. 2-26.1
2901. 2-26.2
2-1000. 2-2.1
2-1001. 2-2.2
2-1002. 2-2.3
2-1003. 2-2.4
2-1004. 2-2.5
2-1005. 2-2.6
2-1006. 2-2.7
2-1006.1. 2-2.7a
2-1006.2. 2-2.7b
2-1006.3. 2-2.7c
2-1006.4. 2-2.7d
2-1006.5. 2-2.7e
2-1006.6. 2-2.7f
2-1006.7. 2-2.7g
2-1006.8. 2-2.7h
2-1006.9. 2-2.7i
2-1006.10. 2-2.7j
2-1006.11. 2-2.7k
2-1006.12. 2-2.7l
2-1007. 2-2.8
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1236
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
2-1007.1. 2-2.8a
2-1007.2. 2-2.8b
2-1007.3. 2-2.8c
2-1008. 2-2.9
2-1008.1. —
2-1008.2. —
2-1008.3. —
2-1008.4. —
2-1008.5. —
2-1009. 2-2.10
3100. 22-2.1
3101. —
3102. —
3103. 22-2.2
3103.1. 22-2.3
3103.2. 22-2.4
3103.3. 22-2.5
3103.4. 22-2.6
3103.5. 22-2.7
3103.6. 22-2.8
3103.7. 22-2.9
3104. 22-2.10
3105. 22-2.11
3106. 22-2.12
3106.1. 22-2.13
3107. 22-2.14
3108. 22-2.15
3109. 22-2.16
3110. 22-2.17
3111. 22-2.18
3300. 22-1.1
3301. 22-1.2
3302. 22-1.3
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1237
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
3303. 22-1.4
3400. 12-1
3400.1. 12-1
3400.2. 12-1
3400.3. 12-1
3400.4. 12-1
3400.5. 12-1
3400.6. 12-1
3400.7. 12-1
3400.8. 12-1
3400.9. 12-1
3400.10. 12-1
3400.11. 12-1
3400.12. 12-1
3400.13. 12-1
3400.14. 12-1
3400.15. 12-1
3400.16. 12-1
3401. 12-2.1
3402. 12-2.2
3403. 12-2.3
3404. 12-2.4
3405. 12-2.5
3406. 12-2.6
3407. 12-2.7
3408. 12-2.8
3409. 12-2.9
3410. 12-2.10
3411. 12-2.11
3412. 12-2.12
3413. 12-2.13
3414. 12-2.14
3415. 12-2.15
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1238
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
3416. 12-2.16
3417. 12-2.17
3418. 12-2.18
3419. 12-2.19
3420. 12-2.20
3421. 12-2.21
3422. 12-2.22
3423. 12-2.23
3424. 12-2.24
3425. 12-2.25
3425.1. 12-2.26
3426. 12-2.27
3427. 12-2.28
3428. 12-2.29
3429. 12-2.30
3430. 12-2.31
3431. 12-2.32
3432. 12-2.33
3433. 12-2.34
3434. —
3434.1. 12-2.35
3435. 12-2.36
3436. 12-2.37
3437. 12-2.38
3438. 12-2.39
3439. 12-2.40
3440. 12-2.41
3441. 12-3.1
3442. 12-3.2
3443. 12-3.3
3444. 12-3.4
3445. 12-3.5
3446. 12-3.6
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1239
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
3447. 12-3.7
3448. 12-3.8
3449. 12-3.9
3450. 12-3.10
3451. 12-3.11
3452. 12-3.12
3453. 12-3.13
3454. —
3455. —
3456. —
3457. 12-3.14
3458. 12-3.15
3459. 12-3.16
3459.1. 12-3.17
3459.2. 12-3.18
3459.3. 12-3.19
3459.4. 12-3.20
3459.5. 12-3.21
3459.6. 12-3.22
3459.7. 12-3.23
3460. 12-3.24
3460.1. 12-3.25
3461. 12-3.26
3462. 12-3.27
3463. 12-4.1
3464. 12-4.2
3465. 12-4.3, 12-4.4
3466. —
3467. 12-2.42
3467.1. 12-2.43
3468. 12-3.28
3469. 12-2.44
3470. 12-5.1
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1240
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
3471. 12-5.2
3472. 12-5.3
3473. 12-5.4
3474. 12-5.5
3475. 12-2.45
3476. —
3500. 8-6.1
3501. 8-6.2
3502. 8-6.3
3503. 8-6.4
3504. 8-6.5
3505. 8-6.6
3506. 8-6.7
3507. 8-6.8
3508. 8-6.9
3509. 8-6.10
3600. 7-4.1
3601. 7-4.2
3602. 7-4.3
3603. 7-4.4
3603.1. 7-4.5
3604. —
3604.1. —
3604.2. —
3605. —
3605.1. 7-19.1
3605.2. 7-19.1
3605.3. 7-19.1
3605.4. 7-19.2
3605.5. 7-19.3
3605.6. 7-19.4
3605.7. 7-19.4
3605.8. 7-19.4
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1241
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
3605.9. 7-19.4
3606. 7-19.5
3701. 8-4.1
3702. 8-4.2
3703. 8-4.3
3704. 8-4.4
3705. 8-4.5
3706. 8-4.6
3707. 8-4.7
3708. 8-4.8
3709. 8-4.9
3710. 8-4.10
3711. 8-4.11
3712. 8-4.12
3713. —
3800. 13-1
3900. 8-2.1
3901. 8-2.2
3902. 8-2.3
3903. 8-2.4
3-1000. 8-3.1
3-1001. 8-3.2
3-1100. 8-1.1
3-1101. 8-1.2
4101. 11-1.1
4102. 11-1.2
4200. 7-6.2
4200.1. 7-6.1
4200.2. 7-6.2
4201. 7-6.2
4202. 7-6.3
4203. 7-6.4
4203.1. —
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1242
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
4203.2. —
4204. 7-6.5
4205. 7-6.6
4206. 7-6.7
4207. 7-6.8
4208. 7-6.9
4209. 7-6.10
4210. 7-6.11
4211. 7-6.12
4300. 7-13.1
4300.1. 7-13.2
4400. 7-7.1
4401. 7-7.2
4401.1. 7-7.2
4500. 7-2.1
4500.1. 7-2.2
4500.2. 7-2.3
4500.3. 7-2.4
4500.4. —
4500.5. —
4500.6. —
4500.7. —
4501. 7-2.5
4502. 7-11.1
4502.1. —
4502.2. —
4502.3. —
4503. —
4503.1. —
4503.2. —
4503.3. 7-11.2
4504. 7-11.3
4504.1. 7-11.3
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1243
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
4504.2. 7-11.3
4504.3. 7-11.3
4505. 7-11.3
4506. 7-11.3
4600. 7-8.1
4600.1. 7-8.1
4600.2. 7-8.2
4600.3. 7-8.3
4601. 7-8.4
4602. 7-8.5
4603. 7-8.6
4604. 7-8.7
4605. 7-8.8
4606. 7-8.9
4607. 7-8.10
4608. 7-8.11
4609. 7-8.12
4610. 7-8.13
4611. 7-8.14
4612. 7-8.15
4700. 7-1.1
4700.1. 7-1.2
4700.2. 7-1.3
4701. 7-1.4
4701.1. 7-1.5
4701.2. 7-1.6
4701.3. 7-1.7
4701.4. 7-1.8
4702. 7-9.1
4702.1. 7-9.2
4702.2. 7-9.3
4702.3. 7-9.4
4702.4. 7-9.5
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1244
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
4702.5. 7-9.6
4702.6. 7-9.7
4702.7. 7-9.8
4702.8. 7-9.9
4702.9. 7-9.10
4703. —
4703.1. 7-9.11
4703.2. 7-9.12
4704. —
4704.1. 7-9.13
4704.2. 7-9.14
4704.3. 7-9.15
4705. 7-17.1
4705.1. 7-17.2
4705.2. 7-17.3
4705.3. 7-17.4
4705.4. 7-17.5
4705.5. 7-17.6
4705.6. 7-17.7
4706. 7-12.1
4706.1. 7-12.2
4706.2. 7-12.3
4706.3. 7-12.4
4706.4. 7-12.5
4706.5. 7-12.6
4706.6. 7-12.7
4706.7. 7-12.8
4706.8. 7-12.9
4706.9. 7-12.10
4706.10. 7-12.11
4706.11. 7-12.12
4706.12. 7-12.13
4706.13. 7-12.14
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1245
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
4706.14. 7-12.15
4706.15. 7-12.16
4707.1. 7-15.1
4707.2. 7-15.2
4707.3. 7-15.3
4707.4. 7-15.4
4707.5. 7-15.5
4708. 7-12.17
4708.1. 7-12.18
4708.2. 7-12.19
4708.3. 7-12.20
4708.4. 7-12.21
4708.5. 7-12.22
4708.6. 7-12.23
4708.7. 7-12.24
4708.8. 7-12.25
4708.9. 7-12.26
4709. 7-14.1
4709.1. 7-14.2
4709.2. 7-14.3
4709.3. 7-14.4
4709.4. 7-14.5
4710.1. 7-21.1
4710.2. 7-21.2
4710.3. 7-21.3
4710.4. 7-21.4
4711. 7-3.1
4711.1. 7-3.2
4711.2. 7-3.3
4800. 18-1
4801. 18-2
4801.1. 18-2.1
4801.2. 18-2.2
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1246
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
4801.3. 18-2.3
4801.4. 18-2.4
4801.5. 18-2.5
4801.6. 18-2.6
4801.7. 18-2.7
4801.8. 18-2.8
4801.9. 18-2.9
4801.10. 18-2.10
4801.11. 18-2.11
4801.12. 18-2.12
4801.13. 18-2.13
4801.14. 18-2.14
4801.15. 18-2.15
4801.16. 18-2.16
4801.17. 18-2.17
4801.18. 18-2.18
4801.19. 18-2.19
4802. 18-3
4803. 18-4
4804. 18-5
4804.1. 18-5a
4085. 18-6
4805.1. 18-6a
4805.2. 18-6b
4806. 18-7
4807. 18-8
4808. 18-9
4900. 7-5.1a
4900.1. 7-5.1b
4900.2. 7-5.2
4900.3. 7-5.3
4901. 7-5.4
4901.1. 7-5.5
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1247
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
4901.2. 7-5.6
4903.1. 7-18.1
4903.2. 7-18.2
4903.3. 7-18.3
4903.4. 7-18.4
5100. 27-1
5100.1. 27-1
5100.2. 27-1
5100.3. 27-1
5100.4. 27-1
5100.5. 27-1
5101. 27-2
5102. 27-3
5103. 27-4
5104. 27-5
5105. 27-6
5106. 27-7
5107. 27-8
5108. 27-9
5109. 27-10
5110. 27-11
5111. 27-12
5112. 27-13
5113. 27-14
5114. 27-15
5115. 27-16
5116. 27-17
5117. 27-18
5118. 27-19
5119. 27-20
5120. 27-21
5121. —
5122. 27-22
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1248
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
5200. —
5200.1. 21-1.1
5200.2. —
5200.3. —
5200.4. —
5200.5. —
5201. 21-1.2
5201.1. 21-1.2a
5201.2. 21-1.2b
5201.3. 21-1.2c
5201.4. 21-1.2d
5202. 21-1.3
5203. 21-1.4
5204. 21-1.5
5205. 21-1.6
5205.1. 21-1.6a
5205.2. 21-1.6b
5205.3. 21-1.6c
5205.4. 21-1.6d
5205.5. 21-1.6e
5205.6. 21-1.6f
5205.6A. 21-1.6g
5205.7. 21-1.6h
5205.8. 21-1.6-1
5206. 21-1.7
5207. 21-1.8
5208. 21-1.9
5300. 35-1
5301. 35-2
5302. 35-3
5303. 35-4
5304. 35-5
5305. 35-6
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1249
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
5306. 35-7
5307. 35-8
5308. 35-9
5309. 35-10
5310. 35-11
5311. 35-12
5500. 7-20.1
5500.1. 7-20.2
5500.2. 7-20.3
5500.3. 7-20.4
5500.4. 7-20.5
5501. 7-20.6
5501.1. 7-20.7
5501.2. 7-20.8
5502. 7-20.9
5502.1. 7-20.10
5502.2. 7-20.11
5502.3. 7-20.12
5502.3.A. 7-20.13
5502.4. 7-20.14
5503. 7-20.15
5504. 7-20.16
5505. 7-20.17
5506. 7-20.18
5507. 7-20.19
5508. 7-20.20
5509. 7-20.21
5510. 7-20.22
5511. 7-20.23
6100. 9-1.1
6100.1. 9-1.1
6100.2. 9-1.1
6100.3. 9-1.1
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1250
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6100.4. 9-1.1
6100.5. 9-1.1
6100.6. 9-1.1
6100.7. 9-1.1
6100.8. 9-1.1
6100.9. 9-1.1
6100.10. 9-1.1
6100.11. 9-1.1
6100.12. 9-1.1
6100.13. 9-1.1
6100.14. 9-1.1
6100.15. 9-1.1
6100.15A. 9-1.1
6100.15B. 9-4.10
6100.16. 9-1.1
6100.17. 9-1.1
6100.18. 9-1.1
6100.19. 9-1.1
6100.20. 9-1.1
6100.21. 9-1.1
6100.22. 9-1.1
6100.23. 9-1.1
6100.24. 9-1.1
6100.25. 9-1.1
6100.26. 9-1.1
6100.27. 9-1.1
6100.28. 9-1.1
6100.29. 9-1.1
6100.30. 9-1.1
6100.31. 9-1.1
6100.32. 9-1.1
6100.33. 9-1.1
6100.34. 9-1.1
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1251
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6100.35. 9-1.1
6100.36. 9-1.1
6100.37. 9-1.1
6100.38. 9-1.1
6100.38A. 9-1.1
6100.38B. 9-1.1
6100.39. 9-1.1
6100.39A. 9-1.1
6100.39B. 9-1.1
6100.39C. 9-1.1
6100.40. 9-1.1
6100.41. 9-1.1
6100.42. 9-1.1
6101. 9-1.2
6102. 9-1.3
6103. 9-1.4
6104. 9-1.5
6105. 9-1.6
6106. 9-1.7
6107. 9-1.8
6108. 9-1.9
6109. 9-1.10
6109.1. 9-1.10a
6110. 9-1.11
6110.1. 9-1.11a
6111. 9-1.12
6112. 9-1.13
6113. 9-1.14
6114. 9-1.15
6115. 9-1.16
6116. 9-1.17
6117. 9-1.18
6117.1. 9-1.19
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1252
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6117.2. 9-1.20
6117.3. 9-1.21
6118. 9-1.22
6119. 9-1.23
6119.1. 9-1.24a
6119.2. 9-1.24b
6120. 9-1.25
6120.1. 9-1.25a
6120.2. 9-1.25b
6121. 9-1.26
6122. 9-1.27
6123. 9-1.28
6124. 9-1.29
6125. 9-1.30
6126. 9-1.31
6127. 9-1.32
6128. 9-1.33
6129. 9-1.34
6130. 9-1.35
6131. 9-1.36
6132. 9-1.37
6133. 9-1.38
6134. 9-1.39
6135. 9-1.40
6136. 9-1.41
6200 9-2.1
6200.1. 9-2.1-1
6200.2. 9-2.1-2
6200.3. 9-2.1-3
6200.4. 9-2.1-4
6200.5. 9-2.1-5
6200.6. 9-2.1-6
6200.7. 9-2.1-7
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1253
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6200.8. 9-2.1-8
6200.9. 9-2.1-9
6200.10. 9-2.1-10
6200.11. 9-2.1-11
6200.12. 9-2.1-12
6200.13. 9-2.1-13
6200.14. 9-2.1-14
6200.15. 9-2.1-15
6200.15a. 9-2.1-16
6200.16. —
6200.17. 9-2.1-17
6200.18. 9-2.1-18
6200.19. 9-2.1-19
6200.19a. 9-2.1-19b
6200.20. 9-2.1-20
6200.21. 9-2.1-21
6200.22. 9-2.1-22
6200.23. 9-2.1-23
6200.24. 9-2.1-24
6200.25. 9-2.1-25
6200.26. 9-2.1-26
6200.26a. 9-2.1-27
6200.27. 9-2.1-28
6200.28. 9-2.1-29
6200.29. 9-2.1-30
6200.30. 9-2.1-31
6200.31. 9-2.1-32
6200.32. 9-2.1-33
6200.33. 9-2.1-34
6200.34. 9-2.1-35
6200.35. 9-2.1-36
6200.36. 9-2.1-37
6200.37. —
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1254
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6200.37a. 9-2.1-38
6200.37b. —
6200.38. 9-2.1-39
6200.39. 9-2.1-40
6200.39a. 9-2.1-41
6200.40. 9-2.1-42
6200.40a. 9-2.1-43
6200.41. 9-2.1-44
6200.42. 9-2.1-45
6200.43. 9-2.1-46
6200.44. 9-1.2-47
6200.45. 9-1.2-48
6200.46. 9-2.1-49
6200.47. 9-2.1-50
6200.48. 9-2.1-51
6200.49. 9-2.1-52
6200.49a. 9-2.1-53
6200.50. 9-2.1-54
6200.51. 9-2.1-55
6200.52. 9-2.1-56
6200.53. 9-2.1-57
6200.54. 9-2.1-58
6200.55. 9-2.1-59
6200.56. 9-2.1-60
6200.57. 9-2.1-61
6200.58. 9-2.1-62
6200.59. 9-2.1-63
6200.60. 9-2.1-64
6200.61. 9-2.1-65
6200.62. 9-2.1-66
6200.63. 9-2.1-67
6200.64. 9-2.1-68
6200.65. 9-2.1-69
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1255
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6200.66. 9-2.1-70
6200.67. 9-2.1-71
6200.68. 9-2.1-72
6200.69. 9-2.1-73
6200.70. 9-2.1-74
6200.71. 9-2.1-75
6200.72. 9-2.1-76
6200.73. —
6200.74. 9-2.1-77
6200.75. 9-2.1-78
6200.76. 9-2.1-79
6200.77. 9-2.1-80
6200.78. 9-2.1-81
6200.79. 9-2.1-82
6201. 9-3
6201.1. 9-3.1
6201.2. 9-3.2
6201.3. 9-3.3
6201.4. 9-3.4
6201.5. 9-3.5
6201.6. 9-3.6
6201.7. 9-3.7
6201.8. 9-3.8
6300. 9-4.1
6300.1. 9-4.1-1
6300.2. 9-4.1-2
6300.3. 9-4.1-3
6300.4. 9-4.1-4
6300.5. 9-4.1-5
6300.6. 9-4.1-7
6300.7. 9-4.1-8
6300.8. 9-4.1-9
6300.9. 9-4.1-10
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1256
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6300.9A. 9-4.1-11
6300.10. 9-4.1-12
6300.11. 9-4.1-13
6300.12. 9-4.1-14
6300.13. 9-4.1-15
6300.14. 9-4.1-16
6300.15. 9-4.1-17
6300.16. 9-4.1-18
6300.17. 9-4.1-19
6300.18. 9-4.1-20
6300.19. 9-4.1-21
6301. 9-4.2
6302. 9-4.3
6303. 9-4.4
6303.1. 9-4.5
6304. 9-4.6
6305. 9-4.7
6306. 9-4.8
6307. 9-4.9
6419.1. 9-14.1
6419.2. 9-14.2
6419.3. 9-14.3
6420. 9-10.1
6420.1. 9-10.1
6420.2. 9-10.1
6420.3. 9-10.2
6421. —
6422. —
6423. —
6424. 9-10.3
6425. 9-10.4
6426. 9-10.5
6427. 9-10.6
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1257
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6430. 9-11.1
6430.1. 9-11.1
6430.2. 9-11.1
6430.3. 9-11.1
6431. 9-11.2
6431.1. 9-11.3
6431.2. 9-11.4
6432. 9-11.5
6432.1. 9-11.6
6432.2. 9-11.7
6432.3. 9-11.8
6433. 9-11.9
6434. 9-11.10
6435. 9-11.11
6436. 9-11.12
6437. 9-11.13
6438. 9-11.14
6439. 9-11.15
6440. 9-12.1
6440.1. 9-12.1
6440.2. 9-12.1
6440.3. —
6441. 9-12.2
6441.1. 9-12.1
6441.2. 9-12.1
6441.3. 9-12.1
6441.4. 9-12.3
6441.5. 9-12.4
6441.6. 9-12.5
6441.7. 9-12.6
6441.8. 9-12.7
6441.9. 9-12.8
6441.10. 9-12.9
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1258
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6441.11. 9-12.10
6441.12. 9-12.11
6441.13. 9-12.12
6441.14. 9-12.13
6441.15. 9-12.14
6441.16. 9-12.15
6441.17. 9-12.16
6441.18. 9-12.17
6441.19. 9-12.18
6441.20. 9-12.19
6441.21. 9-12.20
6441.22. 9-12.21
6441.23. 9-12.22
6441.24. 9-12.23
6441.25. 9-12.24
6441.26. 9-12.25
6441.27. 9-12.26
6441.28. 9-12.27
6441.29. 9-12.28
6441.30. 9-12.29
6441.31. 9-12.30
6442. —
6443. 9-12.1
6443.1. 9-12.1
6443.2. 9-12.1
6443.3. 9-12.1
6443.4. —
6443.5. 9-12.31
6443.6. 9-12.32
6443.7. 9-12.33
6443.8. 9-12.34
6443.9. 9-12.35
6443.10. 9-12.36
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1259
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6443.11. 9-12.37
6443.12. 9-12.38
6443.13. 9-12.39
6443.12. 9-12.38
6443.13. 9-12.39
6443.14. 9-12.40
6443.15. 9-12.41
6443.16. 9-12.42
6443.17. —
6443.18. 9-12.43
6443.19. 9-12.44
6443.20. 9-12.45
6443.21. 9-12.46
6443.22. 9-12.47
6443.23. 9-12.48
6443.24. 9-12.49
6443.25. 9-12.50
6443.26. 9-12.51
6443.27. 9-12.52
6443.28. 9-12.53
6443.29. —
6444. —
6445. 9-12.54
6445.1. 9-12.55
6446. —
6446.1. —
6446.2. 9-12.56
6446.3. 9-12.57
6447. 9-12.58
6448. 9-12.59
6449. 9-12.60
6450. 9-16.1
6450.1. 9-16.1
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1260
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6451. 9-16.2
6452. 9-16.3
6452.1. 9-16.4
6453. 9-16.5
6453.1. 9-16.6
6454. 9-16.7
6455. 9-16.8
6455.1. 9-16.9
6455.2. 9-16.10
6455.3. 9-16.11
6455.4. 9-16.12
6456. 9-16.13
6457. 9-16.14
6460. 9-21.1
6460.1. 9-21.1
6460.2. 9-21.1
6460.3. 9-21.1
6460.4. 9-21.1
6460.5. 9-21.1
6461. 9-21.2
6461.1. 9-21.1a
6461.2. 9-21.1b
6461.3. 9-21.1c
6461.4. 9-21.1d
6462. 9-21.3
6463. 9-21.4
6464. 9-21.5
6464.1. 9-21.6
6464.2. 9-21.7
6464.3. 9-21.8
6464.4. 9-21.9
6464.5. 9-21.10
6464.6. 9-21.11
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1261
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6464.7. 8-21.12
6464.8. 9-21.13
6465. 9-21.14
6465.1. 9-21.15
6466. 9-21.16
6467. 9-21.17
6467.1. 9-21.18
6467.2. 9-21.19
6467.3. 9-21.20
6468. 9-21.21
6468.1. 9-21.22
6468.2. 9-21.23
6468.3. 9-21.24
6468.4. 9-21.25
6480. 9-19.1
6480.1. 9-19.1
6480.2. 9-19.1
6480.3. 9-19.1
6480.4. 9-19.1
6480.5. 9-19.1
6480.6. 9-19.1
6480.7. 9-19.1
6480.8. 9-19.1
6480.9. 9-19.1
6480.10. 9-19.1
6481. 9-19.2
6481.1. 9-19.3
6482. 9-19.4
6482.1. 9-19.5
6482.2. 9-19.6
6482.3. 9-19.7
6482.4. 9-19.7a
6482.5. 9-19.8
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1262
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6482.6. 9-19.9
6482.7. 9-19.10
6482.8. 9-19.11
6482.9. 9-19.12
6482.10. 9-19.13
6482.11. 9-19.14
6482.12. 9-19.15
6483. 9-19.16
6483.1. 9-19.17
6483.2. 9-19.18
6483.3. 9-19.19
6484. 9-19.20
6484.1. 9-19.20a
6485. 9-19.21
6485.1. 9-19.22
6485.2. 9-19.23
6486. 9-19.24
6486.1. 9-19.25
6487. 9-19.26
6488. 9-19.27
6489. 9-19.28
6489.1. 9-19.29
6489.2. 9-19.30
6489.3. 9-19.31
6490. 9-7.1
6490.1. 9-7.2
6491. 9-8.1
6491.1. 9-8.1-2
6491.2. 9-8.1-1
6491.3. 9-8.2
6491.4. 9-8.3
6491.5. 9-8.4
6491.6. 9-8.5
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1263
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6493. 9-13.1
6494. 9-9.1
6494.1. 9-9.1
6494.2. 9-9.1
6494.3. 9-9.2
6494.4. 9-9.3
6494.5. 9-9.4
6494.6. 9-9.5
6494.7. 9-9.6
6494.8. 9-9.7
6494.9. 9-9.8
6494.10. 9-9.9
6494.11. 9-9.10
6495.
6496. 9-15.1
6496.1. 9-15.1
6496.2. 9-15.1
6496.3. 9-15.1
6496.4. 9-15.2
6496.5. 9-15.3
6496.6. 9-15.4
6496.7. 9-15.5
6496.8. 9-15.6
6497. 9-6.1
6497.1. 9-6.2
6497.2. 9-6.3
6498. 9-5.1
6498.1. 9-5.2
6498.2. 9-5.3
6498.3. 9-5.4
6499. 9-5.6
6499.1. 9-5.6a
2-6400. 10-1
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1264
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
2-6401. 10-2
2-6401. 10-3
2-6402. 10-4
2-6403. 10-5
2-6404. 10-6
2-6405. 10-7
2-6406. 10-8
2-6407. 10-9
2-6408. 10-10
2-6409. 10-11
2-6410. 10-12
2-6430. 9-22.1
2-6431. 9-22.2
2-6432. 9-22.3
2-6433. 9-22.4
2-6434. 9-22.5
2-6435. 9-22.6
2-6436. 9-22.7
2-6437.1. 9-22.8
2-6437.2. 9-22.9
2-6438. 9-22.10
2-6439. 9-22.11
2-6440. 9-22.12
2-6441. 9-22.13
2-6442. 9-22.14
2-6443. 9-22.15
2-6444. 9-22.16
2-6445. 9-22.17
2-6446. 9-22.18
2-6447. 9-22.19
2-6448. 9-22.20
2-6449. 9-22.21
2-6450. 9-22.22
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1265
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
2-6451. 9-22.23
2-6452. 9-22.24
2-6500. 9-17
6500. 9-18.1
6501. 9-18.2
6502. 9-18.3
6503. 9-18.4
6504. 9-18.5
6505. 9-18.6
6506. 9-18.7
6507. 9-18.8
6600. —
6601. —
6602. —
6602A. —
6603. —
6604. —
6605. —
6606. —
6607. —
6608. —
6609. —
6610. —
6611. —
6612. —
6613. —
6614. —
6615. —
6616. —
6617. —
6618. —
6619. —
6620. —
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1266
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6621. —
6622. —
6623. —
6624. —
6700. —
6701. —
6702. —
6703. —
6704. —
6705. —
6706. —
6707. —
6708. —
6709. —
6710. —
6711. —
6712. —
6713. —
6714. —
6715. —
6716. —
6717. —
6718. —
6719. —
6720. —
6721. —
6722. —
6723. —
6900. 3-2.1
6901. 3-2.2
6902. 3-2.3
6903. 3-2.4
6904. 3-2.5
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1267
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6905. 3-2.6
6906. 3-2.7
6907. 3-2.8
6908. 3-2.9
6909. 3-2.10
6910. 3-2.11
6911. 3-2.12
6912. 3-2.13
6913. 3-2.14
6-1000. 3-3.1
6-1001. 3-3.2
6-1002. 3-3.3
6-1003. 3-3.4
6-1004. 3-3.5
6-1005. 3-3.6
6-1006. 3-3.7
6-1007. 3-3.8
6-1008. 3-3.9
6-1009. 3-3.10
6-1010. 3-3.11
6-1100. 3-4.1
6-1101. 3-4.2
6-1102. 3-4.3
6-1103. 3-4.4
6-1104. 3-4.5
6-1105. 3-4.6
6-1106. 3-4.7
6-1107. 3-4.8
6-1108. 3-4.9
6-1109. 3-4.10
6-1110. 3-4.11
6-1111. 3-4.12
6-1112. 3-4.13
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1268
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
6-1200. 9-20.1
6-1201. 9-20.2
6-1202. 9-20.3
6-1203. 9-20.4
6-1204. 9-20.5
6-1205. 9-20.6
6-1206. —
6-1207. —
6-1208. —
6-1209. —
7100. 20-1.1
7200. 20-2.1
7200.1. 20-2.2
7201. 20-2.3
7202. 20-2.4
7203. 20-2.5
7204. 20-2.6
7205. 20-2.7
7206. 20-2.8
7207. 20-2.9
7208. 20-2.10
7209. 20-2.11
7210. 20-2.12
7211. 20-2.13
7212. 20-2.14
7300. 20-3.1
7300.1. 20-3.2
7300.2. 20-3.3
7300.3. 20-3.4
7300.4. 20-3.5
7300.5. 20-3.6
7300.6. 20-3.6f
7300.7. 20-3.7
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1269
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
7300.8. 20-3.8
7300.9. 20-3.9
7300.10. 20-3.10
7300.11. 20-3.11
7300.12. 20-3.12
7300.13. 20-3.13
7300.14. 20-3.14
7300.15. 20-3.15
7300.16. 20-3.16
7300.17. 20-3.17
7300.18. 20-3.18
7300.19. 20-3.19
7300.20. 20-3.20
7300.21. 20-3.21
7300.22. 20-3.22
7300.23. 20-3.23
7300.24. 20-3.24
7300.25. 20-3.25
7300.26. 20-3.26
7300.27. 20-3.27
7300.28. 20-3.28
7300.29. 20-3.29
7200.30. 20-3.30
7300.31. 20-3.31
7300.32. 20-3.32
7300.33. 20-3.33
7300.34. 20-3.34
7300.35. 20-3.35
7300.36. 20-3.36
7400. 23-1.1
7400.1. 23-1.1
7400.2. 23-1.1
7400.3. 23-1.1
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1270
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
7400.4. 23-1.1
7400.5. 23-1.1
7401. 23-1.2
7402. 23-1.3
7403. 23-1.4
7404. 23-1.5
7405. 23-1.6
7406. 23-1.7
7406.1. 23-1.8
7406.2. 23-1.9
7406.3. 23-1.10
7407. 23-1.11
7408. 23-1.12
7409. 23-1.13
7409.1. 23-1.14
7409.2. 23-1.15
7409.3. 23-1.16
7409.4. 23-1.17
7409.5. 23-1.18
7410. 23-1.19
7411. 23-1.20
7412. 23-1.21
7413. 23-1.22
7414. 23-1.23
7415. 23-1.24
7416. 23-1.25
7416.1. 23-1.25a
7416.2. 23-1.25b
7416.3. 23-1.25c
7417. 23-1.26
7418. 23-1.27
7419. 23-1.28
7420. 23-1.29
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1271
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
7421. 23-1.30
7500. 23-2.1
7500.1. 23-2.1
7500.2. 23-2.1
7500.3. 23-2.1
7500.4. 23-2.1
7500.5. 23-2.1
7500.6. 23-2.1
7500.7. 23-2.1
7500.8. 23-2.1
7500.9. 23-2.1
7500.10. 23-2.1
7500.11. 23-2.1
7500.12. 23-2.1
7501. 23-2.2
7502. 23-2.3
7503. 23-2.4
7504. 23-2.5
7505. 23-2.6
7506. 23-2.7
7507. 23-2.8
7508. 23-2.9
7509. 23-2.10
7510. 23-2.11
7511. 23-2.12
7512. 23-2.13
7513. 23-2.14
7513.1. 23-2.14e
7514. 23-2.15
7515. —
7516. —
7517. 23-2.16
7518. 23-2.17
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1272
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
7519. 23-2.18
7520. 23-2.19
7521. 23-2.20
7522. 23-2.21
7523. 23-2.22
7524. 23-2.23
7525. 23-2.24
7526. 23-2.25
7527. 23-2.26
7527.1. 23-2.26a
7528. 23-2.27
7529. 23-2.28
7600. 25-1
7601. 25-2.1
7601.1. 25-2.2
7602. 25-3
7602.1. 25-3
7602.2. 25-3
7603. 25-4
7604. 25-5
7605. 25-6
7606. 25-7
7607. 25-8
7608. 25-9
7609. 25-10
7610. 25-11
7611. 25-12
7612. 25-13
7613. 25-14
7614. 25-15
7615. 25-16
7616. 25-17
7617. 25-18
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1273
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
7618. 25-19
7700. 26-1
7701. 26-2
7702. 26-3
7703. 26-4
7704. 26-5
7705. 26-6
7706. 26-7
7707. 26-8
7708. 26-9
7709. 26-10
7710. 26-11
7711. 26-12
7712. 26-13
7713. —
7800. 20-4.1
7801. 20-4.2
7802. 20-4.3
7803. 20-4.4
7804. 20-4.5
7805. 20-4.6
7806. 20-4.7
7807. 20-4.8
7808. 20-4.9
8100. 14-1.1
8100.1. 14-1.2
8100.2. 14-1.3
8101. 14-1.4
8101.1. 14-1.5
8101.2. —
8102. —
8103. 14-1.6
8103.1. 14-1.7
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1274
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
8103.2. 14-1.8
8103.3. 14-1.9
8104. 14-1.10
8104.1. 14-1.11
8104.2. 14-1.12
8105. 14-1.13
8106. 14-1.14
8107. 14-1.15
8108. 14-1.16
8109. 14-1.17
8110. 14-1.18
8110.1. 14-1.19
8111. 14-1.20
8111.1. 14-1.21
8112. 14-1.22
8113. 14-1.23
8114. 14-1.24
8115. 14-1.25
8116. 14-1.26
8117. 14-1.27
8118. 14-1.28
8119. 14-1.29
8120. 14-1.30
8121. 14-1.31
8122. 14-1.32
8123. 14-1.33
8124. 14-1.34
8125. 14-1.35
8126. 14-2.1
8127. 14-2.2
8128. 14-2.3
8128.1. 14-2.4
8128.2. 14-2.5
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1275
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
8129. 14-2.6
8130. 14-2.7
8131. 14-2.8
8132. 14-2.9
8133. 14-2.10
8134. 14-3.1
8135. 14-3.2
8135.1. 14-3.3
8135.2. 14-3.4
8136. 14-3.5
8137. 14-3.6
8138. 14-3.7
8139. 14-3.8
8140. 14-3.9
8141. 14-3.10
8141.1. 14-3.11
8142. 14-3.12
8143. 14-3.13
8144. 14-3.14
8145. 14-3.15
8146. 14-3.16
8147. 14-3.17
8148. 14-3.18
8149. 14-3.19
8150. 14-3.20
8151. 14-3.21
8151.1. 14-3.22
8152. 14-3.23
8153. 14-3.24
8153.1. 14-3.24
8154. 14-3.26
8155. 14-3.27
8156. 14-3.28
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1276
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
8157. 14-3.29
8158. 14-4.1
8159. 14-4.2
8160. 14-4.3
8200. 15-1
8201. 15-2
8202. 15-2.2
8203. 15-2.3
8204. 15-2.4
8205. 15-2.5
8206. 15-2.6
8207. 15-2.7
8208. 15-2.8
8300. 16-1
8301. 16-2.1
8302. 16-2.2
8303. 16-2.3
8304. 16-2.4
8304.1. 16-2.5
8304.2. 16-2.6
8304.3. 16-2.7
8304.4. 16-2.8
8304.5. 16-2.9
8304.6. 16-2.10
8304.7. 16-2.11
8305. 16-2.12
8306. 16-2.13
8307. 16-2.14
8307.1. 16-2.15
8308. 16-2.16
8309. 16-2.17
8310. 16-2.18
8311. 16-2.19
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1277
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
8312. 16-2.20
8312.1. 16-2.21
8313. 16-2.22
8314. 16-2.23
8314.1. 16-2.24
8314.2. 16-2.25
8314.3. 16-2.26
8314.4. 16-2.27
8314.5. 16-2.28
8315. 16-2.29
8315.1. 16-2.30
8316. 16-2.31
8316.1. 16-2.32
8316.2. 16-2.33
8316.3. 16-2.34
8316.4. 16-2.35
8316.5. 16-2.36
8317. 16-2.37
8318. 16-2.38
8318.1. 16-2.39
8319. 16-2.40
8320. 16-2.41
8320.1. 16-2.42
8321. 16-2.43
8400. 14-5.1
8401. 14-5.2
8402. 14-5.3
8403. 14-5.4
8404. 14-5.5
8500. 14-6.1
8501. 14-6.2
8502. 14-6.3
8503. 14-6.4
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1278
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
8504. 14-6.5
8505. 14-6.6
8506. 14-6.7
8507. 14-6.8
8508. 14-6.9
8509. 14-6.10
8510. 14-6.11
8511. 14-6.12
8512. 14-6.13
8513. 14-6.14
8514. 14-6.15
8515. 14-6.16
8516. 14-6.17
8517. 14-6.18
8518. 14-6.19
8519. 14-6.20
8520. 14-6.21
8521. 14-6.22
8600. 19-1
8600.1. 19-1
8600.2. 19-1
8600.3. 19-1
8600.4. 19-1
8600.5. 19-1
8600.6. 19-1
8600.7. 19-1
8600.8. 19-1
8600.9. 19-1
8600.10. 19-1
8600.11. 19-1
8600.12. 19-1
8600.13. 19-1
8600.14. 19-1
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1279
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
8600.15. 19-1
8600.16. 19-1
8600.17. 19-1
8600.18. 19-1
8600.19. 19-1
8600.20. 19-1
8600.21. 19-1
8600.22. 19-1
8601. 19-2.1
8601.1. 19-2.2
8606.2. 19-2.3
8601.3. 19-2.4
8601.4. 19-2.5
8601.5. 19-2.6
8602. 19-3.1
8603. 19-3.2
8604. 19-4
8604.1. 19-4a
8604.2. 19-4b
8604.3. 19-4c
8605. 19-5
8605.1. 19-5.1
8605.2. 19-5.2
8605.3. 19-5.3
8605.4. 19-5.4
8606. 19-6.1
8607. 19-6.2
8608. 19-6.3
8609. 19-6.4
8610. 19-6.5
8611. 19-6.6
8612. 19-6.7
8613. 19-7.1
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1280
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
8614. 19-7.2
8615. 19-7.3
8616. 19-7.4
8617. 19-7.5
8618. 19-8.1
8619. 19-8.2
8620. 19-9
8700. 14-7.1
8701. 14-7.2
8702. 14-7.3
8703. 14-7.4
8704. 14-7.5
8705. 14-7.6
8706. 14-7.7
8707. 14-7.8
8708. 14-7.9
8800. 17-1
8801. 17-2.1
8802. 17-2.2
8803. 17-2.3
8804. 17-2.4
9101. 30-1
9102. 30-2
9103. 30-3
9103.1. 30-3
9103.2. 30-3
9103.3. 30-3
9103.4. 30-3
9103.5. 30-3
9103.6. 30-3
9103.7. 30-3
9103.8. 30-3
9103.9. 30-3
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1281
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
9103.10. 30-3
9103.11. 30-3
9103.12. 30-3
9103.13. 30-3
9103.14. 30-3
9103.15. 30-3
9103.16. 30-3
9103.17. 30-3
9103.18. 30-3
9103.19. 30-3
9103.20. 30-3
9103.21. 30-3
9103.22. 30-3
9103.23. 30-3
9103.24. 30-3
9103.25. 30-3
9103.26. 30-3
9103.27. 30-3
9103.28. 30-3
9103.29. 30-3
9103.30. 30-3
9103.31. 30-3
9103.32. 30-3
9103.33. 30-3
9103.34. 30-3
9103.35. 30-3
9103.36. 30-3
9103.37. 30-3
9103.38. 30-3
9103.39. 30-3
9103.40. 30-3
9103.41. 30-3
9103.42. 30-3
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1282
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
9103.43. 30-3
9103.44. 30-3
9103.45. 30-3
9103.46. 30-3
9103.47. 30-3
9103.48. 30-3
9103.49. 30-3
9103.50. 30-3
9103.51. 30-3
9103.52. 30-3
9103.53. 30-3
9103.54. 30-3
9103.55. 30-3
9103.56. 30-3
9103.57. 30-3
9103.58. 30-3
9103.59. 30-3
9103.60. 30-3
9103.61. 30-3
9103.62. 30-3
9103.63. 30-3
9103.64. 30-3
9103.65. 30-3
9103.66. 30-3
9103.67. 30-3
9103.68. 30-3
9103.69. 30-3
9103.70. 30-3
9103.71. 30-3
9103.72. 30-3
9103.73. 30-3
9103.74. 30-3
9103.75. 30-3
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1283
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
9103.76. 30-3
9103.77. 30-3
9103.78. 30-3
9103.79. 30-3
9103.80. 30-3
9103.81. 30-3
9103.82. 30-3
9103.83. 30-3
9103.84. 30-3
9103.85. 30-3
9103.86. 30-3
9103.87. 30-3
9103.88. 30-3
9103.89. 30-3
9103.90. 30-3
9103.91. 30-3
9103.92. 30-3
9103.93. 30-3
9103.94. 30-3
9103.95. 30-3
9103.96. 30-3
9103.97. 30-3
9103.98. 30-3
9103.99. 30-3
9103.99a. 30-3
9103.100. 30-3
9103.101. 30-3
9103.102. 30-3
9103.103. 30-3
9103.104. 30-3
9103.105. 30-3
9103.106. 30-3
9103.107. 30-3
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1284
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
9110. 30-4
9111. 30-5
9112. 30-6
9120. 30-7
9120.1. 30-7.1
9120.2. 30-7.2
9120.3. 30-7.3
9120.4. 30-7.4
9121. 30-8
9121.1. 30-8.1
9121.2. 30-8.2
9121.3. 30-8.3
9122. 30-9
9122.1. 30-9.1
9122.2. 30-9.2
9122.3. 30-9.3
9123. 30-10
9123.1. 30-10.1
9123.2. 30-10.2
9123.3. 30-10.3
9130. 30-11
9130.1. 30-11.1
9130.2. 30-11.2
9130.3. 30-11.3
9131. 30-12
9131.1. 30-12.1
9131.2. 30-12.2
9131.3. 30-12.3
9132. 30-13
9132.1. 30-13.1
9132.2. 30-13.2
9132.3. 30-13.3
9132.4. 30-13.4
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1285
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
9140. 30-14
9140.1. 30-14.1
9140.2. 30-14.2
9140.3. 30-14.3
9140.4. 30-14.4
9141. 30-15
9141.1. 30-15.1
9141.2. 30-15.2
9141.3. 30-15.3
9141.4. 30-15.4
9150. 30-16
9150.1. 30-16.1
9150.2. 30-16.2
9150.3. 30-16.3
9151. 30-17
9151.1. 30-17.1
9151.2. 30-17.2
9151.3. 30-17.3
9151.4. 30-17.4
9152. 30-18
9152.1. 30-18.1
9152.2. 30-18.2
9152.3. 30-18.3
9152.4. 30-18.4
9152.5. 30-18.5
9153. 30-19
9153.1. 30-19.1
9153.2. 30-19.2
9153.3. 30-19.3
9153.4. 30-19.4
9153.5. 30-19.5
9153.6. 30-19.6
9153.7. 30-19.7
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1286
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
9160. 30-20
9160.1. 30-20.1
9160.2. 30-20.2
9160.3. 30-20.3
9160.4. 30-20.4
9160.5. 30-20.5
9161. 30-21
9161.1. 30-21.1
9161.2. 30-21.2
9161.3. 30-21.3
9161.4. 30-21.4
9161.5. 30-21.5
9161.6. 30-21.6
9162. 30-22
9162.1. 30-22.1
9162.2. 30-22.2
9162.3. 30-22.3
9162.4. 30-22.4
9163. 30-23
9163.1. 30-23.1
9163.2. 30-23.2
9163.3. 30-23.3
9163.4. 30-23.4
9164. 30-24
9164.1. 30-24.1
9164.2. 30-24.2
9164.3. 30-24.3
9164.4. 30-24.4
9164.5. 30-24.5
9164.6. 30-24.6
9165. 30-25
9165.1. 30-25.1
9165.2. 30-25.2
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1287
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
9165.3. 30-25.3
9170. 30-26
9170.1. 30-26.1
9170.2. 30-26.2
9170.3. 30-26.3
9170.4. 30-26.4
9170.5. 30-26.5
9171. 30-27
9171.1. 30-27.1
9171.2. 30-27.2
9171.3. 30-27.3
9171.4. 30-27.4
9171.5. 30-27.5
9172. 30-28
9172.1. 30-28.1
9172.2. 30-28.2
9172.3. 30-28.3
9173. 30-29
9174. 30-30
9175. 30-31
9176. 30-32
9177. 30-33
9178. 30-34
9179. 30-35
9180. 30-36
9180.1. 30-37
9180.2. 30-38
9180.3. 30-39
9181. 30-40
9182. 30-41
9200. 29-1
9200.1. 29-2
9201. 29-3
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1288
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
9202. 29-4
9203. 29-5
9204. 29-6
9205. 29-7
9206. 29-8
9206.1. 29-8a
9206.2. 29-8b
9206.3. 29-8c
9206.4. 29-8d
9206.5. 29-8e
9206.6. 29-8f
9206.7. 29-8g
9206.8. 29-8h
9206.9. 29-8i
9206.10. 29-8j
9206.11. 29-8k
9206.12. 29-8l
9206.13. 29-8m
9206.14. 29-8n
9206.15. 29-8o
9206.16. 29-8p
9206.17. 29-8q
9206.18. 29-8r
9206.19. 29-8s
9206.20. 29-8t
9206.21. 29-8u
9206.22. 29-8v
9206.23. 29-8w
9300. 28-1
9300.1. 28-1.1
9300.2. 28-1.2
9300.3. 28-1.3
9300.4. 28-1.4
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1289
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
9300.5. 28-1.5
9300.6. 28-1.6
9300.7. 28-1.7
9300.8. 28-1.8
9300.9. 28-1.9
9300.10. 28-1.10
9300.11. 28-1.11
9300.12. 28-1.12
9300.13. 28-1.13
9300.14. 28-1.14
9300.15. 28-1.15
9301. 28-2
9301.1. 28-2
9301.2. 28-2
9301.3. —
9301.4. 28-2
9301.5. 28-2
9301.6. 28-2
9301.7. 28-2
9301.7.1. 28-2
9301.8. 28-2
9301.9. 28-2
9301.10. 28-2
9301.11. 28-2
9301.12. 28-2
9301.13. 28-2
9301.14. 28-2
9301.15. 28-2
9301.16. 28-2
9301.17. 28-2
9301.18. 28-2
9301.19. 28-2
9301.20. 28-2
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1290
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
9301.21. 28-2
9301.22. 28-2
9301.23. 28-2
9301.24. 28-2
9301.25. 28-2
9301.26. 28-2
9301.27. 28-2
9301.28. 28-2
9301.29. 28-2
9301.30. 28-2
9301.31. 28-2
9301.32. 28-2
9301.33. 28-2
9301.34. 28-2
9301.35. 28-2
9301.36. 28-2
9301.37. 28-2
9301.38. 28-2
9302. 28-3
9302.1. 28-3.1
9302.2. 28-3.2
9302.3. 28-3.3
9302.4. 28-3.4
9302.5. 28-3.5
9302.6. 28-3.6
9302.7. 28-3.7
9302.8. 28-3.8
9302.9. 28-3.9
9302.10. 28-3.10
9302.11. 28-3.11
9302.12. 28-3.12
9302.13. 28-3.13
9302.14. 28-3.14
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1291
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
9303. 28-4
9303.1. 28-4.1
9303.2. 28-4.2
9303.3. 28-4.3
9303.4. 28-4.4
9303.5. 28-4.5
9303.6. 28-4.6
9303.7. 28-4.7
9303.8. 28-4.8
9303.9. 28-4.9
9303.10. 28-4.10
9303.11. 28-4.11
9303.12. 28-4.12
9303.13. 28-4.13
9303.14. 28-4.14
9303.15. 28-4.15
9303.16. 28-4.16
9303.17. 28-4.17
9303.18. 28-4.18
9303.19. 28-4.19
9303.20. 28-4.20
9303.21. 28-4.21
9303.22. 28-4.22
9303.23. 28-4.23
9304. 28-5
9304.1. 28-5.1
9304.2. 28-5.2
9304.3. 28-5.3
9304.4. 28-5.4
9304.5. 28-5.5
9304.6. 28-5.6
9304.7. 28-5.7
9304.8. 28-5.8
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1292
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
9305. 28-6
9305.1. 28-6.1
9305.2. 28-6.2
9305.3. 28-6.3
9305.4. 28-6.4
9305.5. 28-6.5
9305.6. 28-6.6
9305.7. 28-6.7
9305.8. 28-6.8
9305.9. 28-6.9
9305.10. 28-6.10
9305.11. 28-6.11
9305.12. 28-6.12
9305.13. 28-6.13
9305.14. 28-6.14
9305.15. 28-6.15
9305.16. 28-6.16
9305.17. 28-6.17
9305.18. 28-6.18
9305.19. 28-6.19
9305.20. 28-6.20
9305.21. 28-6.21
9305.22. 28-6.22
9305.23. 28-6.23
9306. 28-7
9306.1. 28-7.1
9306.2. 28-7.2
9306.3. 28-7.3
9306.4. 28-7.4
9306.5. 28-7.5
9306.6. 28-7.6
9306.7. 28-7.7
9306.8. 28-7.8
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1293
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
9306.9. 28-7.9
9307. 28-8
9307.1. 28-8.1
9307.2. 28-8.2
9307.3. 28-8.3
9307.4. 28-8.4
9307.5. 28-8.5
9307.6. 28-8.6
9307.7. 28-8.7
9307.8. 28-8.8
9307.9. 28-8.9
9307.10. 28-8.10
9307.11. 28-8.11
9307.12. 28-8.12
9307.13. 28-8.13
9307.14. 28-8.14
9307.15. 28-8.15
9307.16. 28-8.16
9307.17. 28-8.17
9307.18. 28-8.18
9307.19. 28-8.19
9307.20. 28-8.20
9307.21. 28-8.21
9307.22. 28-8.22
9307.23. 28-8.23
9307.24. 28-8.24
9308. 28-9
9308.1. 28-9.1
9308.2. 28-9.2
9308.3. 28-9.3
9308.4. 28-9.4
9308.5. 28-9.5
9308.6. 28-9.6
§ RT-1 COMPTON § RT-1
AO:1294
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
9308.7. 28-9.7
9308.8. 28-9.8
9308.9. 28-9.9
9309. 28-10
9309.1. 28-10.1
9309.2. 28-10.2
9309.3. 28-10.3
9309.4. 28-10.4
9309.5. 28-10.5
9310. 28-11.1
9310.1. 28-11.2
9310.2. 28-11.3
9310.3. 28-11.4
9310.4. 28-11.5
9310.5. 28-11.6
9310.6. 28-11.7
9310.7. 28-11.8
9310.8. 28-11.9
9310.9. 28-11.10
9310.10. 28-11.11
9310.11. 28-11.12
9310.12. 28-11.13
9400. 24-1
9401. 24-2.1
9402. 24-2.2
9402.1. 24-2.3
9403. 24-2.4
9404. 24-2.5
9405. 24-2.6
9406. 24-2.7
9407. 24-2.8
9408. 24-2.9
9409. 24-2.10
§ RT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § RT-1
AO:1295
1951 Compton Municipal
Code
1985 Compton Municipal Code
9410. 24-2.11
9411. 24-3.1
9412. 24-3.2
9413. 24-3.3
9414. 24-3.4
9415. 24-3.5
9501. 8-5.1
9502. 8-5.2
9503. 8-5.3
9504. 8-5.4
9505. 8-5.5
9506. 8-5.6
9507. 8-5.7
9508. 8-5.8
9509. 8-5.9
9510. 8-5.10
9511. 8-5.11
9512. 8-5.12
9513. 8-5.13
9514. 8-5.14
9515. 8-5.15
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
This Disposition List provides a list of the ordinances used in the
preparation of Code supplements. The word Special after the ordinance
description or the word NCM in the Disposition column indicates material
that is special in nature/non-Code material and has not been included in the
Code.
§ RT-1 COMPTON § DL-1
AO:1296
Ord. No. Adoption
Date
Title Supp.
No.
2255 11-12-2014 Call for holding Primary Election April
21, 2015 and General Municipal
Election June 2, 2015, Special
34
2256 3-3-2015 Amends Ch. 2, Administration, adds
2-30, Public Works Commission
34
2257 4-7-2015 Amends Ch. 30, Zoning, amends
30-21.11, exceptions; adds 30-21.12,
Modified Parking Requirement (MPR)
34
2258 4-7-2015 Authorizes Development Agreement
with LA Brickyard LLC, Special
34
2259 6-23-2015 Zoning Map amendment, Special 34
2260 7-28-2015 Levy municipal tax rate for 2015-2016,
Special
34
2261 9-15-2015 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; Deletes
2-28 Housing Development
Commission
35
2262 9-15-2015 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; Deletes
2-21 Gaming Commission
35
2263 10-20-2015 Amends Ch. 7 Police Regulations;
7-12.28 Loud or Unruly Parties/
Gatherings Prohibited; adds 7-12.29
Loud or Unruly Parties or Gatherings;
Second and Subsequent Response
Fees
35
2264 12-22-2015 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; 2-1.2
Regular (Council) Meetings;
Adjournment
35
2265 2-16-2016 Call and Provide for Special Election
to Be Held June 7, 2016, Special
35
2266 2-23-2016 Amends Ch. 9, General Licensing;
9-23.8, 9-23.14, 9-23.15, 9-23.16f
Licensing of Bingo Games for
Charitable Purposes
35
2267 2-23-2016 Amends Ch. 4 Fiscal Administration;
Adds 4-11.12 Payment of Prevailing
Wages Required for Public Works
Projects
35
2268 6-7-2016 Amends Ch. 3 Taxation; adds 3-5
Transaction and Use Tax
35
2269 — Number not used 35
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1297
Ord. No. Adoption
Date
Title Supp.
No.
2270 7-26-2016 Grant of Franchise to Torrance
Pipeline Company, Special
35
2271 9-6-2016 Levy of Municipal Tax Rate for Fiscal
Year 2016-2017, Special
35
2272 9-13-2016 Amends City Charter; Abolishes
Department of Public Works and
Municipal Utilities and creates Public
Works Department and the Compton
Municipal Water Department, Editor’s
Note: at Ch. 2, Article 3.
35
2273 10-11-2016 Amends Zoning Map, Special 35
2274 10-11-2016 Amends Ch. 30, Zoning; 30-52,
Prohibits All Commercial Medical
Marijuana Uses in the City (Interim
Ordinance)
35
2275 11-1-2016 Amends Ch. 30, Zoning; 30-51;
Imposes a Temporary Moratorium on
New Convenience and Liquor Store
Uses-repealed by Ord. No. 2300
35
2276 11-15-2016 Amends Ch. 30, Zoning; 30-52 Extends
Ord. No. 2274, Prohibiting the
Establishment of All Commercial
Medical Marijuana Uses in the City
(Interim Ordinance)
35
2277 11-15-2016 Amends Ch. 30, Zoning; 30-53;
Prohibits All Commercial Non-Medical
Marijuana Activity in the City;
Prohibits Outdoor Marijuana
Cultivation on Private Residences
(Interim Ordinance)
35
2278 12-6-2016 Call for Holding Primary Nominating
Election April 18, 2017 and General
Municipal Election June 6, 2017,
Special
36
2279 12-16-2016 Amends Ch. 30 Zoning; 30-51 An
Interim Ordinance Imposing a
Temporary Moratorium on New
Convenience Store and Liquor Store
Uses, Established by Ord. No. 2275,
superseded by Ord. No. 2300
36
§ DL-1 COMPTON § DL-1
AO:1298
Ord. No. Adoption
Date
Title Supp.
No.
2280 12-20-2016 Amends Ch. 23 Sewer and Water; adds
23-3 Sanitary Sewer Overflow
Reduction Program 23-3.1 — 23-3.20
36
2281 1-17-2017 Amends Ch. 30 Zoning; 30-51 An
Interim Ordinance Imposing a
Temporary Moratorium on New
Convenience Store and Liquor Store
Uses, Established by Ord. No. 2275,
superseded by Ord. No. 2300
36
2282 1-24-2017 Amends Ch. 9 General Licensing;
amends 9-24 Medical Marijuana
Dispensaries in entirety and
establishes 9-24 Marijuana 9-24.1 —
9-24.5; [Amends Ch. 30 Zoning; to
prohibit commercial marijuana uses
and marijuana cultivation with limited
exceptions in all zones in the City, 30-3
Definitions; 30-7.2 Uses (R-A); 30-8.2
Uses (R-L); 30-9.2 Uses (R-M); 30-10.2
Uses (R-H); 30-12.2 Uses (C-L);
30-12.3 Prohibited Uses (C-L); 30-13.2
Uses (C-M); 30-13.3 Prohibited Uses
(C-M); 30-14.2 Uses (M-L); 30-14.3
Prohibited Uses (M-L); 30-15.2 Uses
(M-H); amends 30-15.3 Prohibited
Uses; 30-16.2 Uses (B); 30-16.3
Prohibited Uses (B); 30-18.3 Uses (D);
adds 30-18.6 Prohibited Uses (D);
30-19.3 Uses (SD); 30-19.4 Prohibited
Uses (SD); Amends 30-40 and adds
specific penalty for violations of Ord.
#2282]
36
2283 3-14-2017 Amends Ch. 10 Cable, Video and
Telecommunications Service
Providers; 10-7.6 Fee for Support of
PEG Access Facilities and Activities,
reauthorizes the fee on statefranchised
video service providers
36
2284 4-11-2017 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; 2-20
Compton Youth Leadership Council,
2-20.1 — 2-20.2
36
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1299
Ord. No. Adoption
Date
Title Supp.
No.
2285 4-11-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Police Regulations; adds
7-20 Regulation of Camping, Sleeping,
and/or Storage of Personal Property on
Public Property 7-20.1 — 7-20.9,
Notice of Property Retrieval
36
2286 Not adopted 36
2287 7-5-2017 Amends Ch. 4 Fiscal Administration;
4-15 First Source Hiring Program,
4-15.1 — 14-15.6
36
2288 7-5-2017 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; 2-21E.2
Compensation of Members, Personnel
Board
36
2289 7-25-2017 Levy municipal tax rate for 2017-2018,
Special
36
2290 8-2-2017 Amends Ch. 6 Election Procedure,
adds 6-22 Special Municipal Election
on Charter Proposals, 6-22.1, 6-22.2
36
2291 8-2-2017 Call and Provide for Special Municipal
Election to be Held November 7, 2017,
Special
36
2292 10-24-2017 Call for Holding and Notice of Special
Municipal Election on January 23,
2018, Special
36
§ DL-1 COMPTON § DL-1
AO:1300
Ord. No. Adoption
Date
Title Supp.
No.
2293 11-14-2017 Not Approved by the Electorate at the
January 23, 2018 Special Municipal
Election
An Ordinance of the Voters of the City
of Compton, California Amending Title
9 and Title 17 of the Compton
Municipal Code to Permit Commercial
Cannabis Activity (Except Outdoor
Cultivation and Indoor Cultivation for
Other Than Personal Use) Only in the
Commercial Manufacturing Zone of
the City, Requiring A Business License
for All Permitted Commercial
Cannabis Activity, and to Prohibit
Indoor and Outdoor Commercial
Cannabis Cultivation Uses in the City,
to Adopt a Tax on Commercial
Cannabis Uses and Activities Not to
Exceed 10% of Gross Annual Sales,
and to Regulate Indoor Cannabis
Cultivation in Dwellings Consistent
with State Law, and Declaring a
Conflict with Another Ballot Measure
on the Same Subject
36
2294 11-11-2017 Amends Ch. 12 Traffic Regulations;
12-5.1 Increasing State Speed Limits
in Certain Zones
36
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1301
Ord. No. Adoption
Date
Title Supp.
No.
2295 12-19-2017 Amends Municipal Code relative to
fees charged for City Services and
Facilities now established in the
Master Fee Schedule adopted by
Resolution; Amends Ch. 1 General
Provisions; 1-10.4 Purchase of Code;
Amends Ch. 8 Public Safety; 8-1.2,
8-6.11, 8-6.12, 8-7.3; Amends Ch. 14
Building and Housing; 14-1.8 Table
1-A Building Permit Fees deleted,
14-2.4 Fees; Amends Ch. 15 Plumbing
Code; 15-1.8 Amendment; Table 1-1
Plumbing Permit Fees; Amends Ch. 16
Electrical Code; 16-2.13 Amendment,
Fees Required; Amends Ch. 17
Mechanical Code; 17-1.7 Table 1-A
Mechanical Permit Fees; Amends Ch.
18 Public Parks and Playgrounds;
18-10, 18-11; amends Ch. 22 Fire
Prevention and Protection; 22-3;
Amends Ch. 23 Sewer and Water;
23-1.7, 23-1.10, 23-1.31; Amends Ch.
23 Appendix Sections 4,9, 17 — 19;
Amends Ch. 30 Zoning; 30-26.5,
30-27.5, 30-28.3, 30-42 Planning Fees
36
2296 1-24-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Police Regulations,
repeals Sex Offender Residency
Restrictions, 7-25.1 — 7-25.16
36
2297 2-27-2018 Amends Ch. 21 Integrated Waste
Management; 21-1.9 Collection of
Recyclable Solid Waste
36
2298 6-19-2018 Amends Ch. 12 Traffic Regulations;
12-9 Preferential Permit Parking
Program, 12-9.1 — 12-9.15
36
2299 6-26-2018 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; 2-1.16
Mayor Pro Tem
36
§ DL-1 COMPTON § DL-1
AO:1302
Ord. No. Adoption
Date
Title Supp.
No.
2300 7-3-2018 Amends Ch. 30 Zoning; repeals
Interim Ordinance No. 2275 codified
as Section 30-51, An Interim
Ordinance Imposing a Temporary
Moratorium on Convenience Store and
Liquor Store Uses; establishes 30-51
Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Establishment Regulations, 30-51.1 —
30-51.23; amends 30-12.2 and 30-12.4
Uses (C-L); 30-13.2 Uses (C-M);
30-14.2 uses (M-L); 30-15.2 Uses (MH)
36
2301 7-17-2018 Amends Ch. 18 Public Parks and
Playgrounds; 18-2.9 Loitering After
Closing Time
36
2302 7-17-2018 Levy of Municipal Tax Rate for Fiscal
Year 2018-2019, Special
36
2303 9-11-2018 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; 2-1.2
Regular Meetings; Adjournment; 2-1.7
Order of Business
36
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
2304 9-18-2018 Personnel Policies
Amendment
Ch. 5 37
2305 11-13-2018 Decrease of Maximum
Weight and Load on
Bridges
NCM 37
2306 12-4-2018 Election NCM 37
2307 6-5-2019 Tax Rate NCM 37
2308 6-11-2019 Sewer and Water
Amendment
Ch. 23 37
2309 6-25-2019 Agreement NCM 37
2310 6-25-2019 Integrated Waste
Management
Amendment
Ch. 21 37
2311 6-25-2019 Waste Rates NCM 37
2312 7-2-2019 General Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 9 37
2313 7-2-2019 Police Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 7 37
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1303
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
2314 9-17-2019 Fiscal Administration
Amendment
Ch. 4 37
2315 10-8-2019 Moratorium NCM 37
2316 10-15-2019 General Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 1 37
§ DL-1 COMPTON § DL-1
AO:1304